The definition offered for the classification of SLI is one which is ruled by categories of exclusion (Botting and Ramsden, 2001: 421). Donaldson states that SLI is a diagnosed when a child presents language difficulties despite this impairment not being associated with any other problems, such as cerebral palsy and hearing difficulties (Donaldson, 1995: 21). A non-verbal IQ of 85 or above is expected of those with SLI in order to establish that the deficits produce by the child are indeed language specific (Leonard, 2000: 10) and that otherwise the child is intellectually 'normal' (Johnston: 1994: 107); however in recent years researchers have felt that the definition of SLI by exclusion is not satisfactory and that non-verbal and behavioural skills are also vulnerable in those categorised as having SLI (Stevenson, 1996: 83). This has led to the suggestion that SLI is not in fact a specific disorder of language but a more general disorder affecting cognition also (Hill, 2001: 167).
The literature proposing those with SLI will also have non-verbal deficits will be presented. From the given information a discussion will be generated in an attempt to establish a conclusion as to whether those described as having SLI do indeed demonstrate no non-verbal deficits or whether the disorder involves elements of cognition that have been largely ignored in the earlier research into SLI.
Snyder (1982, as in Leonard, 2000: 17) states that a significant percentage of the population who attain a normal non-verbal, or performance, IQ can be found to demonstrate diminished IQ on language measures by approximately 15 points. Such a statement describes the patterns of deficit proposed for those with SLI and supports the view that SLI does not include deficits of non-verbal functioning; however it has been reported that many children with SLI show weaknesses on tasks that require minimal language ability, hence suggesting a possible cognitive vulnerability (Leonard, 2000: 119) with the suggestion that these differences between verbal and non-verbal ability via IQ scores are not significant enough to classify children as having a specific impairment in language alone confidently (Leonard, 2000: 16).
Research into the non-verbal abilities of those with SLI have taken various approaches with some focusing on physical ability (e.g. limb praxis) and others focusing more on a child's ability to use abstract concepts and stretch their imaginations (e.g. symbolic play, mental imagery). A variety of evidence will be discussed in relation to potential correlations with SLI as a general processing disorder.
From the evidence presented on non-verbal deficits in SLI it seems clear that the deficits children with SLI face are not exclusively related to language (Hill, 2001: 162), therefore causing speculation as to what the deficit does indeed entail. Although non-verbal IQ appears to be in tact on initial examination Conti- Ramsden and Gunn (1986 as in McTear and Conti-Ramsden: 1994: 65) suggest that tests used to assess cognition are too 'global' to identify any specific deficits within a persons cognitive system.
All the measures discussed previously demonstrate some level of non-verbal deficit in those with SLI with some of these being found to be more pronounced than others; for example symbolic plays clear deficits in those with SLI in comparison to conservation and seriation where deficits are thought to be less significant statistically. However, all of these deficits point towards SLI as a more general deficit in processing ability with Tallal et al (1993) and Kail (1994) seeming to support this notion with their theories on processing deficits in SLI (as in Hill, 2001: 162). Tallal's suggestion that integration deficits are a significant contributor to those diagnosed with SLI supports the evidence presented previously by Udwin and Yule (1983 as in Leonard, 2000: 121) in 2.1. Whilst Kail (1994) suggests that all verbal and non-verbal processes slow and therefore create the patterns of deficit that can be attached to SLI (as in Hill, 2001: 163), which would support the notion that children diagnosed as having SLI require more processing time and therefore are found to have deficits in auditory perception, hypothesis testing and analogical reasoning tasks.
Some areas discussed have noted that the research is not totally conclusive as of yet, such as the findings on mental imagery tasks that identify SLI children as poorer than their age matched controls but better than their language matched controls. However, even subtle and inconclusive evidence must be considered as it all leads to a clearer pattern of deficit with these small discrepancies being found so frequently in those diagnosed with SLI that they cannot be ignored (Leonard: 2000: 237).
The suggestion that SLI includes these non-verbal deficits add strength to the suggestion that cognitive ability and language are more closely related than previously thought, with Leonard emphasising that through the study of those with SLI non-verbal deficits have been identified and through these deficits being investigated the cause of language impairments experienced by those with SLI may be feasible (Leonard, 2000: 119). However, whether non-verbal deficits are the likely cause or effect of language impairment is unclear with the suggestion that low non-verbal IQ may in fact be found in response to poor comprehension of syntactic structures (Leonard, 2000: 128).
Whilst non-verbal deficits have been suggested to be secondary to language impairments, (Leonard: 2000: 237, Stevenson, 1996: 83), low general IQ has been reported by Silva et al (1983, as in Donaldson, 1995: 21) in 25% of children aged 7;0 with SLI. Therefore, although the exact relationship between non-verbal and verbal functioning capacity are still unknown it is increasingly apparent that non-verbal deficits do exist in SLI, with these deficits requiring greater investigation in order to establish whether SLI is predominantly a language disorder or a more general disorder of processing capacity.