It is now well documented and widely accepted that the Earth's interior consists mainly of molten rock and exists as layers of differing content and density, ranging from a solid iron core to a molten, mineral rich mantle. This, however, has not always been the case and many hypotheses on the nature of its structure have been put forward throughout history. Nineteenth century science fictionalist, Jules Verne, proposed that, to account for the flawed calculation of the earths density, vast internal caves existed as hollows below the surface and in his popular children's story, 'Journey to the centre of the Earth' he exploited this fact by allowing the characters to descend through these air filled passages toward the centre of the Earth. Of course this sounds preposterous now but many of the arguments made by Verne hold true and at the time in which it was written, people believed that this was the knowledge of the scientific community.
When describing the journey to be undertaken in Chapter Six, the young Axel states that ,"the internal temperature rises one degree for every seventy feet in depth" which equates to a geothermal gradient of around twenty eight degrees Celsius per kilometre, well within the accepted value of between twenty and thirty. However, this gradient only holds true for the continental crust, a vital error which leads to an overestimation of the temperature at the centre by a magnificent factor of forty. Despite his inaccuracy, he does state his assumption that the gradient remains constant, in keeping with scientific procedure. The argument between him and the professor develops and counter theories expressed as expected. It is true that an internal heat of such magnitude would indeed lead to unpredictable and explosive consequences and so other avenues must be explored.
The professor disputes even the concept of internal heat, he believes that, "The Earth has been heated by combustion on its surface, that is all" and that any heat which once was held internally as a result of this combustion must now have all dissipated through volcanic vents. There are several obvious errors in his argument but again, each has been presented from a scientific and informed viewpoint. We know that heat within the Earth is, as the professor said, a result of its violent creation. However, it is now known that this heat was formed in the outer regions by the conversion of kinetic energy of extraterrestrial bodies on impact with our young planet , whilst gravitational energy from contraction heated its interior so, although the vigorous reactions mentioned between atmospheric water and what he proposes composed the Earth's surface, sodium and potassium, do occur as he states, this is inaccurate. It is important to note though that although erroneous, the argument is supported by an experiment he claims was performed by Humphrey Davy, the chemist who discovered the afore mentioned elements, and so is in keeping with scientific methodology. He was also correct when saying that the depletion of volcanoes over history indicates that the earth is cooling down, but the process is extremely slow and he has assumed that no additional heat is being generated, which we know is not the case. The decay of radioactive isotopes in the mantle is constantly producing heat which goes into powering the solid state convection cycle associated with plate tectonics.
The professor concludes, inaccurately, "that the interior of the globe is neither gas nor water, nor any of the heaviest minerals known." We know that all three of these components contribute to the Earth's internal structure. The mantle is predominantly peridodite, a rock made up mainly of the silicate minerals, pyroxene and olivine. There is also evidence that there is water within the mantle and these vapours and gases can be observed during volcanic eruptions.
I think, when reading this book, it is important to remember that its sole purpose is to entertain and excite the reader. Although many of the facts stated have scientific support and the way in which they were presented have academic credibility, there are several, and in my opinion, intentional flaws. If Verne had been accurate when describing the internal structure of the Earth he would inevitably have had to conclude that the mission was impossible. Temperatures and pressures of such great magnitude would not allow such a thing. The molten interior would be impenetrable. I think the book is a wonderful introduction to geology, providing much insight into the field but it is by no means a substitute for modern day text books. I think also, at the time it was written, it was to be taken somewhat with a pinch of salt. I believe Verne represented his true feelings through the voice of Axel when presenting his arguments against the journey as he knew such a feat could not be undertaken but the professor, with his convincing and logical arguments, persuaded him, as much as the reader, that it could and no budding geologist would turn down such an adventurous quest for knowledge.