to determine, experimentally, the solubility product of Potassium Periodate and study the effects of salting in and salting out on the molar solubility.
there exists a heterogeneous equilibrium between a saturated solution of a slightly soluble salt, MX, in contact with excess solid.
The equilibrium constant for the equilibrium between the undissolved salt and its ions in a saturated solution is known as the solubility product, Ks, and like any equilibrium constant is the same at any one temperature.
The concentration of the anion and cation are equal and are aknown as the molar solubility, s.
this refers to the common ion effect by which the solubility of the salt is reduced by the addition of a common ion of concentration, c, of M+ ions, for example. For the equilibrium constant to remain the same, [X-] must decrease and hence the molar solubility, which can now be called s' :
this refers to the inert ion effect by which the solubility of the salt increases by addition of other ions due to ionic interactions. For example, the removal of M- ions by a cation would lead to, according to Le Chatelier's Principle, the generation of more M- ions to oppose the change. The effects can be quantitatively described in terms of activity co-efficients for each ion.
The true thermodynamics solubility, ksth, is the quantity which is truly constant at any one defined temperature:
For dilute solutions, there are few interactions between ions and so the effects can be ignored as (a + -) tends to one, ksth tends to ks. However, for solutions between 0.01M and 0.1M, the value of the activity co-efficients are more or less independent of the nature of the electrolyte and (a+ -) can be calculated from the Debye-Huckel limiting law equation:
For concentrations above this, (a+ -) can be approximated by considering the mean value of the activity co-efficients for several similar electrolytes.
Sodium thiosulfate (12.4037g) was made up to 250ml with distilled water and a trace amount of sodium carbonate added. A 25ml portion of this solution was then extracted and made up to 250ml. Three stoppered bottles were labelled A-C, and into each, potassium periodate (1g) was added with, in bottle A, distilled water(100ml), in B, sodium nitrate(0.2M, 100ml) and in C, potassium nitrate(0.2M, 100ml) and shaken vigorously for 3 minutes before allowing to settle. At this point the temperatures were noted. each solution was then filtered and a 25ml portion taken for titration. This sample was then treated with potassium iodide and sulphuric acid to liberate the iodine. Solutions A and B were titrated against the more concentrated sodium thiosulfate(1.999*10^-1M) and solution C against the more dilute(1.999*10^-2M). The iodine acted as an indicator, turning the solution from red-brown to colourless when it had all reacted. Each sample was repeatedly titrated until concordant results were achieved and a mean titre calculated.
the true thermodynamic solubility product of potassium periodate at room temperature was found to be approximately 2.718*10^-4 (this was the average value taken from our three solutions). It is this product which is said to be truly constant at any one temperature regardless of the environment as it takes into account the interactions between ions in solution. Our results strongly support this, deviating only very slightly from the mean, whereas the solubility product, ks, has a much greater standard deviation, varying for different solutions. It is important to note that our three solutions were filtered when at slightly different temperatures which may have led to the discrepancy in ksth.
Our results also demonstrate very well the effects of both salting in and out as mentioned before. When other ions were introduced they reacted with the dissolved salt ions, removing them from the established equilibrium and hence forcing further generation (solubilization). This was illustrated by the rise in concentration of salt ions in solution B and demonstrates "salting in". Solution C introduced common ions which pushed the equilibrium towards the solid salt, lowering the concentration of iodate ions and hence the solubility decreased - an example of "salting out".