to calculate, experimentally, the heat capacity of our calorimeter and use it to determine the enthalpy of vaporisation of a sample of propanone by recording the drop in temperature of the surrounding fluid in our calorimeter.
the molar enthalpy of vaporisation is the heat energy required to vaporise one mole of a liquid substance. during calorimetry, the energy needed is absorbed from the surrounding fluid and so a drop in its temperature is observed, which is equal to the enthalpy of vaporisation divided by the specific heat capacity of the calorimeter system.
The heat capacity of the system can be determined by supplying it with a know amount of energy and measuring the increase in temperature. the heat capacity is the number of Joules of energy needed to increase the temperature by one degree. All the relevant formulae will be exploited in this practical.
petroleum ether (180ml) was transferred to an insulated, glass cylinder and a magnetic stirrer bar added. the cylinder was placed in its insulated jacket on a magnetic stirrer. The lid of the vessel contained a thermometer, heater and an evaporation tube. The heater was connected to a heat monitor and power supply and was switched on while a note was made of its current and voltage. Propanone (3.9684g,68.42mmol) was added to the evaporation tube and connected to the water pump to ensure a flow of air over it to remove any vapour produced and encourage the generation of more vapour (by Le Chatelier's Principle). Before turning the pump on, the magnetic stirrer was started and the temperature of the petroleum ether taken at thirty second intervals. The water pump was then turned on and further temperature readings were taken until the propanone had evaporated and the temperature ceased dropping. At this stage the temperature was monitored for a few minutes to see how effective our insulation was (eg. how much heat was absorbed from outside). The heater was then switched on and temperature readings taken until it exceeded the starting temperature. It was then turned off and again the temperature monitored for a few more minutes.
the molar enthalpy of vaporisation of propanone was found to be 30.72kJmol^-1, which is slightly higher that the literature value of 29.10kJmol^-1, with a discrepancy of 5.27%. Obviously the equipment error cannot account for this as it is much smaller. Other sources of error include our interpretation of the graph and disturbances of our calorimeter system. It is apparent that either the flask was knocked, moving the insulation, or the flow of air into our system wasn't constant because the three sections of our plot that show external influence on the system should have best fit lines of equal gradient. The system appears to be well insulated between 0 and 20 minutes as the temperature stays constant before and after the petroleum evaporates, however at 20 minutes the petroleum ether began to heat up leading me to suspect that the system was tampered with, letting outside heat in. This pattern of heating was observed again after the electrical heater was switched off. To try and minimise the effect of this, the lines of best fit of these periods were extrapolated and the temperature taken along these at the midway time. A great source of error, I believe, was the way in which the graph was manipulated. The lines of best fit were just predicted by eye. A possible solution could be to use a computer program to plot the graph and determine them with it. Random errors in this practical also include our reading of the temperature and timing the thirty second intervals.