to hydrogenate the unsaturated fatty acid, methyl ester, Methyl Oleate to form Methyl Stearate and to identify differences in the physical properties of the two using thin layer chromatography.
Due to the extreme flammability of Hydrogen gas, Ammonium Formate was used, which is readitly converted to Hydrogen in the presence of a catalyst. It was formed in situ and so the Hydrogen formed went on to hygrogenate the Methyl Oleate at once, again with the help of the catalyst.
to a solution of Methyl Oleate (0.6ml, 1.76mmol), 10% Palladium on Carbon (44mg) and Methanol (10ml, 247mmol) was added Ammonium Formate (219mg, 3.48mmol) and swirled frequently as an exothermic reaction proceeded. Three thin layer chromatography samples were taken ten, thirty and sixty minutes after its addition to track the prgress of the reaction. Hexane (10ml, 76.1mmol) was then added, yielding two liquid phases which were mixed thoroughly and settled with the clear Hexane layer floating on a black Methanoic solution containing the catalyst. The Hexane layer, which should have contained our product, was obtained by filtering the solution through a small plug of cotton wool and Celite in a pipette and then we attempted to remove the solvent on a rotovapour to get a solid product. However, what remained was an oily mixture of what we believed to be Methyl Oleate and possibly our product solubilised in it. Once 0.5g remained in the flask we realised we would not obtain any crystals because we would expect to gain this amount of solid product so evaporation was ceased.
The ten and thirty minute thin layer chromatography samples yielded very similar results when stained as shown on the opposite page with Rf values of around 0.5 for both substrate and product, although it is likely no product had formed and the plate had simply entered the eluent tank at an angle. At sixty minutes, Iodine stained all three columns as shown. No further results were gained as a solid product was not obtained.
we appear to have gained no, or very little, product due to, we believe, inactivity of the provided catalyst. There were indications that the reaction was not occurring as hoped from the start. When Ammonium Formate was first added we expected Carbon Dioxide and Ammonia gas to be evolved yet nothing was observed.
To have been satisfied that our reaction had gone, there would have been distinct spots in the co product column of the thin layer chromatography plates that matched with a single spot in the substrate and product columns. It was the case with ours that one large spot developed over all three columns making it difficult to detect individual marks and the Rf values calculated appeared very similar in this solvent. It may have been beneficial to use a different eluent for clarity.
When our sixty minute plate was exposed to Iodine we would have hoped to see staining only on the substrate and co product columns due to the addition of Iodine to the double bond. However, some staining was detected on the product showing it to be saturated still.
Analysis of all these things led us to believe we may not have been successful. The proof came when evaporating our final solution. It was expected that once all the Hexane had been removed, a solid would be left of mass ~0.52g. An oily substance remained and when weighed it was found to have a mass of 0.50g. It was clear then that we would not gain a solid and that Methyl Oleate had been collected and our catalyst had indeed been corrupted.