In order to analyze the aims of Carthage during the First and Second Punic Wars; it is necessary to examine a number of aspects, which may have determined Carthage's policy towards the conflicts in question. These aspects are: the extent of Carthaginian influence during this period, the resources and man power available to her (and also the Romans) and perhaps more importantly, the system of government which ultimately controlled Carthaginian policy. All of these various factors will be examined throughout the course of this essay to determine the extent that Carthage's aims differed during the two conflicts, if at all.
The first task is to examine the political situation at the time between the powers of Rome and Carthage. Livy  describes that both powers were at the peak of the power and prosperity during this period. This is indeed the case for Rome, but there is a direct contrast with this claim found in Polybius:
However, Carthage was still in a powerful position concerning her influence abroad. She could largely dominate the whole Western Mediterranean due to her control over Sicily. Hoyos  states that the Carthaginians were still a match for Rome in terms of her manpower. Not only this but Carthage had possession of a large empire and received a large annual income as a result from trade. Scullard explains that Carthage exported salt, wax, honey, figs, textiles and pottery. Details from 193 BC show that Carthage gained an approximate annual revenue of 1,400 -1,500 talents which equates to between 8,400,000 and 9,000,000 drachmas. Compare this to the figures of Rome during the early decades of the same century, when the Roman Republic is receiving approximately 2000 talents.
By analyzing the situation prior to the First Punic War, it is possible to examine what the aims of Carthage were. Polybius  states that Carthage ruled the sea and Tarn  provides a rough total of 130 ships in the Carthaginian fleet prior to the First War. He also comments that Carthage was capable of creating 200 ships in times of intense national effort. This can be further reinforced with a statement by Ennius  that:
The extent of Carthage's influence is shown on the map  below:
Yet, despite her power, Carthage during 264 BC did not want to fight the Romans  and it is probable that it was the same for the Romans. The tension between the two powers would have been intensified by Roman expansion in Eastern Sicily  and here the first difference between the two wars can be encountered. Polybius  informs us that the First Punic War was fought over Sicily and that Carthage; wishing to maintain the vital region of western Sicily sent troops there.
Carthage's aims in the First Punic War were only to prevent the loss of Sicily to the Romans but after the First War, Livy  states that 'bitter resentment at what was felt to be the ... tyrannical attitude of their conquerors' was the driving force behind the Second War. After their defeat in the First Punic War, the Carthaginians lost Sicily to the Romans. So in essence they had lost one of their vital commercial power bases. During the peace between the First and Second Punic War, Carthage's political situation had changed.
The map above shows the territory gained by the Barcids in Spain. This new region was a valuable boost to Carthage's income and also Spain opened up a new avenue in terms of manpower. Livy provides us with an example of the Carthaginian exploitation of their new province:
The settlement of New Carthage also contributed greatly to Punic power. So how did this new region affect Carthage's long term aims? Polybius  and Livy  credit Hamilcar's conquest of Spain as his intended base, from which he would attack Rome. So now under Hamilcar, Carthage's aim was to avenge the loss of the First War by attacking Rome itself. This being the case, Hamilcar died before the Second Punic War and so a new political figure would now influence Carthaginian politics. It is also necessary to remember that the aims of one individual will not represent the intentions of all the Carthaginians.
Having examined the conditions of the First Punic War, a contrast now can be made with Carthage's aims during the Second Punic War. There is a remarkable difference between these two wars concerning the expanse of land which became theatres of war. The First War essentially focused on the area around Sicily, while the Second Punic War had theatres of war in Spain, (later Africa) and Italy. Hoyos explains that Hannibal launched his invasion from his capital of New Carthage and intended to march over a thousand miles without reinforcements or provisioning by Punic ships along the way. Livy  gives a concise summary of the differences between the two wars:
Since the First Punic War, Carthage's naval supremacy had been overturned. Hoyos states that the Romans had a navy of 220 ships compared to 100 Punic. Giving a slightly different figure, Tarn  points out that the rough total of the Carthaginian fleet in 215 BC was 120 ships in all. However, the reduction of Carthage's naval power could be exaggerated. Compared with the total of 130 ships in the First War, there seems only a small reduction. Hannibal chose to attack by means of a land campaign, ironically reversing Ennius'  statement concerning Carthaginian War Policy in the First War; but this does not mean that Carthage abandoned the usage of naval operations altogether. Livy  describes a number of Carthaginian fleets that were sent to attack the coasts of Italy.
The critical difference was the state of Roman naval power, which was a key difference in the Second Punic War, not so much the Carthaginians themselves. Polybius records that during the First Punic War, the Romans had no decked ships or warships of their own and that they simply used ships belonging to their allies. The Romans also endeavored to build a huge number of newly fitted ships in sporadic bursts when they needed more. So it was this increase in Roman sea power that firstly diminished the Carthaginian naval advantage and then subsequently enabled them to win the First Punic War.
It is necessary to investigate Hannibal's intentions and how his leadership affected the aims of the Carthaginians. According to Bickerman,  Hannibal expected to remain the Carthaginian general in Italy after the victory and ensuing peace. There is seemingly some debate over Hannibal's intentions regarding Rome. Polybius  comments that Hannibal intended to bring the war to Italy, this would divert the Romans from attacking the coasts of Africa which had been done towards the end of the First War. It would also give Hannibal an opportunity to raise more recruits from the Gauls and the Roman allies. There is also a marked contrast between what Hannibal would have liked to have done and what he actually could do when it comes to the invasion of Italy. He had to tread very carefully because success hung on his ability to bring the Italian Allies to his cause. As Hoyos comments, he could not afford to be seen as an invader to them because then this would end his prospects of victory beyond all doubt.
Hannibal was, therefore, taking a huge risk, he had to recruit the Allies when he arrived in Italy, but before that, he would have to take as small a force as practically possible. Polybius  records that he emerged from the Alps with an army of 12000 African and 8000 Spanish infantry and not more than 6000 cavalry in all. Taking such a small force into Italy was indeed a risk but having brought many more Carthaginian reinforcements would only serve to alienate the Italian Allies. After all, given the choice, the Italians would rather have an alliance with the Romans than with a far more exotic Carthaginian power.
In addition to the subject of man power, Hannibal also had to consider the requirements of his army in terms of rations, supplies and especially wages as his army (as is the case with all other Carthaginian forces)  was essentially comprised of mercenary soldiers. So this aspect would be paramount to him throughout his campaign. Meiklejohn points out that the most decisive move of the war was made by Scipio, when he invaded Spain, cutting off Hannibal from his base.
This in itself created a vicious circle for Hannibal. In order to pay and feed his troops he would need both supplies of food and money. The nearest source of both food and money would be from any captured towns in the form of war booty and harvest crops. So to acquire these supplies he would inevitably have to occupy towns or even if necessary take them by force. This in turn would have alienated the Italian Allies unless they were highly supportive of Hannibal. As a result of this problem, Livy reports that Hannibal did suffer financially  and had difficulty in acquiring enough food; though this was not always the case.
The clearest possible indication of Hannibal's aim is after Cannae, when he had the opportunity to march on Rome. In terms of investigating any possible aims of the Carthaginians, this is one of the better events to choose. Both Polybius  and Livy  state that Hannibal did not feel that attempting to capture the city would be possible; Livy certainly believes that he should have done:
However, Hannibal could hardly challenge Rome by a siege or an assault because of the Fabian tactics which were employed. Furthermore, the Romans did not surrender after Cannae like Hannibal had imagined. Moreover, the strength of the allied forces was a major problem for Hannibal. As Hoyos remarks, he lead an army of 26,000 to challenge a power which had 750,000 men of military age. Details from Polybius  illustrate the proportion of the Romans' forces that was comprised of allied soldiers:
Allies consisted of 30,000 Etruscan infantry and 2000 Etruscan cavalry, Sabine cavalry of 4000 with infantry of 50,000. The hill tribes of the Apennines are listed as providing 20,000 [infantry] as well as 20,000 by the Veneti and the Cenomani. The Roman reserve was 20,000 infantry. This is one occasion mentioned by Polybius, and the allies were called upon on a number of occasions to provide more troops.
Not only was the sheer number of the reinforcements which could be summoned to Rome a problem for Hannibal; but even more crucially their loyalty to Rome cost him the war. Polybius  gives some information concerning the Celtic tribes and he attributed the lack of support for Hannibal to Roman military positioning:
As Livy explains, worse was to come for Hannibal:
So supposing Hannibal had actually taken Rome, what would this have achieved? Well the answer depends on what the Carthaginian aim was regarding Rome after the war. From the claims that the Carthaginians wanted to avenge the loss of Sicily, one could believe that the destruction of Rome was the most likely outcome. Had Hannibal have done this, it is possible that then the allies would have resisted no longer. Merely occupying Rome was hardly likely to make any difference. More importantly, Hannibal was unable to attempt this because of the Roman forces that still were at large.
Yet if the Romans had met Hannibal in pitched battle continuously and had not adopted the Fabian tactics, it is likely that they would have had to withdraw to Rome itself. Had the opportunity presented itself, Hannibal would have laid siege to Rome.
In terms of Carthaginian aims, Donaldson  remarks that the only opinion that mattered was Hannibal's. His aim was simply the destruction of Rome. However, Bickerman suggests that there is evidence to believe that Hannibal intended to spare Rome and actually allow her continued existence. Bickerman suggests that Hannibal 'admitted that even after the conclusion of peace, Rome would remain a military power.
Regarding the aims of the Carthaginians, there is a difficulty. In the Ancient World, there was no real sense of national interests or aims as Donaldson  explains. The only way to fully answer such a question would be to examine who was in power at Carthage itself and to analyze the form of government that operated there. So the first question to ask is who wanted to achieve these aims at Carthage. Who wanted to regain Sicily and who wanted to take the war to Italy?
Evidence concerning the constitution of Carthage is not great but significant details can be located in Aristotle's Politics. The Carthaginian government consisted of Kings or Sufetes (mentioned in Livy) and also a Senate body of sorts. Aristotle  describes the relationship between the Sufetes and the Senate body (called the Elders in his work):
In effect the people can be left out completely if both the Senate and the Sufetes agree with one another. So this extract would lead us to believe that the people may not be behind the aims of the Carthaginian Empire. There is ample evidence though to suggest that the people may well have had quite a powerful role in Carthaginian aims. There are a number of extracts from both Polybius and Livy, which illustrate the relations between Senate and the Sufetes, was usually tense.
Polybius  indicates that the Sufetes would have to have popular support by both the Senate body and the people:
It seems that the Senate body was the most powerful according to Aristotle and Livy reinforces this possibility by mentioning that communication with the Senate was possible during the Hannibalic War  and that the Senate was very much in control. Mago had to prove to the Senate that the war was going well:
Livy  does provide an instance where there is negotiation between the generals and Senate:
Yet Hasdrubal's orders were not changed and he was still to march to Italy. There were also reported instances of division within the Senate itself concerning aspects of the War. According to Livy  some of the senators were against sending Hannibal to Spain in the first place. There was also division after Mago's report to the Senate ; which shows that even the Senate did not always have one sole aim. Livy  believes that division in the Senate was a factor which caused Hannibal to fail in his objectives.
Another important fact was that Sufetes could only become politically powerful if they were victorious in campaigns. We do have to bear in mind that Aristotle as Hoyos  comments was recording a constitution a century before the period of the Punic Wars. The people at this time were very important to any Carthaginian general as they elected them via the Public Assembly. Polybius  states that at the time, the people had become the predominant force in Carthaginian politics and also mentions that Hannibal hoped to get support at home.
In conclusion, the differences between the First and Second Punic Wars would cause the aims of the Carthaginian to alter. While during the First War, the aim was to maintain control over Sicily and the immediate area around her; the Second War, according to our sources, was a fight to avenge the loss of Sicily and to attack Italy. There appears a marked difference in terms of Carthage's aims.
However, if Hannibal intended to allow Rome to survive, then all he intended to do was to bring the war to Italy while Carthage managed to reclaim her lost territories. Meiklejohn  explicitly states that this is the case, as Hannibal, while he was in Italy persuaded the Carthaginians to stir up trouble in Sicily, so they could regain their lost territories. This implies that in essence the aims of Carthage (if we can really use such a broad term) did not change between the two wars.
Still, that is only Hannibal's aim, we do not know what the other politicians at Carthage might have wanted, nor are we aware of the feelings of the general populace to a great extent. We must consider that Hannibal's aims should have been popular with the people because normally a Sufete was elected for a short term; so he needed their support. However this is not a normal situation, it would not be possible to try and recall Hannibal for an election and so he was probably left the command, without needing popular support after his initial election to the post.
From the material we have, all we can do is analyze the aims and ambitions of individual leaders at Carthage. To be able to fully answer the question 'how far did Carthage's aims differ between the First and Second Punic Wars'; greater detail concerning Carthaginian intentions, other than just a few individual cases such as Hamilcar or Hannibal, would be required.