Martin Luther became a monk in 1505 and devoted his life to God without ever having properly read the Bible. His knowledge of theology was based on the Roman Catholic interpretation of it. In 1917 he produced his 95 theses, yet 'opinions vary as to how well developed Luther's theology was' by this stage. What began as an attack 'against the abuses associated with Tetzel's indulgence peddling' became a condemnation of the papacy. In 1520-21 Luther produced three major treatises, and in them can be seen a real consolidation of his beliefs. However, Luther possibly already held such beliefs before writing these treatises, and his ideas continued to develop after 1520.
Luther's three major treatises of 1520 were entitled To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation, The Babylonian Captivity of the Church and The Freedom of a Christian. In the tract, To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation, Luther highlights three major errors the papacy had committed: firstly that the pope had power over secular authorities; secondly that only the pope could interpret scripture properly; and thirdly that only the pope could determine church doctrine. Thus Luther was denying the pope's claims to authority. The Babylonian Captivity of the Church tackled the issue of sacraments, where Luther reduced the seven traditional sacraments to just two. Only Baptism and the Eucharist had basis in Scripture and thus only they were legitimate rituals. The Freedom of a Christian consolidated the view that justification was by faith alone and also declared that Christians should practise brotherly love out of love for God. Good works would flow from faith; they were not a prerequisite for salvation. The American Edition of Luther's Works holds the view that 'these three treatises of 1520 are at the heart of Luther's protest against the church of his day'. Yet this does not necessarily mean that they were a turning point in the development of his ideas.
The three treatises had different audiences yet all contained elements of the ideas he outlined in his 95 Theses. The main aim of the 95 Theses was his attack against indulgences, 'Therefore those preachers of indulgences are in error, who say that by the pope's indulgences a man is freed from every penalty, and saved'. He denied the pope ability to forgive sins, 'The pope cannot remit any guilt, except by declaring that it has been remitted by God'. Although he criticised the papacy, his ideas were not yet fully developed to deny the pope any power or authority whatsoever. Yet by 1520 Luther came to recognise the pope as the Antichrist. In To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation, he beseeches the German nobility to 'set itself against the pope as against a common enemy and destroyer of Christendom'. This is a much harsher rebuke than in the 95 Theses. Luther had also already started to formulate his ideas on justification prior to the writing of the three major treatises. Christ's death on the cross redeemed human kind once and for all; there was no need for indulgences or good works. 'First a sinner was "justified" in the sense that the guilt of his sins, which deserves God's anger and punishment, was suddenly and unconditionally forgiven'. Good works were then a result of this as the 'believers soul was renewed from inside by the Holy Spirit' in a process called "sanctification". However, Cameron believes that these ideas did not 'spring fully grown from the mind of Luther' but his 'mature view seems to have been established by 1519-20' particularly in The Freedom of a Christian. 'Therefore it is clear that, as the soul needs only the Word of God for life and righteousness, so it is justified by faith alone and not by any works'. It therefore appears that Luther's previous beliefs were not only developed in the later treatises but also, in fact, reached a crucial stage whereby Luther rejected the authority of the pope and rejected his claims to be the only one with power to interpret scripture. This was a major turning point and led to a separation from Rome on Luther's behalf. Prior to the 1520 treatises Luther had already identified the three requisites for a Christian and for salvation. These were sola gratia, sola fida and sola scriptura. Humankind is saved by the grace of God alone; it is only through faith that one can receive this grace; and only scripture can be trusted and relied upon as the absolute authority. These were the very core ideas of Luther's theology, yet it had been developed in most part before 1520. This was what Luther later described in 1545 as his 'liberating discovery." Yet it could be argued that his 1520 treatises laid out in detail the discoveries he had learnt in previous years, as 'between 1513 and 1519 he experienced a series of breakthroughs'. His treatises thus mark a turning point in that after 1520 none of his fundamental ideas changed much.
The issue of the sacraments had been touched upon in his earlier work, including The Holy and Blessed Sacrament of Baptism, yet  The Babylonian Captivity of the Church was 'the goal toward which they had been unconsciously tending." He came to realise that only Baptism and Communion were legitimate sacraments, and his ideas on the latter were especially controversial. The tradition at the time held that the wine and bread became physically transformed into the real blood and body of Jesus Christ in a process called transubstantiation. Only the bread was given to the laity and could only be administered by priests. Luther rejected this notion, stressing that both the bread and wine should be given to all believers, which was controversial in itself. Even more so was his rejection of the notion of transubstantiation. In The Blessed Sacrament of the Holy and True Body of Christ (1519) he wrote, 'To receive this sacrament in bread and wine, then, is nothing else than to receive a sure sign of this fellowship and union with Christ and all the saints." For Luther, the sacrament depended on the faith of the participant rather than on the nature of it. Yet Luther's ideas were still influenced by the Catholic tradition as although he denied transubstantiation, he continued to believe in a "Real Presence" of Christ in the food. This was an issue which caused division and disagreement among Protestants later on. Luther's work The Adoration of the Sacrament of 1523 describes his views on this sacrament in a more developed way to in The Babylonian Captivity of the Church yet was not altogether new. He simply described in more detail an already-held belief. Baptism was also a much-discussed issue, despite not causing quite so much controversy as the Eucarist. In 1522 Luther had to answer Melanchton's letter which explained that Zwickau Prophets were challenging infant baptism. In 1529 his Large Catechism expanded on the ideas he outlined in his reply to Melanchton. Luther believed that infant baptism was permissible, as 'the "ignorant" child is not baptized because of its faith but because of God's promise. By claiming that children cannot understand or accept God's promise changes the sacrament 'from the work of God into the work of man'. This does appear to contradict the view expressed in The Babylonian Captivity of the Church where he affirms that, 'unless it does believe this, it cannot be saved, because it does not believe the truth of God that promises salvation'. A child cannot believe in the promise because it does not understand it. So it would appear that his views were developed slightly on this matter. Yet opinions on infant baptism were not fundamental to the Christian faith, so although details may have changed or been modified following 1520, the basic ideas remained the same.
His ideas on the church and society did develop after 1520 as people began to question and ask for advice on what a new church structure would look like. As he had rejected the pope's claims to authority and the need for priests as mediators, there was a clear need for a new church structure. 'Later in his career, as the issue of ecclesiology became more pressing, Luther offered the faithful "marks" by which the Church could be identified." As all believers were priests, a doctrine he set forth in his work To The Christian Nobility of the German Nation, this would mean that all had the ability to interpret scripture, to preach, to administer sacraments and so on. Yet obviously some leadership was needed as not all were actually qualified fulfil such tasks. Neither Luther nor any of the other Reformers sought to establish a new Church, they merely wished to re-establish the Church of the Apostles. 'Nevertheless, although Luther did not provide the blueprint for a Christian community, he was in no doubt about what constituted the True Church and he was sure that it was not the Church of Rome." Luther's declaration that all Christians were members of a "universal priesthood" did cause some troubles in the 1520s as people sought to exercise that new power. Thus after the 1520s 'he started to emphasize the need for a rite of ordination and the proper coordination of the ministry.' He wrote subsequent tracts on this subject, such as On the Council and the Church (1539), yet 'he never lost sight of the central principle behind his understanding of the Church: "...the whole substance and life of the Church is the Word of God."' So although Luther did continue to develop his ideas after 1520, his key theology had already been formulated, it was just a matter of deciding on the practical changes that would need to be made.
Martin Luther reached a breakthrough in his theology in 1517 when he wrote his 95 Theses. Yet despite the underlying criticism of Catholic teaching, his ideas were as yet not fully formed. By 1520 the core of his theology had been produced and in his three treatises he 'clarified his new evangelical theology for his ever increasing following'. He did continue to publish many tracts in response to opposition, challenges or questions but all of them were based on the breakthroughs he made and explained in 1520. Thus 1520 could be described as a turning point in the development of his ideas.