Throughout the course of this essay, I shall explore various aspects of Plato's proposed state in order to ascertain whether or not it can be regarded as elitist. I hope to compare and contrast the most important aspects of the system and then give an overall conclusion. Let us begin with the standard definition of Elitism :
These are the characteristics that we are searching for in Plato's model state. The elements upon which I shall focus are:
Beginning with the justification for such classes, Plato argues that:
According to Plato's theory, then, some people are indeed better suited to rule other others and some people are not as capable. Seemingly if Plato's whole model state is based on an elitist ideal, what hope is there for the rest of the model state? These Philosopher Kings are selected by a rigorous regime of training and should only become rulers if they possess:
Bowra explains that Plato believed that government should comprise of an intellectual and moral elite. He was not just satisfied with having them well trained, but also morally superior and there is a justification for such a line of thought. Plato himself explains that such a provision prevents the Philosopher Kings from being mean or unreasonable because 'they must do whatever they judge best for the city'.
Although so far, such a regime seems elitist to the core, there is a provision which appears to contradict the concept of elitism. As Schofield explains, the Rulers are chosen from the Guardian Class, which as Plato instructs are to possess no private property of their own, not even a dwelling. Surely an elitist would grant the very best property to the Rulers and Guardians as they are 'inherently' superior? While on one hand, the Rulers are in complete control of the laws and state policy; yet on the other, they completely lack private property and strive for the general welfare of those ruled.
Moreover we have another paradox regarding Plato's theory; how will the Philosopher Kings be able to endure one untruth, which is the one of the greatest imaginable? The so called 'Noble Lie' should be a great source of angst amongst these rulers, or should it? If they believe that they are ruling for the good of the city, they themselves would believe the Noble Lie. This is where the problem worsens; these Philosophers are supposed to be able to:
Presuming that the rulers did this, they too would then be witness to the truth behind the Noble Lie itself. It seems that Plato was not only aware of this prospect but he also expected that the Philosopher Kings would be quite content with ruling by 'a fairy story, like those the poets tell'
with  'a great deal of fiction and deceit'
.
This seems rather odd to me as only a few passages further Plato had himself admitted:
Seemingly Plato is only concerned with enlightening the Philosophers and not at all concerned with informing the lower classes; as such knowledge would entitle them to rule, in essence a democracy. From this respect, the so called model state seems very much an elitist one, although some elements seem to contradict the standard definition of elitism.
Now we have examined how the Philosopher Kings are selected and some of the attributes they are to possess, let us turn to the manner in which the Guardian class is selected from the whole city population. According to the Noble Lie, the god added gold to the rulers and silver to the Auxiliaries and bronze to the farmers and workers. How did Plato decide to winnow out the silver from the bronze?
The candidates were put through rigorous tests designed to lead them astray and tricking them to neglect their responsibility of protecting the city. After testing the candidates during a period from childhood to adulthood, the candidates who would 'stick most firmly to the principle' would be chosen as Guardians. This aspect of Plato's model state does not on the outset appear to be overtly elitist in policy. The whole population has the potential of becoming a Guardian and possibly a Philosopher if they have the right attributes present. Promotion and demotion seems to be an opportunity for all:
Examining this extract would convince us that the system appears fair to everyone. Any child who was golden, yet born in the iron or bronze class could climb the social ladder as befitted its qualities. However it does not remain the case when we read later passages concerning the production of offspring. Plato explains that the state needs to have a pedigree herd of people; the means of acquiring one is to:
So this eugenic programme aims to have only potentially gold or silver children and to decrease the opportunity for the procreation of the population of bronze offspring. It gets even more sinister concerning the 'undesirable' children; while the 'desirable' children are taken by officers to nurseries run by the state, the 'undesirables' will be taken away and secretly disposed of.
What is the intended result from such a regime of selection? The offspring of the Guardian Class will be only the 'best' and will have no defective attributes; the offspring which were not desirable from the Guardian Class are to be disposed of.
In essence Plato wanted by means of the eugenic breeding, to improve the Guardian Class and in doing so even their worst offspring (provided they are healthy) will improve the lower classes as the standard will be ever increasing in excellence. Or is there another explanation? Does Plato mean that only healthy children of the Guardians are to survive birth and that the best of them become future Guardians, while the worst are relegated to the lower classes? With such an overall scheme in mind; what would the opportunities of a bronze child really be? Would they be able to be promoted at all?
Hourani takes up this question and he firstly provides opinions from both sides of the debate. He quotes from the work of Cornford, summarizing his opinions on the matter:
Hourani questions whether this was the case and confirms that there is no mention of the Third Class receiving the same education as the Guardians at all in the Republic. The point as to which children are disposed of is enumerated by Hourani. Seemingly the bronze civilians are allowed to marry as they please and as Hourani states the eugenic breeding programme would put the bronze children further behind as time progressed; 'the scales were weighted from birth'.
He also makes the point that the kindergarten education is not given to 'the best children', but 'the children of better parents': the Greek reads: 











. Hourani also informs us that it seems likely that these bronze children would have had no education, as he states that the source for the description of the education makes no mention of anyone else but the Guardians:
Even though Hourani correctly states that even at birth the chasm between the bronze and silver children would be too great to bridge, I have one, possibly unfounded reservation concerning his treatment of the question. While he explains that the Third Class is allowed to marry as they please, he omits to mention the so called mating festivals that were to take place at certain times of the year.
As it turns out, only the Guardians are to be entered into the breeding festivals; this is made clear by Plato:
To summarize then, the eugenic system was only directed towards the Guardian Class and so Hourani was quite right in his explanations. Lee provides a brief summary of the intentions of this system:
Now we have examined the selection of Rulers and Guardians from the city populace and the integration with the Third Class; we may attempt to answer the question of elitism. I shall now summarise the elements that seem to convict Plato's model state of being elitist in nature. These elements are for mostly the breeding programme which forms a chasm between the Guardian and Third Class at birth. The idea that some are better suited to ruling is also thoroughly elitist. The ruling elite would also be chosen on intellectual qualities. These elements match the description that elitism is the:
Yet there are also elements that do not conform to this ideal. The ruling class does not have any property at all and in this respect the Third Class are 'superior'. In addition, as Plato says, the idea of this model state was to ensure that all the classes of people were content, not just the ruling elite. Balot reminds us that unlike the totalitarian states of the last century, it was not simply a matter of the elite seizing power for their own benefit. Lee adds that:
On these grounds then can we completely condemn Plato's model state for being elitist? I would advocate that we should not even consider condemning him at all; his values of professional specialization are still part of our modern mindsets. Do we not still wish to be treated by doctors who are qualified? The same is true for lawyers, brain surgeons and politicians. We still have expectations that certain people should and should not take on certain professions; a rather topical example is paedophiles in our schools; there we still have expectations regarding what people need to be like to be allowed to perform certain functions.
Returning to Plato and his aristocracy of talent, how can we even consider his model state as an aristocracy when we can not even define what an aristocracy is? What are the traits that distinguish an aristocracy in the first place? Merriam discusses the difficulties that the aristocrats themselves face when trying to legitimize such a term. The main commonly perceived attributes of an aristocracy are wealth; birth and property. Merriam explains that in the modern age all of these are not considered to be attributes even by the Aristoi. He also states that:
What is more, the only one of those attributes found in Plato's Republic is the elite of intelligence; the Rulers do not have wealth or property and have to rule on behalf of the ruled; doing so because they are forced to; not because they have political ambitions.
In conclusion, Plato's Republic does contain a model state that can be seen to be based on elitist principles; but we must remember that our political mindsets are different to those of the classical period. Moreover, to condemn Plato for his elitist ideals would be to condemn our present day society for retaining them to a certain extent, after centuries of 'progress'.
If we were to condemn Plato for his viewpoints, it would be seen as an attack on our own belief that everyone is entitled to their own opinion. Naturally we may supply the counter arguments to any viewpoint but we should never go beyond this; unless we wish to repeat the travesties that were the crusades and the witch hunts.