The purpose of this dissertation is to compare and contrast magical techniques employed by the Ancient Egyptians with the moral values found in the Wisdom Literature, popular stories and religious texts. Lichtheim states that any Egyptian magical approach 'could not be but contrary to morality and piety'. Yet, there is certainly reason to believe that the Egyptians did justify certain uses of magic within their own 'system' of ethical practice.
I shall therefore examine the Wisdom texts and popular stories to provide a list of values the Egyptians held concerning the use of magic. The resulting criteria shall be compared with the magical techniques found in State Magic, Funerary Magic and Popular Magic, to grant us an overall comparison between moral thought and magical practice. This introduction shall also serve as a discussion of several key Egyptian principles, such as Ma'at and Heka, which are crucial to the understanding of Egyptian magical practice. Once these ideas have been discussed and the ground rules have been established; I shall proceed to analyse each field of magic individually and then conclude in a separate piece at the end.
There has been a vast amount of discussion concerning the definition of magic. I shall not discuss these definitions here as it would involve another dissertation in its own right. However, I shall provide my working definition of magic, at least in terms of Ancient Egypt. The use of objects and texts that are designed to 'ward off the blow of events' will be classed as magic in this dissertation. I hope that by using an Egyptian definition of magic, that of Merikare, I shall avoid modern definitions as much as possible. Furthermore, much of the magical practice discussed in this work was indeed designed for such a purpose. Next I shall focus upon two key concepts of Ancient Egyptian magic, Ma'at and Heka.
In this section I shall discuss the magical techniques used by the Priesthood on behalf of the Pharaoh. Limited space prevents me from providing an exhaustive study of each and every one of the rituals employed; so I shall examine only those techniques which seem to contradict the ground rules that have been provided in the Introduction. The other rituals and/or techniques, which have not been examined here, do not conflict with the given criteria.
The rituals and techniques that I shall examine in this section are:
These categories are in fact interrelated as Damnatio Memoriae and the Harem Conspiracy are both extended examples of Execration. The use of Royal Propaganda (particularly on stone) is related as it is often the prior magical technique used by the future victim, who will later fall foul of Damnatio Memoriae.
These techniques would seemingly contradict the ground rule concerning the Execration of Egyptian people and this is why they shall be examined; so we may determine the ethical complications within Egyptian legitimization of such rites.
This section would not be able to provide a broad survey of the huge expanse of funerary magic that was employed by the Egyptians; so I shall attempt to discuss only the elements, which would seem to contradict the ethical criteria set in the Introduction. Seemingly the aspects of funerary magic most likely to conflict with the ethical guidelines are the spells which seem to modern authors to cheat destiny. Spells used against potential enemies are no more troublesome to justify than the Execration Texts which were used on behalf of the state.
One such example of Funerary Magic that would contradict the proposed ethical criteria is Chapter 30B of the Book of the Dead. The important aspects of the text are as follows:
It is generally given a highly cynical treatment by the majority of modern scholars due to the nature of the spell itself. The spell, as Gahlin, explains 'was thought to prevent the heart from owning up to any crimes the person had committed in life'.
Chapter 30B was the preferred text that was inscribed on a heart scarab which was then placed in the wrappings of mummies. Andrews explains:
Surely, such a spell would clearly oppose the concept of Ma'at? Apparently it is not as clear cut as we might think; for within the ethical criteria that have been established is an extract from the Instruction of Merikare:
It is probable that the greatest blow of fate for an Egyptian would be the second death; implying that magic could well be a legitimate tool to counteract this dreaded prospect. Here then, we have an odd contrast of ideas: while Lichtheim was particularly adamant that using this kind of magic 'could not be but contrary to morality and piety'
; the reference concerning the employment of magic against the blows of fate is found in a so called moral text. Could it be that there is an explanation that would place Chapter 30B within the legitimate confines of our draft ethical system?
My hypothesis is that, if there is a way to legitimize Chapter 30B within our criteria, it would be given to people in the form of a reward for their services to Ma'at (essentially the present reign). The methodology will be as follows:
Firstly I shall collate various opinions of the morality of the Chapter by various authors.
I shall then proceed to examine the evidence from the various Books of the Dead that we have in order to establish what sort of people owned this chapter.
The data shall be interpreted to examine if there is any supporting evidence for my hypothesis.
Let us now analyze the current opinions from other scholars who have written on the issue to ascertain if the notion has any supporting evidence from this quarter.
The final sphere of Egyptian magic concerns the use of popular magic. Within this section many questions need to be asked and shall each be addressed throughout the discussion. The vast majority of spells from the Middle and New Kingdom generally do not conflict with the ethical criteria that were established in the Introduction. Many are healing spells, while others combat potential threats. Some are fairly aggressive in nature and share a marked similarity with Execration Rites which have been shown to be legitimately within the confines of the ethical rules.
Later in Egyptian history, this appears to change. The greatest example of the change is the corpus of texts known as the Greek Magical Papyri; here the level of aggression seems to increase and in addition the intentions of the spell appear to be radically different from the older variants. A great many of these spells stand in opposition to the ethical criteria and so I shall dedicate the section to investigate why this is the case and indeed if this is really the case.
My investigation shall comprise of the following elements:
Let us now examine the Greek Magical Papyri in terms of the composition.
Now we have looked at the aspects of Egyptian magic that could be considered to break the ethical values of my proposed system. I shall briefly summarize the findings before examining the impact of this proposal to the current ideas about Egyptian magic.
The Execration Rites, although considered as morally dubious today, had legitimate uses under the Egyptian system. As we have seen Execration Rites were perfectly viable means against the enemies of Egypt, natural and supernatural, and took the form of a punishment for the traitors within the state. The Egyptian Damnatio Memoriae was simply an extension of this principle and generally the Pharaohs had a justification for such an act.
There were, however, illegal uses of such magic even in Egyptian times; the use of such rituals upon Pharaoh was considered the worst crime. Moreover we have found that in the story of the Eloquent Peasant, the evil villain Nemtynakht wished he could use magic of a similar kind on the innocent peasant. This vilification of Nemtynakht shows that generally the Egyptians would not have believed that using magic such as this on the innocent was permitted. After all the words of Ipuwer demonstrate that he at least did not like anybody knowing the magical techniques of the temple magicians:
Here Ritner translates the passage differently; the alternative view being that spells are 'made dangerous because they are remembered by men'. It is clear some types of spell were guarded very carefully; the Execration Rites would have been this type.
Chapter 30B from the Book of the Dead has certainly been more problematic and, is the only aspect of magic that might contradict the system that I have proposed. The main problem is that evidence indicating why the recipients acquired the spell is lacking. What is more, there are seemingly no reliable sources concerning wage rates of the classes of people that are under investigation in my study. I am currently unable to prove that the spell was a reward for good service or whether it was just a luxury for the richest Egyptians. Perhaps the few cases which one might not expect to own such an expensive spell were richer than their counterparts from other parts of the country.
Yet we can still state that this spell does not break the ethical uses of magic that we gleaned from the texts. The Instructions of Merikare told us that magic was a device to ward off the 'blows of fate'
; could there possibly be a more terrifying blow of fate than the Egyptian second death? Under this pretext we can allow Chapter 30B to conform to our ethical criteria; despite the fact I do not wish to use Merikare's extract as a blanket term, which would in turn allow any sort of magic under this justification.
The Greek Magical Papyri clearly are not compatible with the proposed ethical system. The corpus has all sorts of harmful spells that would never have been part of a magician's work prior to this period; although this we can deduce from the surviving texts, so it is possible that we have not yet found evidence of these kinds of spells earlier in Egyptian history.
In the study we discovered that the change was caused by a possible change in the identity of the practitioner who was neither attached to the temples nor versed in the traditional ethical rules. Conversely, it could just as well have been a native priesthood, which needed to adapt its traditional spells to earn an income from the new Roman elite.
It may be worth noting that I have found no references to magic within the Wisdom Literature of the later periods. Perhaps this could be connected with the professional classes of priests and scribes vowing that they had nothing to do with Heka. What is clear is that the change of morality and function of the spells are connected to the change of the identity of the magician or the change of economic circumstances.
Therefore if the Greek Magical Papyri were devised under a different ethical code then they do not fit with the system I have proposed which concerns the earlier periods. This means that all of the examples that were practised in the earlier periods are indeed compatible with the ethical system I have outlined.