In this essay I shall examine the Wisdom of Solomon and comment on the role of God, the definition of piety, the construction of Jewish identity, cultural influences and the possible date of composition.
In this section, I shall examine how God is portrayed in the Wisdom of Solomon. The text emphasizes that people should pursue wisdom, beginning with an uncompromising reverence to God, 'for he will be found by those who do not put him to the test'. The description of the nature of God dominates the first chapter, with other scattered sections throughout the book.
One of the most crucial concepts expressed is that no deed, word or thought is missed by God and Justice is always achieved. One idea, which I find surprising, is the claim that God did not create Death and that he takes no pleasure from destroying the living. According to the author of the text, Death is an artificial construction of man, based on what he perceives to happen to those who 'die'.
God therefore is portrayed to test every individual and then either punish accordingly or bring them under his eternal protection. Such a notion is certainly not new; for possible Egyptian influences on the text, see the cultural influences section. God is essentially the creator of everything, shaping the universe from formless matter. There is also a powerful description of God as he punishes the wicked; he has Justice for a breastplate, invincible holiness for a shield and a helmet of forthright judgement. In essence there is no greater force for good.
God's power is demonstrated in the third section of the book dealing with the ten plagues of Egypt. He is characterized as the 'Saviour of all', having a 'sweetness to [his] children' and an all powerful Word. The text concludes with the assertion that God has never yet failed to assist the Jews.
In the Wisdom of Solomon, God is portrayed as omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent. He will show himself to those who have simplicity in their hearts and are pure from sin. Despite the formidable description of his limitless power, God did not create Death and hates to see his children destroy themselves.
I would advocate that the author was attempting to come to terms with a question very much in people's minds today: why does God allow such suffering? A question perhaps wide spread in the period in which the text was written, see the date of composition section. In Wisdom, the answer asserted is that God designed people to be immortal, but the envy of the Devil created Death.
Piety in Wisdom is described predominantly in terms of seeking wisdom. Much of the focus is upon kings and rulers of nations in the second section of the book. Ruling justly, observing the law and following the will of God are forms of pious behaviour. Another crucial aspect of piety is to desire to be instructed:
In order to keep the laws, a ruler must love Wisdom; giving her attention will give the ruler incorruptibility. At the beginning of the book, the core instruction of pious behaviour can be seen. Any form of wrong doing, such as perverse thoughts, drives both Wisdom and therefore God away from the subject in question.
However the largest section on personal piety occupies the last section of the book. One could not miss the fact that the author deemed tending divine images as a highly impious act. What follows from 13:10 to 15: 13, as Nickelsburg states, is:
Yet surprisingly, during the polemic the author stumbles across a notion central to the Egyptian homage to divine images. An image can not help itself and needs assistance from the worshipper. The Egyptians held the belief that a statue was not a divine being in itself, but by means of certain rituals, the 'Ka' or 'spirit' of the deity it represented would reside in the statue. Thus, serving the statue was a form of sympathetic magic; doing service to the statue was the equivalent of doing service to the deity.
Whether the author was aware of this or not, such notions were conveniently omitted from the polemic, as one would expect. Instead the reader is told not to put his or her 'trust in lifeless idols'.
So piety, according to the author of Wisdom, is to seek wisdom, be willing to be instructed, to live by the law and not to worship idols.
Concepts concerning Jewish identity are predominant in the third section of the book. What better passage could be used to grant the Jews their key customs other than the Exodus? The appearance of the Exodus has two functions in the text, only one of them being the construction of the Jewish community. The other was to introduce the reader to the atmosphere that would later launch a slanderous polemic against idolatry.
The Jews are described in Wisdom as 'a holy people, a blameless race'. Their resilience to hardship is a key feature of this section of the text and it is then followed by an emphasis on the rewards they received for their piety to God. An important section concerning Jewish behaviour comes at 12: 19-22:
The next crucial section of Wisdom that constructs Jewish identity is 15: 1-6. It serves as a distinctive difference between the Jews and essentially all the other peoples of the ancient world. Jews do not worship idols of any form and that for the Jews 'to know ... [God] is indeed the perfect virtue'.
However it is within the criticisms of other cultures that we can analyze Jewish identity the most, for a great deal of information is conveyed not just by what the Jews believe, but also what the Jews do not, via the description of other peoples.
In this instance, then, the savage polemic against Egyptian practices can serve to illustrate Jewish identity. Other examples within Wisdom of these insightful criticisms are God's forbearance with Egypt and Canaan. Egypt was the case study illustrating Jewish contempt for the service to divine images, while the people of Canaan were an example of 'loathsome practices ... acts of sorcery and unholy rites'.
In Wisdom, then, Jewish identity is expressed both by assertions of Jewish culture and by scornful denunciations of the neighbouring cultures, such as Egypt and Canaan. Therefore, Jewish readers would be constantly reminded of whom they are. The reasons behind this will become clear when we deal with the date of the work.
The Wisdom of Solomon was written in elegant Greek and as Gruen explains, was intended for an audience of sophisticated and hellenized readers. Gruen also states that is was most unlikely that the general readership comprised of many Egyptians. In Wisdom a high level of Hellenistic influence can be detected in two aspects of the text. The first is the style of the literature itself and the second concerns the thoughts and beliefs behind the Wisdom of Solomon.
A number of Greek literary devices can be found within Wisdom, the most apparent is the use of synkrisis towards the end of the book. Essentially it appears that the Wisdom of Solomon is a combination of philosophic wisdom with divine inspiration. Hadas explains that:
One example of Plato's philosophy in Wisdom is the belief of the pre-existence of the soul. In addition Nickelsburg comments that some of the descriptions of Wisdom are 'beholden to Stoic conceptions'. However the personification of Wisdom which extends from 6:12 to 9:18 is not believed to be a solely Greek concept. Murphy explains that the description of the order Wisdom brings is paralleled in the Egyptian concept of Ma'at; while Nickelsburg states that the language used in praise of Wisdom are most likely drawn from the praises of Isis.
There is also a strong biblical influence throughout the Wisdom of Solomon. The Exodus story itself is the subject of the third section of Wisdom and other biblical elements appear in other parts of the work. Solomon has been used as the central character in the book and he is a Jewish king from the Bible.
There are both Hellenistic, Jewish and to some extent Egyptian influence found within the Wisdom of Solomon and this combination of cultures can be understood more clearly when we examine the possible dating of Wisdom.
There has been a great deal of dispute between scholars concerning the actual date of the work's composition. The range of possible dates seems to be from the last third of the Second Century BC to the middle of the First Century AD. Winston argues that the book was written after 30 BC when Egypt was brought under the control of Rome. Gruen states that it was written by an Egyptian Jew in the early Roman Empire. I would also agree with the scholars who advocate the First Century AD because of the style of the polemic against idolatry.
During this period onwards the Egyptian priests were suffering under the Roman occupation. Such was the growing dislike of magic, Egyptian priests of this period had to prove their sanctity by declaring that they had nothing to do with the art of magic. Formerly Egyptian priests before the Roman Period proved their sanctity by asserting they had mastery over magic. Such conditions would appear to match the attitudes expressed in Wisdom.
To conclude, the Wisdom of Solomon appears to be a text written by an Egyptian Jew in Greek during the First Century AD. The literary style is very much Hellenistic while the ideas contained within it appear to be a blend of Greek, Jewish and Egyptian ideas. Jewish identity is expressed both by means of open criticism of other cultures and assertions of Jewish values. The general concept of piety included the search for Wisdom, by means of an undying devotion to a God who had never failed his people and taught them the secrets of heaven to those who were pure enough.