This essay shall examine the evolution of the goddess Isis in the Egyptian, Greek and Roman environments in an attempt to ascertain whether or not she can be categorized as being strictly Egyptian, Greek or Roman. In a similar manner; an attempt will be made to determine if Isis can be seen as an old or a new deity. The examination of her evolution over time shall be divided into a number of categories which are:
My sources for the investigation comprise of both classical texts by writers such as Herodotus and Plutarch in conjunction with Egyptian sources such as the Bremner-Rhind Papyrus and the Oxyrhynchus Papyri. I shall attempt to analyze the sources in chronological order to aid any patterns of evolution found. I shall begin with the Egyptian elements; depictions and accounts of Isis (or Aset/Auset as she was known in native Egyptian).
The account of the evolution of Isis in Egypt shall be kept short as it serves only as a common element of comparison upon which I shall base my discussion of her depictions in the Graeco-Roman world. My small selection of extracts from the various Egyptian texts is by no means exhaustive.
One of the reasons why Isis became as popular as she did throughout the ancient world was because, as Wilkinson remarks, she was able to absorb the attributes of a multiplicity of deities. Even within Egypt itself, Isis absorbed a number of goddesses before her cult spread throughout the Mediterranean. Wilkinson provides a list of the various attributes which she came to hold in Egypt:
Over the course of Egyptian History, the imagery of Isis did change and it is well worth observing the following transitions in her image. I have provided a number of images of Isis from Egypt from varying time periods; in order to show her gradual transformations that resulted in a template, which the Greeks and Romans incorporated. Image A is from the 19 th Dynasty and depicts Isis as suckling Seti I. Here she has the double crown of Egypt and the vulture head dress. Image B is older than A and is the oldest of all the selection provided here; dating to circa 1400 BC in the 18 th Dynasty. Isis has the characteristic crown on her head which also is the symbol used to spell her name in Egyptian. Images C and D are both Amulets portraying Isis, Image C again shows the crown unique to Isis, from the Saite Period; while Image D shows Isis with the solar disk and cow horns that she acquired from Hathor during the 18 th Dynasty. This is dated to the Third Intermediate Period. Finally the most recent image of the selection, E  depicts Isis with both crowns and is dated to the Roman period.
From the images from Egypt alone it is clear that Isis evolved at least in terms of portrayal.
Now let us briefly examine references to Isis in a sample of Egyptian texts again from a variety of periods in Pharaonic Egyptian History. According to Wilkinson Isis is mentioned 80 times in the Pyramid Texts most of the references concern Isis as a protectress alongside Nepthys such as the example in PT 690, 2098-99.
She is mentioned about 114 times in the Coffin Texts and in particular Isis claims to be 'a protection from fear' perhaps the later ideas of Isis as the saviour goddess can be linked to Egyptian theology. Isis' protective role seems to be of a primary importance as she is described in a similar way to CT 775 in the Book of the Dead Corpus, BD 69; where she has 'saved me from my enemies who would harm me'.
In the Bremner-Rhind Papyrus, Isis is called 'Mistress of the Universe, who came forth from the Eye of Horus'. This is a title that seems to have been continued in the Graeco-Roman descriptions, which are examined later in the investigation.
Now a selection of the Egyptian elements of Isis has been summarized briefly; let us use them to compare and contrast the Graeco-Roman interpretations of Isis. Firstly beginning with the Greeks; Isis was identified with both Io and Demeter who both wandered the earth. Io gave birth to her son Epaphus by the Nile and Demeter who searched for her daughter Persephone. The identification with both Io  and Demeter  is confirmed by Herodotus:
Even from this early stage in Greek History in the Fifth Century BC; Isis had been associated with Greek divinities. Herodotus also provides us with insightful information about the spread of the Isiac Cult during his era:
We must of course be aware that this could be a case of Interpretatio Graeca on the part of Herodotus but after all this was probably the case for the extracts from Book II. If what he says is true then by the Fifth Century BC; Isis had already begun to spread across the Mediterranean. We also know that Isis had come to have a temple built for her at Athens in 333 BC due to a Greek inscription:
It is interesting that Aphrodite is mentioned here because we have an image of Isis-Aphrodite (Image F) which dates to circa 100 BC.
One of the events that probably enhanced the popularity of the goddess in the long term was Alexander's conquest of Egypt. Alexandria became one of the most important cities in the ancient world and according to Arrian:
So how did the Greeks perceive Isis? Some of her attributes are given to us by Aesop. Dillery comments that Isis was generally associated with the invention of writing and language in general. This is not as such a truly Egyptian attribute but similarities of Isis and the power over words can be seen in one of the Egyptian myths; namely the Secret Name of Ra . For this reason it is not a radically new attribute conferred upon Isis and this may even be evidence that Isis remained very much the same as she spread across the Mediterranean.
From the Life of Aesop we find that Isis had the title 'Isis of the many names' '











'. Further evidence provided by Dillery (namely from one of the goddess' Aretologies from Cyme dated to the First Century BC), in which Isis proclaims that:
The reason for conferring such an attribute seems to be that Isis was associated with Hermes (Thoth; Djehuty in the Egyptian) who was the god of writing. According to Plutarch she was also called 'First of the Muses' as well as Justice. This appears to be because the Ptolemies associated Isis with the constellation Virgo, which was thought by the Greeks to be Dike or Nemesis.
So to summarize; the Greeks associated her with the Muses as well as a goddess who not only invented writing but language in general and gave it to both the Greeks and the so called Barbarian peoples. She was also associated with Justice which perhaps seems rather a new concept; if we consider that in Egypt Ma'at was the personification of justice.
However; it seems that the most commonly widespread Egyptian myth concerning Isis was the Death of Osiris and this is probably one of the main sources for the Graeco-Roman perceptions of the goddess. In fact the myth recorded by Plutarch, in my opinion, can show that any new attributes of Isis were thought by the Greeks and Romans to be her original ones from Egypt. So in their minds; little had changed about Isis from her worship in Egypt to her cults established in the Mediterranean. This I hope to demonstrate throughout the remainder of this essay.
I shall now focus the discussion on the rites and festivals performed on behalf of Isis. As this seems to form the best means of transition from Greek aspects to Roman aspects; as the rites are similar in both. Furthermore we have sources for the festivals performed over several different periods and focusing on Roman Isiac Cults before completing the analysis would rather disturb the fluidity of a chronological based method.
Let us now return to Herodotus who provides an account of the so called 'Festival of Lamps' which seems likely to have precedents for the processions described in the novel by Apuleius. The events at the Festival in Busiris and at Sais (probably on a national scale) are as follows:
I have attempted to find a similar festival within the official calendars of Egypt and although I can not find a mention of the Festival of Lamps; I have found an entry that reads:
It is by no means a match but I feel it is a strong candidate for one. Now let us compare the description given to us by Apuleius:
Could there be a greater match between the accounts of Apuleius and Herodotus? Personally I feel that they both describe the same rite; perhaps the mythological reasoning behind the two cases is different but the ritual actions are seemingly identical. There is also another festival which I shall mention here which is known as the Navigium Isidis. This was celebrated on the 5 th March each year and the details of the ceremonies are provided in Apuleius' account. Essentially a procession lead down to the sea where a boat made in Egyptian style was loaded with offerings and cast out to sea. Turcan comments that Isis of all the deities had a direct interest as she was the patroness of all sailors. Williams also mentions that Isis was associated with the Pharos Lighthouse at Alexandria in Egypt. The Navigium Isidis was based on Isis' wanderings in search of Osiris which again is found in the myth recorded by Plutarch. It is clear to see that the later rites associated with Isis are in fact based on this Egyptian myth.
So far we have found evidence to show that the Greek perceptions of Isis; which can be considered as 'new' ones; were based on an Egyptian myth. Now let us turn out attention to the Roman perceptions of Isis. We have a variety of opinions from both Roman sources and scholars; we shall begin with Cassius Dio writing in the Third Century AD:
In fact it seems we have a debate between two scholars concerning the popularity of Isis. Goodman states that the worship of Isis came from higher ends of society; but Wells contends that she was generally held in disrepute by the more respectable citizens. One source about the public standing of the cult of Isis is from a statue in Ostia which was set up by Drusus Fabius Florus Veranus a Roman Senator. So I would be inclined to agree with Goodman.
Other sources concerning the Roman perceptions of Isis (namely her attributes) are Apuleius and also a papyrus from the Oxyrhynchite Nome in Egypt. Here are some of the attributes recorded in the account of Apuleius:
We also have two sources that reinforce the account of Apuleius which come from Egypt. The first is provided by Walbank and is a prayer to Isis by a certain Isidorus; an Egyptian priest of the First Century BC. It was inscribed at the temple of Isis in Medinat Madi in the Fayum. It reads as follows:
Here we have Isis once again essentially addressed as '











' and the next source expands on this theme. Also found in Egypt, a papyrus from Oxyrhynchus seems to be a longer version of the passage found in Apuleius. The implications show that not only were these titles attributes of the Romans but also those who worshipped Isis in Egypt. The papyrus is believed to predate Apuleius, being written in the early Second Century AD; whereas Apuleius wrote at the end of the Second Century AD.
The final aspect of this section is to examine the representations of Isis in Roman art. I have provided the Egyptian images and then a Greek one earlier with which we may compare the following two images. Image G  is a depiction of an Isiac ceremony from Herculanuem circa 50-75 AD. Image H  depicts Isis on the left with very Romanesque attire and a pair of cow's horns.
We have seen that the iconography of Isis changed considerably over time from the sample of images I have presented. She has evolved from the Egyptian Isis with the Aset crown to the infamous Isis with the solar disk and cow's horns; which she acquired from Hathor in the 18 th Dynasty. She then was Hellenized as we saw in the image of Isis-Aphrodite and then Romanized with only the cow's horns signifying her identity.
In terms of her attributes, we saw that as Isis spread across the Mediterranean, she seemingly acquired new titles and was associated with a whole myriad of other deities. To mention a few she was assimilated with Hathor, Bast, Io, Demeter, Aphrodite, Dike, Hermes and Astarte.
So was Isis an old or new goddess? We can contrast the attributes from Pharaonic Egypt with those from the Oxyrhynchus Papyrus. Still in the Roman Period Isis is addressed as the wife of Osiris and mother of Horus; as well as the 'Mistress of the Universe'. Not to mention her funerary qualities are still expressed as 'queen of the shades'.
I believe that although the details in her iconography were adapted, the general identity and attributes of the goddess remained the same. From the beginning in Egypt she was known as 'Mistress of the Universe' and this title continued down into the account of Apuleius. Her festivals performed in Greece and Rome may not have been identical to those in Egypt but they were all based on the Death of Osiris Myth from Egypt, recorded in Plutarch.
However to use such terms 'old' or 'new' is not a valid procedure; as not only are such terms relative in usage but they are also force us to create a direct contrast that in the case of Isis and her 'evolution' does not apply. As the evidence shows she hardly changed at all.
Regarding the question of whether Isis was Egyptian, Greek or Roman; it would be fair to say that her origins and surrounding mythology was generally Egyptian; but it is misrepresentative to make such a simple statement. Such a question is dependant upon the worshipper; a Roman would have seen her as Egyptian, but a native Egyptian who witnessed the methods which the Roman worshipper used would not agree. It would perhaps be advisable to dispense with all these terms, old, new, Egyptian, Roman altogether.
It would be more precise to narrow the focus down to one particular period. For instance 'how Egyptian was Isis during the Hellenistic Age?' would be more suitable to determine the national identity of the goddess. Even then the Egyptian beliefs seem to have changed slightly since Pharaonic times to the Ptolemaic and Roman Periods; so using these terms is a hindrance.
In terms if her evolution; I would agree with Potter's  comment on the Isiac Cult bearing the last few points I have discussed in mind:
Therefore I would conclude that although Isis evolved over the course of time in terms of iconography; absorbing various national identities; she essentially remained the same in many core aspects.