Plutarch's version of the Osiris myth in De Iside et Osiride has been incorporated within other native Egyptian myths in mythological publications for much of the twentieth century, if not earlier. Pinch, in particular, feels that this habit has been damaging for the study of Egyptian mythology. She asserts that reading Plutarch or a non Egyptian account has caused the habit of 'perceiving Egypt through Greek or Roman eyes'.
The objectives of this essay are fourfold:
Each of the objectives will constitute a section of the essay and the conclusion will combine the results of each inquiry to ascertain whether Plutarch's Greek version is damaging when included among native Egyptian myths or, on the contrary, a useful tool, which orders the chronologically scattered parts of the myth found in Egyptian sources.
Before we may assess how Plutarch uses the Osiris myth to his own ends, we must first examine the versions of the myth from Egyptian sources. The Osiris myth appears in texts right across the spectrum of ancient Egyptian history, from the earliest Pharaonic dynasties to the Roman Period. The belief that Osiris was not only proof of, but also the means, to reach immortality was retained by the Egyptians throughout their religious history.
Furthermore, the nature of the evidence is diverse, chronologically and thematically. There appear remnants of several traditions of the myth, often within the same source or corpus of texts. One common example of this phenomenon is that during the conflict between Horus and Set for the throne of Egypt, the two warring gods are sometimes depicted as brothers, and at other times, in accordance with Plutarch's version, Set was Horus' uncle. Both of these seemingly once independent traditions are found together in the Contendings of Horus and S et
.
Despite the fact that we have no ordered equivalent of the Osiris myth from Egyptian sources, we can create an ordered list of the key events of the myth from the texts. The texts I have studied are:
a) The Pyramid Texts (PT): the oldest religious texts from Egypt, which were inscribed on the pyramids of the last pharaoh of the 5 th Dynasty and most pharaohs of the 6 th Dynasty (c.2375- 2181 BC). They consist of roughly 800 spells to ensure the pharaoh immortality.
b) The Memphite Theology: although recorded on a stone inscribed during the 25 th Dynasty (c. 710 BC), this text is believed to date back to the Old Kingdom (c.2686-2181 BC) and thus makes it roughly contemporary with the Pyramid Texts.
c) The Coffin Texts (CT): are essentially revisions of the Pyramid Texts, with new spells and date from c.2181 -1650 BC. They consist of roughly 1200 spells with similar intent to their predecessors.
d) The Great Hymn to Osiris: dates from the 18 th Dynasty (c.1550-1295 BC) and contains the fullest Egyptian account of the Osiris myth .
e) The Contendings of Horus and Set: dates from the reign of Ramesses V (1147-1143 BC). The text focuses on the legal battles between Horus and Set.
f) The Book of the Dead (BD): is the successor to the Coffin Texts and again is a revised body of spells with many new texts. These selections of spells were used from c. 1550 BC and were standardized in the 26 th Dynasty (664-525 BC).
g) The Lamentations of Isis and Nephthys: was written in the Ptolemaic Period (332-30 BC). It is believed to be a parallel version, not an abridgement to the text on Papyrus Bremner-Rhind.
h) The Metternich Stele: is covered with texts to protect the owner from snake and scorpion bites. Parts of the Osiris myth featuring Isis make up much of the text. It is dated to the reign of Nectanebo II (360-343 BC).
i) Papyrus Bremner-Rhind: is a collection of ritual texts related to the mysteries of Osiris. It was written in the reign of Alexander II in the year 312-11 BC.
j) The Book of Victory over Set: is another ritual text, designed to execrate the god Set, written in the 30 th Dynasty (380-343 BC).
k) The Greek Magical Papyri: date from the 2 nd Century BC to the 5 th Century AD. They are a collection of mainly ritual texts written in Greek, Demotic and Old Coptic.
Due to the space restrictions, I have compiled a table (below), which lists all the main features of the myth reported by Plutarch and shows the Egyptian texts which have the same statement. In addition I have included some of the Egyptian traditions that feature prominently in the texts but not in Plutarch. These few exceptions are 15-17 and 20. I have listed the texts according to letter and arranged them chronologically.
Let us now draw a few observations from the table. Firstly, many of the episodes described in Plutarch can be traced in Egyptian texts right back to the Pyramid Texts (A in the table). One crucial observation is that the closest parallels to Plutarch's version fall within the 30 th Dynasty and Ptolemaic texts, (texts H, I and J). We have thus established that Plutarch's version of the Osiris myth matches many episodes recorded in the Egyptian sources and that the Greek and Ptolemaic versions are closely linked. This insight will now allow us to proceed to assess the possible candidates for Plutarch's sources.
Since Plutarch could not read Egyptian he had to rely on accounts concerning Egyptian religion written in Greek. Two of these accounts were by Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus. We can swiftly dismiss Herodotus as Plutarch's primary source for the Osiris myth because Herodotus hardly discusses it at all. Herodotus' accounts related to the Osiris myth can be summarized as follows:
Herodotus does, however, display at least partial knowledge of the myth. He is aware of the rivalry between Horus and Set and that Horus was hidden from Set while he was young. Yet interestingly Plutarch does not mention the hiding of Horus in the marshes, but he does mention that Horus was raised by Isis in Buto. It is possible then that Plutarch may have used Herodotus for this section of his treatise.
Let us turn our attention to Diodorus Siculus' account of the myth. His version is of particular interest since Plutarch and Diodorus may well have shared a source. In fact there are a number of similarities between Diodorus and Plutarch, the first is the account concerning the birth of the early gods. Both accounts have Helius (or Sun) followed by Cronus and Rhea. Both writers have knowledge concerning the five intercalated days of the Egyptian calendar and each state that a god was born on each day. Furthermore, both use the same gods, Osiris, Apollo (Horus), Typhon (Set), Isis and Nephthys (Aphrodite); even though the order of births is marginally different.
What is more remarkable is that both writers continue to describe in varying detail how Osiris traveled the world and civilized many nations. Whereas in the birth of the five gods, Plutarch provided more detail than Diodorus; Diodorus provides much more information on the wanderings of Osiris. These close parallels continue along the course of the myth, each adding more or less detail than the other at various points. The following points of the myth are both described in the same order in both accounts:
Therefore, it is clear that Plutarch and Diodorus shared the same source, at the very least for their versions of the Osiris myth. This means that the common source would have to predate Diodorus, but probably postdate Herodotus. My reasoning for dating the common source after Herodotus is that Herodotus himself admits that his account is to recall the thaumata 'amazing things' and had he more information on the Osiris myth, his version (II: 144, 156) would have contained more detail to astonish his readers.
However, we have so far only examined the Greek evidence for the common source. The Egyptian material also provides important clues concerning the possible identity of the shared source. Within the Greek Magical Papyri parallels to Plutarch's version of the Osiris myth may be encountered. This body of ritual texts has many allusions to both Egyptian versions and Plutarch's own version of the Osiris myth. The following extract from the Greek Magical Papyri matches statements found in Plutarch:
Compare this to Plutarch (de Iside: 15), who states that Osiris' coffin washed up at Byblos (Syria). This is the most important reference as the only other source to explicitly state that Osiris washed up near Byblos is Plutarch. Among other references from the Greek Magical Papyri is the equation of Osiris with river water and Set or Typhon with sea water. It would appear that the common source shared by Plutarch and Diodorus also found its way into the Egyptian tradition. PDM xiv has been dated to no earlier than the beginning of the second century AD in a recent study by Dieleman. This would make this particular papyrus roughly contemporary with Plutarch's account, which has been dated to c. 115 AD by Jones.
Therefore, we can now state the attributes of the shared source. It was written in Greek, it has to predate Diodorus and Plutarch. It may or may not postdate Herodotus, though from what we know of his motivation for writing, his lack of detail would suggest that it postdates him. Furthermore, the source was used in Egypt and the details correspond perfectly with details from older Egyptian texts. Thus, our source is from Egypt and dates between c.425 BC and c.56 BC. Given that in the section entitled 'Plutarch's Predecessors' we established that the closest parallels to Plutarch's version dated from around the 30 th Dynasty and the Ptolemaic period, these proposed dates agree completely. Our common source would most likely be Manetho, who lived during the reign of the first three Ptolemies.
The fragmentary nature of Manetho is indeed problematic, yet there are several points which suggest that he is the strongest candidate for the common source. Firstly, from what we know about Manetho, he became an authority on the Serapis cult. In addition it appears he was heavily involved in establishing the cult in places other than Egypt and may have acted as a consultant. His links with the cult of Serapis, which was based around a combination of Osiris and the god Hapi, make him an ideal candidate for the common source.
Fortunately we have more to work with than speculation concerning his career. A number of the fragments are virtually identical to account given by Plutarch and Diodorus on the early gods. Fragment 2a, (F2, 3a, 3b and 3c in Jacoby's system), describe the first gods to rule Egypt:
Diodorus also includes a story in his section on the early gods in which Hephaestus teaches mankind how to use fire. Furthermore, his account, which attributes each of the gods to a force of nature or a heavenly body, matches Manetho's fragment F24 exactly, both give the following equations:
One way or another, Diodorus used Manetho even though he never cites him. On the other hand Plutarch cited Manetho on a number of occasions throughout his account. Plutarch's version of the early gods does indeed differ slightly from Diodorus, but it is still plain to see from their shared version of the Osiris myth that whatever changes Plutarch may have made, he shared the same source.
In this section, we will examine the differences and similarities between Plutarch and his Egyptian predecessors more thoroughly. In doing so we will also assess just how damaging it really is to place Plutarch's version of the Osiris myth among other native Egyptian myths. Thus far, we are able to reconstruct a rough tradition of the Osiris myth, which in its current state is depicted in figure A.
The diagram is not intended to show all the other possible sources that Plutarch may have employed in composing his treatise. For instance we know that Plutarch does occasionally use material from Herodotus. Also it is well known that the Greek Magical Papyri were influenced by many other Greek ritual sources, but here I am showing merely the proposed tradition of the Osiris myth.
Now let us examine the topical differences that can be found in Plutarch's or possibly even Manetho's version compared to Egyptian texts. There are a number of episodes in Plutarch's myth which employ themes from older Egyptian sources but are used in a new way. The episodes in question are:
Most of these episodes may have been either the result of the merging of other Egyptian stories or may be based on similar episodes found within the pre-existing tradition of the Osiris myth.
The birth of the five gods on the intercalary days is essentially unique to Plutarch, in regard to the narrative behind the episode. However, the order of the children of Nut and the involvement of Thoth (Hermes) has an Egyptian basis. Thoth was associated with recording the calendar and the seasons of the year. A number of Egyptian calendars also have the following order of births: Osiris, Horus the Elder (Apollo), Set (Typhon), Isis and Nephthys. This order matches Plutarch's account precisely.
While Set's scheme at the party for Osiris is again absent from Egyptian sources; there is one instance of Set holding a party in order to humiliate Horus in the tribunal. This is a common phenomenon and a number of the above episodes have Egyptian precedents although the subject of the episode is often different in Plutarch's version.
The floating chest of Osiris is a very intriguing episode. Holley informs us that the floating chest is a recurring motif in Greek mythology. There are about eleven such stories in Greek literature. It is highly tempting to see the chest of Osiris as an adaptation from Greek mythology. Yet there appear to be allusions of the chest in Egyptian texts and I feel it is misguided of Holley to say that the whole point of the story for Plutarch was to explain away Egyptian rites at Byblos. A chest with entrails of Osiris is mentioned in the Book of the Dead and also a spell from Papyrus Chester Beatty VIII.
There is some form of link with Byblos in the Egyptian tradition beginning with the Coffin Texts. In one spell Hathor, Lady of Byblos, makes a steering pole of a barge for Osiris and in another, Horus gives a steering pole of cedar from Byblos to Osiris. There was a long history of importing cedar wood from the region of Syria, particularly Byblos. In addition a 20 th Dynasty story features Byblos as the provider of timber. Furthermore, Osiris had floated down to the sea in the Egyptian texts. The first citation of this comes from the Pyramid Texts, the oldest religious texts from Egypt itself. In the Middle Kingdom a text states that the god Sobek crossed the 'Great Green' (i.e. the Mediterranean) to find the body of Osiris.
The notion of the chest of Osiris being surrounded by a tree may also have an Egyptian precedent. Pinch mentions that in the city of Herakleopolis the soul of the dead Osiris was believed to emerge from a sacred tree. Lutz has argued quite convincingly that the Djed emblem of Osiris was descended from an older depiction of the tree of Osiris and that it may well be a borrowing from Mesopotamia. One particular version of the Djed emblem has the pillar as the body of Osiris with his arms showing holding his characteristic symbols, the crook and the flail (below).
The episode of Isis and the queen of Byblos is similar to the story written on the Metternich Stele. In Plutarch's version Isis becomes a nurse to the queen's child and every night burns a part of the child's mortal body away. The story from the Metternich Stele includes an encounter with a noble woman who refuses Isis shelter and slams the door in her face. One of the seven scorpions traveling with Isis bites the noble woman's infant child; no one answers the screams of the noble woman except Isis, who saves the child. Details have changed but essentially Isis still interacts with a noble woman whilst on her search for the body of Osiris and in both stories is seen to help an infant child.
The episode of Osiris sleeping with Nephthys is seemingly a late tradition. It is not mentioned at all in the Egyptian texts except in the Greek Magical Papyri. It may well be a late popular story that has not survived. The concept of Set as the sea may well be traceable to an Egyptian story, dating to the reign of Amen-hotep II (1427-1400 BC). The story is very fragmented but there is some form of contest between Set and the sea. It is possible that over time Set's role was reversed and he was then thought of as the sea itself.
The last episode is when Isis creates a replica phallus for Osiris as the original was eaten by a fish. No parallel for this narrative exists in Egyptian texts, but there are two citations where Isis does create a replica member for someone. In The Contendings of Horus and Set, Set holds a party so as to humiliate Horus. He does this by having intercourse with him in an effort to impregnate him with his semen. Horus, however, manages to catch the semen in his hands and shows Isis what had transpired. She at once cut off his hand and threw it into the river. It is this incident which is also alluded to in the Book of the Dead:
To conclude this section, we have seen that Plutarch's version of the Osiris myth corresponds very closely to the known Egyptian versions of the myth and that where he appears to add totally un-Egyptian episodes, he may well in fact have based them on very similar episodes found elsewhere in other stories. In effect, Plutarch's version summarizes and orders the many Egyptian versions of the myth, which are descended from the Pyramid Texts. Therefore I would argue that it is not particularly damaging to the study of Egyptian mythology to include Plutarch's version among other Egyptian myths, since very little of it is not attested at some point in the older Egyptian tradition.
In this final section, we shall examine how Plutarch uses Egyptian mythology to expound his cosmological theories compared with near contemporaries from Egypt, the Theban Magicians.
Let us begin with the Theban Magicians. These individuals are the unnamed editors of one particular group of texts within the Greek Magical Papyri. They worked on their texts from the Ptolemaic to the Roman period and the result of their work is now called the Theban Magical Library. Dieleman has listed the following texts, which belong to the collection:
He also lists the following which may have been in the Theban Magical Library, but there is no proof to validate this:
Other texts from the Greek Magical Papyri thought not to belong to the Theban Magical Library are:
In the following graph I have shown the proportion of Hellenized Greek and Egyptian elements of the Osiris myth in each of these groups. It also demonstrates the difference the second group of texts can make when added to either the Theban Magical Library or the group not from that collection.
As there is little evidence to place the second group of texts in either the Theban Magical Library group or the non Theban Magical Library group, I have displayed three scenarios on the graph. Scenario A considers the second group as part of the Theban Magical Library, scenario B considers that the opposite is true. Scenario C leaves out the second group altogether to show the two concrete groups as they stand. It is clear that whichever scenario is true, the Theban Magical Library contains a much higher proportion of Greek elements of the Osiris myth. This corresponds to Dieleman's theory that the demotic spells were copies from Greek spells with traditional Egyptian elements incorporated within the text, dating from the early Roman period.
The Osiris myth in the Theban Magical Library is not employed very differently from older Egyptian texts. All Egyptian texts utilize the myth as magical historiolae, which equates their situation with that from the myth and thus secures the same outcome to occur in their own scenario. The small difference is that one spell has the magician assisting Set to defeat Osiris, something unheard of from the older texts.
Let us now turn to Plutarch. Richter claims that Plutarch uses the Osiris myth to create a Greek cultural superiority to Egyptian lore. I am indeed happy to accept Richter's thesis generally, however, one particular point warrants further examination. He states:
I would argue that it is not all things Egyptian that Plutarch consistently rejects but instead the accounts given by his Greek predecessors. Let us examine some of the same extracts used by Richter to seemingly prove the opposite. Plutarch dismisses accounts which equate a god to one particular body or natural phenomenon. This is precisely what Diodorus and Manetho postulate.
The other major section that Richter uses is about sacred animals. Two points Plutarch rejects are:
Both of these accounts can be found in Diodorus (I: 85-6). Most of the extracts where Plutarch rejects an account have either a parallel quoted in Diodorus (and sometimes in Manetho) and/or contain a citation to Manetho. Given that Plutarch already wrote a reaction to the work of Herodotus prior to this work; I feel it is not unjustified to suggest that the de Iside is both written to return cultural superiority to Greece and a reaction against earlier Greek writers, who have not used Greek philosophical ideas to good use.
I would like to conclude the essay by demonstrating the difference between Plutarch and the Theban Magicians concerning the use of the Osiris myth. The key difference between them is a conceptual one. While the Egyptians emulate the behaviour of the gods in myth because myths describe the nature of the cosmos (for example: Set killed Osiris in myth because he did so in reality); Plutarch believes that they re-enact the myths, which in themselves are  symbolic of the nature of the universe (Set tries to kill Osiris because the chaotic part of the soul always fights the ordered part). Nor do I believe that he claims that Greek philosophers are the only ones capable of realizing Greek philosophical ideas as Richter suggests, since Plutarch on one occasion even praises Egyptian lore for containing ideas similar to Plato.
Plutarch's treatise contains a version of the Osiris myth that at best matches native Egyptian tradition perfectly and at worst uses episodes present in other Egyptian stories. I would argue that his ordered account of the myth is not highly damaging to the study of Egyptian mythology, when placed among other native legends. It also appears to be a reaction against earlier Greek accounts concerning Egyptian religious philosophy, while at the same time utilizing Egyptian mythology in only a marginally different way from the Theban Magicians and their Egyptian predecessors, advocating his Neo-Platonist theories concerning the divine and the nature of the cosmos.