The sheer bulk of material written about Herodotus and Egypt has, unsurprisingly, constrained me to focus upon a particularly narrow aspect of Herodotean scholarship, namely the veracity of his historical methods and his relationship with his predecessor Hecataeus. I have intended to produce a broad sweep of the most important literature on this topic over time from the late nineteenth century to the present.
Debate concerning the veracity of Herodotus' historical methods and his relationship to his predecessor Hecataeus has been raging at least as far back as the late nineteenth century. It would be almost impossible to comment upon both aspects separately as both are interrelated. I shall provide a general sweep of the various schools of thought from the late nineteenth century down to the present day.
There are arguably three main schools of thought concerning our inquiry. The third is relatively recent and the other two have been in competition with each other for a considerable length of time. The essential arguments of the two older schools have remained unaltered over time, though in some cases slight details have been revised.
One school argues that Herodotus is telling us the truth and that the details of his account can be matched to corresponding Egyptian evidence. They frequently attribute inaccuracies either to genuine misinterpretation by Herodotus, or alternatively genuinely innocent or deliberately construed misinformation by his sources. I have managed to trace this school back to Sourdille and Wiedemann at the turn of the twentieth century, though it is probable that the school is older.
The other school, named the 'Liar school' by Kendrick Pritchett, advocates that Herodotus either created wholly fabricated accounts, due to the fact that he never went to Egypt, or similarly he copied and adapted passages from Hecataeus. The oldest scholar I have found who claims that Herodotus was fabricating his account is Sayce who states that 'The majority of the statements made by Herodotus about Egyptian matters are now known to be false, and ... there are many in which we can trace a deliberate intention to deceive'. It is clear that already some scholars had begun to suspect Herodotus' motives in the nineteenth century.
In my research I have found a greater number of scholars occupying the 'Misinterpretation School' over the course of time. It is possible that the choice of books that I have made has had an effect on the statistics. Fortunately I have found evidence within the literature that suggests this phenomenon is not merely an unbalanced selection. Both Fehling and West comment that the (then) current trend was to take a more skeptical approach to Herodotus, while the last century or so has taken a 'more favourable view' of Herodotus' veracity.
Having mapped out the progress of both schools of thought from the late nineteenth century, it seems that from the 1910's until the 1960's, the 'Liar School' was outnumbered by the 'Misinterpretation School' at least by 2:1. From the 1970's and 1980's onwards the numbers have evened out somewhat, quite possibly due to the emergence of a third 'school' that has gathered pace ever since. This school shall be introduced once we reach the period of its emergence in our chronological sweep of the Herodotean literature.
The concept that Hecataeus was the source of much of Herodotus' account seems to have been present in Meyer's work in the 1892 and was quoted 'with approval' by Jacoby, writing in 1912. Heidel developed the arguments further stating that some passages were a convenient fiction told in a witty manner by Hecataeus, which was then adapted by Herodotus, 'who was not only gullible but malicious'.
One of the most influential publications from the Liar School was by Fehling in 1971, 'whose forceful indictment of Herodotus' veracity is not easily refuted'. In a review of Lloyd's commentaries on Herodotus Book II, Fehling states that particular passages within Herodotus, namely on Helen in this case, he 'would call a free creation'. The two other prominent members of the Liar School, according to Kendrick-Pritchett, are Armayor and West. Other members of the school mentioned by West are Swain, who according to West was 'the first to venture in this direction', i.e. that Herodotus' Theban Priest passage was an invented fiction on his part; and Erbse, who 'emphasizes the weaknesses of traditional views' of Herodotus.
We now encounter a problem. So far our sweep has let us to believe that Fehling's publication has more or less overturned the arguments of the opposing school. Now turning to the 'Misinterpretation School', we shall discover that this is not the case and in effect a scholarly stalemate is perceived, especially by members of the third school.
The 'Misinterpretation School' has had many members; I have traced the school back as far as Sourdille, who produced a highly influential work on the voyage of Herodotus. His work was believed by this school for a great length of time and glaringly obvious errors, according to West, were only rejected in the late 1970's by Lloyd in his commentary. Yet a crucial point is that Lloyd did not reject outright that Herodotus ever went to Egypt, nor does he openly reject the order of Sourdille's reconstructed itinerary, but states that the time of the year was wrong. Lloyd is not the only scholar to have taken Sourdille's account as a valid reconstruction; his work was accepted by members of the 'Misinterpretation School' from Spiegelberg in 1927 to Lloyd in 1975-6. Both Sourdille and Spiegelberg's works heavily influenced the scholars of the following decades such as Waddell, Griffiths and Zakbar.
Moreover, the belief that Herodotus based his account of Egypt on historical examples of Egyptian culture, which he had encountered, is still advocated by members of this school. In 1989 Obsomer interpreted the campaigns of Sesostris in Asia Minor as a misinterpretation of the Nubian conquests by Senwosret III, a proposal that West refuses to accept. Moyer in 2002 argued that Herodotus' passage concerning the Theban Priests was 'a peculiar Egyptian mirage constructed by the Egyptians for their own needs in the Late Period of their history'. There are, however, a smaller number of scholars now occupying this school as the third school of thought has taken precedence over both of the original schools.
This third school was initiated by the work of Hartog in 1980, which has profoundly altered the status quo of the debate. He argued that Herodotus' ethnographic passages inform us more about ideals of what it was to be Greek. However, the point must be made that Hartog was preceded by Froidefond, who had written a chapter concerning Egypt, in which similar arguments to Hartog were expressed but not as explicitly as his successor, who was to be the main founder of the third school. The 'Ethnographic School' as I shall address it, has had seemingly more adherents than the other two schools in recent years. A current trend is to abandon the 'futile and infertile' arguments over Herodotus' veracity in favour of studies, which focus on Herodotus' internal coherence in his ethnographic accounts. The main followers of this type of approach are Burkett, Cartledge, Hall and more recently Vasunia.
It appears that the current state of affairs has the 'Ethnographic School' enjoying a numerical superiority over the Liar and 'Misinterpretation' Schools. Yet there are adherents for both of the older schools. The irony is that the tide may well have turned against the Liar School. Their attempts to overturn what they have deemed overly favourable interpretations by the 'Misinterpretation School', have been seemingly made obsolete by the 'Ethnographic School', which argues that both of the older schools are outdated and no longer worth pursuing in the intensive manner, which was undertaken by past scholars. For many modern scholars, ethnographic coherence is far more important than the practically impossible task of determining whether passages originate from Hecataeus or Herodotus.