The world of Odysseus by M. I. Finley, (henceforth abbreviated to F.), has been acclaimed as a 'scholarly landmark'. Such a claim is not exaggerated; the very fact that The World of Odysseus was first published in 1954 and frequently reprinted for just over half a century is testimony to the sheer impact of F.'s publication. F. comments in the preface to his second edition that the work 'has been cited, discussed, attacked in innumerable books and articles' and  'has been the acknowledged starting-point of studies by other historians of society and of ideas'
.
F. advocated that a close reading of both the Iliad and the Odyssey could produce a society, complete with a coherent system of institutions and values, which 'is neither an improbable nor an unfamiliar one in the experience of modern anthropology'. In chapter 1, entitled Homer and the Greeks, F. places Homer in the context of myth telling in archaic societies and compares him with later writers such as Herodotus. Homer's techniques concerning the narration of myth are 'expanded and elevated' by the succeeding centuries.
F.'s second chapter, Bards and Heroes, maintains that while, on the one hand there are some anachronisms within the poems, these fragments do not prevent a meaningful study of the archaic society. Yet he is cautious to emphasize that when reading the poems in the proposed fashion, the reader must be constantly aware of the temptation to 'ignore the implications of the poet's selectivity' and 'to brush aside apparent confusions and contradictions in social and political matters ... as nothing more than the carelessness of a bard who did not care'.
The next three chapters then begin to concentrate on a variety of social elements, such as the economic centres (chapter 3), community and kin (chapter 4) and moral values (chapter 5). F. states that the oikos is the centre of economic activity and a man's position in relation to an oikos was fundamental in establishing his rank in society. Associated with the oikoi was the systematic and hierarchical giving of gifts. Both of these crucial elements played a vital role in interactions within the local community. As F. states, 'The coexistence of three distinct but overlapping groups, class, kin and 'oikos', was what defined a man's life, materially and psychologically'.
One aspect of family life that I admit shocked me was the relationship between husband and wife in F.'s account. F. contrasts extracts depicting the emotional reaction between men and between a man and a woman. The results of his inquiry led F. to write, 'While Odysseus was absent the loss to Penelope, emotionally, psychologically, affectively, was incomparably greater than the loss to her husband. The grief of Achilles was nearly matched by the sorrow of Hecuba and Andromache at the death of Hector, son to one and husband to other'.
F.'s treatment of the Homeric religion did not meet with my total approval. It is quite possible that I have misinterpreted F. on this occasion, namely on his account of the evolution of Greek religion. He asserts that the humanization of the gods and the abandonment of the older divine forms was a rapid process, akin to a revolution. F. takes for granted, in my opinion, that we are unable to prove that humanization of the gods occurred around the time of Homer. It is perfectly possible that this had already taken place in earlier phases of Greek civilization. The evidence, however, of such an occurrence is lacking, statues from older temples may well have perished and the Linear B tablets were not concerned with the recording of myth. This does not mean to say that humanization of the gods could not have happened in this period.
There has been much scholarly debate concerning F.'s thesis. Hornblower states that F. has been attacked on two counts, firstly, that there was never a single or coherent society in the Homeric period and secondly, his preferred dating of this society is wrong. The second charge is countered by F. in his first appendix, where he remarks 'What is there in the similes that say this is eighth-century winnowing, not ninth? ' F. makes it clear that to give a precise date is probably unlikely and Hornblower reinforces this by casting doubt over the probability that modern scholarship will remain at a consensus with the currently favoured date.
Overall I believe that F. produced a work that will continue to cause debate. Even though I have my reservations about the validity of employing two sources, the relationship with each other is still debated, to construct a society such as F. has achieved, his style is such that I am quite prepared to follow him in his leap of faith and only at the last moment do I mentally apply the brakes and halt, looking down at the chasm that is Homeric scholarship, murky and teaming with pitfalls and dangers. Such is F.'s power to convince. F.'s work is enlightening both in terms of the application of source material and the combination of classics with other disciplines, which his publication was one of the first of this kind.