This essay is essentially a reaction to an article by R. David entitled: 'Rationality versus Irrationality in Egyptian Medicine in the Pharaonic and Graeco-Roman Periods'. I would argue that David's article lacks a considerable amount of balance concerning the medical practices of the Greeks and Egyptians and, furthermore, at certain points may well misguide a reader who is not well acquainted with the evidence.
There are several issues within the article, which I hope to re-examine, these are:
David, when discussing the trends of the Egyptian medical papyri over the course of history, concludes the paragraph with a description of the London-Leiden Papyrus, stating that: 'some parts follow the pattern of earlier medical papyri, there are also references to some entirely new drugs and, most significantly, the content is predominately magic and indicates no advance in medical science'.
This suggests at the very least that we expect the Egyptians to make medical progress over the course of time. Perhaps this is not unreasonable of us to think so, but one point David fails to make is that the very notion of 'progress' was completely alien to the Egyptians. In fact as Ritner explains, the Egyptians thought seemingly the reverse:
Therefore, to expect a continual improvement in medicine as we expect of modern western society, is anachronistic and particularly unhelpful. Once we have understood the Egyptian notion of time, it immediately becomes clear why the medical papyri often have rubrics claiming an ancient pedigree for a particular procedure or ritual, as can be found in the Book of the Dead.
Similar problems with definitions occur with the various healers who operated in Egypt. David divides Egyptian healers into three categories as have other scholars before her. The divisions are 'doctor/physician', 'priest' and 'magician'. Such a division is not anachronistic as such, since the Egyptians themselves had several terms for healers:
swnw- equated to 'doctor' or 'physician', wa'bw- the 'priest', and sau- one term used to mean 'magician'.
David's error is to then treat each of these categories of healer as fairly distinct and independent of each other, as well as stating that the swnw practiced 'conventional medicine'. Quite what conventional medicine is David never explains and I think it is wrong to overlook this since, in my opinion, defining what constitutes as 'medicine' is just as notoriously difficult as defining what constitutes 'magic'.
An attempt to separate types of Egyptian healers by modern functional conceptions is more of a hindrance than a help despite the fact Egypt had a number of terms available. Ghalioungui and David both separate the healers into 'magical' and 'rational'. Ghalioungui separates the swnw from the wa'bw and the sau; David separates the sau from the other two, on the grounds that the wa'bw occasionally practiced 'conventional medicine'. However, there are two reasons why this practice is not advisable; firstly at least two types of healer seemed to have access to the medical papyri, which have both 'rational' and 'magical' sections. The acclaimed Edwin Smith Papyrus states:
This implies that no one type of healer performed what is conjectured as feeling the pulse. David also states that a cache belonging to a magician (the precise type of healer, she does not state, I assume here sau) had medical papyri among other texts and magical objects. Furthermore in his work Nunn has collated tables listing the known healers from Egypt and his work should clearly demonstrate why functional distinction is flawed. Nunn lists magicians (sau) that were also priests (wa'bw) and physicians (swnw) that were also magicians (sau) and physicians that were also priests! Several terms there may have been, but essentially one could and would be involved in another's form of healing.
The Egyptian texts themselves demonstrate that functional distinction is futile. Let us take a case in point, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, which according to David is 'a model of pragmatism and proves that the Egyptians had developed an empirico-rational system at an early date'. David neglects to admit the true composition of the papyus, stating that it only had one spell. In reality the forty eight cases do only contain one spell, but after these are a further eight spells, written by the same scribe. Moreover, this failure to mention texts that show a combined 'magical' and 'rational' approach is not a single occurrence, but is to be found consistently throughout the article. Two further examples concern the application of substances such as honey to wounds, which David sees as part of conventional treatment. Yet a spell was recited during the application of honey and several spells survive that were recited when medicine was being applied, one even confirms the unity of 'magical' and 'rational' cure:
However, it is not just the Egyptian sources that suffer from a lack of balance, David's discussion of the relation between Greek and Egyptian medical practice is problematic. David rightly questions the theory that Greeks from the Hippocratic School at Cos established a school at Alexandria, which was more rational. Yet only the Egyptian evidence is examined and not the Greek sources. Much effort is spent in demonstrating that many features of Egyptian medical practice predate Greek practices but nothing is said of 'magical' cures in Greek civilization. Reading through the article one would still assume that Greek medicine was wholly rational, even though some of their techniques may have derived from Egypt.
This is a considerable mistake on two counts, as will be seen. Firstly, we should not allow ourselves to assume that all or even many Greeks shared the same 'rational' attitude toward medicine as the Hippocratic writers. Still more intriguing is the recent work of Collins concerning the Hippocratic writers' attitudes to nature itself. He states that:
He goes on to argue that efficacy of magic was still provisionally acceptable and so demonstrates that even the medical thinkers seen as the most 'rational' are not devoid of some magical theory. Let us turn our attention to 'magical' cures in Greek culture. The existence of magicians who claimed to be healers is verified by Plato and also later in the Greek Magical Papyri. The question I wish to ask is how different was 'magical' healing in Greece compared to the procedures of those like the Hippocratic writers?
The distinction commonly made between 'rational' and 'magical' healing is the approach taken by the healers. Only one is based on logical and natural causes and is grounded in the result of observation, this is the definition David applies to the work of the Egyptian swnw as we have seen. Yet we have also seen that at least in Egypt, 'magical' cure was connected to complex philosophy concerning the nature of time and the cosmos. This also appears true of Greek 'magical' cures as Graf points out, both 'rational' and 'magical' approaches are similar if not identical:
This is intriguing since Collins, when referring to the Hippocratic notion of divine influence, cites his observations from the Hippocratic text On the Sacred Disease, which is normally seen as a reaction against 'religious' or 'magical' cures. Essentially then, the 'rational' and 'magical' approaches in Greece were both based on observation and complex theories and thus neither should be called 'irrational'.
It appears that the 'rational' and 'magical' approach to medicine are very closely related in Greece and although perhaps not as integrated as in Egyptian medicine, the two can not be separated by methodology or religious philosophy. Dickie makes an additionally fascinating observation about the nature of Greek 'rational' medicine. From one of the poems of Pindar we have a description of the medical activities of Asklepios, the father of medicine. These activities are:
At least concerning the mythology of Asklepios, 'rational' and 'magical' medicine appears to be intertwined. None of these considerations are mentioned at all by David when arguing that Egyptian medicine had a 'rational' side. This in hindsight is surprising since these insights would be beneficial to her case attacking the theory that we should assign the term 'rational' and 'irrational' to Greek and Egyptian medicine respectively.
Let us proceed to examine the interaction between Egyptian and Greek medicine. There are two relatively minor points to be observed and may well simply boil down to personal conjecture. The first concerns David's insistence that the Greeks inherited many elements of medical practice from the Egyptians. Personally, I believe that we should not simply assume any more recent civilization incapable of making discoveries independently of older cultures. Furthermore, this aspect of study is notoriously difficult and subjective. The second point is slightly more serious, David states:
Other scholars would suggest a more rapid interaction than David suggests. Frankfurter states that Egyptian priests were interacting with the Greek elite as early as the Ptolemaic period, as we have seen some priests had some form of medical function. Furthermore, the Greek Magical Papyri indicate Greek and Egyptian magical/medical interaction; some of the papyri are dated to the first century BC.
My final criticism concerns the lack of working definitions within the article. Namely the use of the terms 'rational' and 'irrational' are both unhelpful and not applicable to Egypt or Greece. This problem is not an isolated one and various scholars utilize a variety of terms when discussing this subject. Although I have difficulty in deciding upon accurate terms to use for this discussion, in my opinion, the term 'irrational' must be abandoned for several reasons.
Firstly, the term 'irrational' is not remotely applicable to Greek or Egyptian medical practice let alone any other culture, since what we tend to deem as 'magical' are based on complex theories about the nature of the cosmos and are, therefore, hardly irrational. Furthermore, David is the first to use 'irrational' and intriguingly even the title of the work in which her article is published is called 'Magic and Rationality in Ancient Near Eastern and Graeco-Roman Medicine'.
Another term used by Pinch in place of 'irrational' is 'supernatural'. This in itself is a slight improvement. However, an observation by Collins that in Classical thought, the gods were not supernatural but within the confines of nature, makes this a dubious replacement, since Egyptian thought probably matched Classical thinking.
The real culprit word in terms of definitions is 'medicine'. To a reader it evokes modern medical science and already causes anachronism before any talk of ancient healing practices are mentioned. The way in which it is used is also instructive to those examining modern attitudes to the art of healing. No mention is ever made in scholarship of a 'medical amulet' or a 'medical spell'; they are called 'healing amulets' and 'healing spells'. The one exception to this rule concerns the 'medical papyri' but often this appears to be allowed since no one papyrus is either solely 'magical' without accompanying prescriptions or anatomical works. Even in the one case where the term 'medical' is applied to an ancient document, the reader unacquainted with the text may not be aware of its partly 'magical' content. The use of 'magical' in healing contexts only exacerbates the situation since the word 'magic' is overloaded with negative connotations.
All this makes it clear that English is not capable of handling the ancient distinctions in healing (when there are any). The choices of terms are either charged with negative connotations or evoke too modern a concept. Nevertheless, I think we can reasonably dispose of the terms 'irrational' and 'rational' altogether when discussing ancient healing. To conclude briefly, David's article employs unsuitable terminology, some of which is not found in other authors of the field. The distinct similarities between 'magical' cures within the Greek and Egyptian medical systems are not discussed and the distinctions between Egyptian healers are too pronounced and what is more contrary to the evidence.