The Carolingian Renaissance is simultaneously one of the most crucial and seemingly controversial periods concerning the transmission of Latin texts. In fact every period to which is assigned the term 'Renaissance' by scholars suffers the misfortune of becoming a 'potential hotbed of controversy'. In this essay, I shall examine a number of issues that are integral to any assessment of the period's role in the history of Latin texts and their transmission. Let us begin with a brief survey concerning the state of classical Latin literature during the Carolingian period.
It has been estimated that only 6 per cent of Latin literature survived the period between the fall of Rome and the rise of Charlemagne. The rest of Latin literature (a very disheartening 94 per cent) perished before the Carolingian period. Due to the efforts of the scholars of the age, many Latin texts were recopied and saved for posterity. However the treatment of various ancient authors varied considerably, from being copied a good many times to not being copied at all.
The following ancient authors were copied frequently during the period: Cicero, Horace, Justin, Juvenal, Lucan, Persius, Pliny the Elder, Sallust, Terence and Vitruvius. Other authors were copied less often and were much rarer. A selection of these authors comprises of Ammianus Marcellinus, Apicius, Martial, Petronius, Suetonius and Valerius Flaccus. While the last group were rare, they were however available. Moreover, some ancient authors were extant in a few manuscripts, occasionally just one, and others were not copied during the Carolingian period at all. These lucky survivals are Apuleius, Catullus, some parts of Livy, Manilius, Cornelius Nepos, Paterculus, Propertius and Tacitus.
Why was there such a disparity concerning the copying of ancient Latin authors? In order to determine the cause, let us analyse the choices made by Carolingian scholars when excerpting or copying ancient authors. Cicero's works feature very greatly in the compilations of the period. The collectaneum of Hadoard is comprised chiefly of Cicero's works and supplemented by Sallust, Servius and Macrobius, each only represented by one or two excerpts. In addition Sedulius also includes Cicero in his collectaneum along with Frontinus, the Historia Augusta, Macrobius, Valerius Maximus and Vegetius.
The choices made by Hadoard and Sedulius demonstrate that they favoured instructive texts, be they literary (Macrobius), moral (Valerius Maximus), pratical (Vegetius) or philosophical (Cicero). This statement can be applied to many of the texts chosen for copying by Carolingian scholars. Ancient Latin authors were copied if they satisfied one of two criteria: a) the chosen text was of practical use and could advise the reader on various practical fields or b) the texts could be used to validate Christian philosophy and teachings.
One gets the distinct impression, when reading the list of neglected Latin historians, that history itself was not keenly studied in the Carolingian period, but this would in fact be inaccurate. The 'pagan' Latin historians may not have been well read but early Christian historical writers were more popular. In addition, early Christian writers saw 'sacred' and 'profane' history as one single unit and therefore integrated the two together in their works. Moreover, they received a great quantity of information from Greek writers by means of a Latin translation. For example Jerome's translation of Eusebius' Chronica allowed scholars to access the wealth of material, especially concerning Eastern history. In one such Chronicle by Freculpius, belonging to the ninth century, some of the passages focus more on Greece, Persia, the Hellenistic kingdoms and Rome than 'sacred' history.
History, then, was studied in the Carolingian period, but the subject was often used towards a Christian end, as ancient authors were used to prove the validity of the Bible. One should stress that this was not always the case and some scholars did study history for its own worth. To summarise, ancient authors were copied if they had information of practical value contained therein or could be used to validate the notions of Christian history. Let us now investigate another vital question; what features of the Carolingian period are discernable that would produce the attitudes of their scholars?
The Carolingian period is typically described as a 'revival of learning in conjunction with a movement to reform ... the institutions of the church'. Many scholars would agree with the statement that the period was 'the most momentous and critical stage in the transmission of the legacy of Rome'. Both the revival of learning and the church reform movement were connected and as Trompf explains:
The Carolingian empire is described as (at the very least) an attempt at a unified political, religious and cultural whole, bound by the personality of the emperor of the Frankish people. Its own significance is inflated by the nature of the preceding Dark Ages, when the copying of manuscripts apparently ceases and many ancient works perished.
Another characteristic of the period was the attempt to integrate the various peoples of the empire socially and culturally. One of the strategies involved the founding of monasteries across the empire and the spreading of Christianity. This act, as posterity testifies, was crucial for the survival of the ancient Latin authors, the 6 per cent known to us as the 'Latin classics'. The texts were found in monasteries across Europe right up to the Renaissance. Thus, 'the link between the Carolingians and the church was to form one of the central pillars of the Carolingian empire'.
The church was also host for the learning revival, the aims of which were learning and copying information that was useful, educating the current clergy and also developing a 'fundamentally Christian political philosophy' by selecting and appropriating symbols and ideas from the past. Such aims are compatible with the choices made by scholars of the period when excerpting or recopying material from ancient Latin authors. Hence finding copies of Frontinus and Vegetius informs us that these were seen as manuals; Charles the Bald was given a personal copy of Vegetius because a member of his court thought it would be useful.
Any pieces of good Latin found in the classical authors were used as models; Sallustian phrases were integrated into a variety of contemporary literature such as histories, letters, lives of saints and theological treatises. The Roman poets and Cicero were all copied and used slavishly by Carolingian scholars. The patronage by the emperors is also held to be a crucial factor in Carolingian identity and a distinctive feature of the period. To summarise, three of the most crucial aspects that identify the Carolingian period are:
These factors would therefore be relevant to the history of Latin texts. The patronage of the emperors allowed new monasteries to be founded where classical texts would be stored for centuries to follow. These new centres of learning allowed the clergy to be educated and royal patronage allowed scholars of the period to recopy ancient texts believed to be of use to Carolingian development and innovation. These features appear to give the period its distinctive qualities.
However, this conventional view of the Carolingian period held by Carolingian scholars is by no means accepted by scholars of other periods of the Middle Ages and beyond. Sullivan argues that recent scholarly work has undermined the former notion that the Carolingian period was either culturally united or distinctive. He states that:
Therefore, let us attempt to compare and contrast the periods immediately preceding and the later periods succeeding the Carolingian age, (which is commonly dated to the eighth and ninth centuries), to determine if the period is indeed as culturally distinctive as has been suggested.
Let us begin with the Dark Ages; this era has been seen as a disruptive and unstable era following the fall of Rome. The period from 550-750 AD is said to be a time of 'unrelieved gloom' for the Latin classics, the copying of which virtually ceased. Economic and cultural stagnation appear to be the main features of this desolate period, or were they?
After the fall of Rome the people of Western Europe were freed from the grueling effects of taxation and finances could be redirected towards more local concerns. Furthermore, the coinage of the Merovingians, (predecessors of the Carolingians) was extremely similar, undermining the concept of a clear disjuncture, at least in terms of economic trends, between the Merovingians and the Carolingians.
Upon looking at the Dark Ages, one also discovers that one supposedly distinctive Carolingian feature was already occurring, the founding of monasteries. Classical Latin authors were already being placed under the care of the monasteries before the empire of Charlemagne came into being. What is more, two foundations occurred before the period of 'unrelieved gloom'; Vivarium in 540 and Montecassino in 529. Vivarium was founded by Cassiodorus on one of his estates and he equipped it with a library. Most importantly he put a strong emphasis on the copying of manuscripts. Moreover, he foresaw the need for translations of Greek work on exegesis before such work began in the Carolingian period. In addition to the work of Cassiodorus in the sixth century, the work of another in the seventh has relevance here. The Chronicle of Fredegarius was a forerunner to the interests supposedly characteristic of the Carolingian period.
Furthermore, there were a number of other writers that performed similar work valued by the later Carolingian scholars. These writers were themselves highly used in the Carolingian age and are four in number: St Benedict, St Gregory the Great, St Isidore of Seville and Bede. All of this indicates that all of the distinctive features of the Carolingian period had historical precedents.
It would appear that the Carolingian period is not highly distinctive from the Dark Ages. This is indeed for me a particularly problematic situation. If one is to adhere to the notion that the Carolingian period was similar to the Dark Ages, the only significance of the age was its temporal position within the history of Latin texts, not so much because it was independently unique, but because it was totally dependent on the cultural decline of the Dark Ages. Now the Dark Ages no longer seem as dark, then the state of classical Latin literature actually dictates the significance of the Carolingian period.
Furthermore, when one compares the Carolingian period with succeeding periods up to and including the Renaissance, one finds that the period has all of its formerly distinctive features in common with several eras of history. Let us examine the succeeding periods. Eisenstein grants us an overview of the history of Latin texts from the Carolingian period to the advent of printing. She believes:
She also explains at length how, in terms of the transmission of Latin texts, little changed after the Carolingian period until the beginning of printing. The continual use of patronage of the local elite in each renaissance rules it out as a unique feature of the Carolingian period.
Her study also raises issues concerning the impact of the Carolingian period in terms of the survival and perpetuation of classical Latin texts. When reading the works of Carolingian history, one regularly gets the impression that the Carolingian monks saved the remains of the classical Latin heritage. Eisenstein removes the shroud by placing the period in context; the texts had to be saved many times over in the course of time until printing finally saved the texts from their continually precarious state. Petrarch and his contemporaries eventually had to perform the same function as the Carolingian scholars. Furthermore, until printing began, the movement of texts from one place to another for copying deprived one place of a vital text, enriching one field of study would impoverish another as the logistics of scribal labour were diverted. Now let us bring all of these points together for the conclusion.
The Carolingian period appears to have many of its supposedly distinctive features in common with preceding and succeeding periods in the history of Latin textual transmission. It was one of at least two medieval renaissances required to perpetuate the Latin classics until the advent of printing finally released them from their precarious situation. In the Carolingian period only a selection of the Latin classics were recopied, the unfortunate texts yet to be copied had to wait for the next renevatio
.
The disparity is not only apparent in the number of texts regularly copied but also in the proportion of classical texts held in the Carolingian monasteries. While some monasteries had a substantial range of classical texts such as Corbie, others had remarkably few such as St Gall, which had only four pagan writers in four hundred manuscripts overall. Likewise, the library of Hartmut had sixty seven books and only five of them contained works of classical authors.
In conclusion, the Carolingian period may share many cultural features with earlier and later periods of history, but its position within the history of Latin textual transmission grants it higher significance than other revivals solely because of the precarious state of the literature by which the Carolingians were confronted. It is possible then, to suggest that had the Carolingian period been an intermediate revival, such as the renevatio of the twelfth century, and not the first such revival immediately succeeding the Dark Ages, then the Carolingian period would lose some of its historical significance.
In my opinion, the sheer importance of the Carolingian revival rests solely on the dilapidated state of the Latin classical heritage. Moreover, had the heritage been in a better state, the Carolingian period would be one of a long line of necessary and unremarkable periods of recopying and the Renaissance, bringing with it the dawn of printing, would indeed be worthy of the epithet given to the Carolingian period by Reynolds and Wilson: