In May 1968 a student protest at the Sorbonne University in Paris quickly escalated into a joint workers' demonstration, with important consequences for France. Although the basis of the protest was to do with class and social status, the events of May 1968 had an important impact on women. In fact, a new type of feminism emerged in France following the events in May 1968 and the 1970s heralded the emergence of women writers on a much larger scale than ever before. Les mots pour le dire was published in 1975 and is a striking example of writing that was influenced by this new feminism. Although there had been women writers before, writing on topics not deemed suitable for female authors, such as Simone de Beauvoir, women started to explore themes not discussed before. Cardinal makes a reference to May 1968 in the very last chapter of her book. Therefore, it is evident that Cardinal did feel that her work was influenced by the events that went on in Paris at that time.
In May 1968 students at the Sorbonne University held sit-ins and manifestations to complain about the role they perceived universities playing in perpetuating class differences. They argued that the universities were deliberately widening class divisions and that with this system, there was no hope of lower classes ever being able to rise above their hereditary social status. The police were ordered to storm the Sorbonne, which led to riots in Paris and more occupations of universities. Soon factory workers had joined in across the country, going on strike and taking part in riots. This combined action of workers and students was revolutionary as different social groups were working together to bring a change to the social system. This movement also provided the opportunity for women to get involved, as they too could take part in the riots and demonstrations. This was one of the first times that they were actively involved in politics, as despite being given the vote in 1944, they were still very underrepresented. As late as 1996 women only made up 6% of the National Assembly's deputies. Their activity in the events of May 1968 meant that they were working alongside men, just as in the 1789 Revolution, and similarly the discourse spoke of equality for all. Yet in reality, the women realised that their words did not match their beliefs, as the men were still extremely traditional and conservative in their view of gender equality. The main decision-making was still left to the men, while the women were expected to deal with the domestic tasks. The phrase, 'Les hommes discourent, les femmes nettoient! ' is a perfect summary of the view most of the men held on how things should be. The women realised that if they ever wanted to achieve social equality they would have to set up their own organisation. So they did. The Mouvement de libration des femmes embraced a large number of different women's groups, all rejecting the oppression of women and feeling the injustice that designated women to a subordinate role. They believed that the patriarchal society of France needed to be changed, as that was the root of society's problems and inequalities.
Marie Cardinal's Les mots pour le dire is influenced by the outbreak of feminism in France resulting from May 1968. Her book was published in 1975, right in the middle of the most feminist period. Although her book is partly autobiographical, there is a deeper motive than just to relate her personal story. Cardinal wished to raise awareness both to men and to women. By telling of her experiences, she conveyed to women that they were not isolated individuals but that many others were in the same position. 'Pour le leur faire comprendre et pour aider ceux qui vivaient dans l'enfer o j'avais vcu, je me promettais d'crire un jour l'histoire de mon analyse'. She was also highlighting that her problems stemmed from a patriarchal society. Although the issue of psychoanalysis is very important in this book, equally important is the feminist critique of a male-dominated society. Through her psychoanalysis, the narrator discovers the root of most of her problems come from her mother. Yet her mother in turn was moulded by the patriarchal society and she was simply relaying these conventions and forcing them on to her own daughter, the narrator. The role of both the narrator's father and husband are also extremely important. At first, the narrator blames her husband for her bleeding problems, as they started after she married him. Although this is not strictly true, Cardinal is going against the traditional view that marriage was the cure to all women's problems. Traditional views held that women were only complete when they were married and especially once they had children, and any mental problems would be cured by marriage. Cardinal is showing that this is not the case; in fact her physical symptoms only started after she was married. Thus the impact of May 1968 is shown in this theme, as women were starting to discover that their sole purpose in life was not just to get married and have children.
During her psychoanalysis, the narrator discovers her role in society and the problems with forcing women into this traditional stereotype. 'Plus mon traitement se droulait, plus je me mfiais du rle traditionnel de la mere." She saw how the patriarchal society forced her mother into a marriage she did not want, with a man she did not love and who was much older than her. Once they got divorced, it was up to her mother to raise her and the issue of child maintenance comes up. The narrator remembers is as being something humiliating that she had to endure each time she saw her father, asking him for the money and watching him go through the same ritual of searching his pockets for it. He always finished with the same phrase, 'a cote cher les enfants!" Yet the amount was not enough for her mother to provide her daughter with what she needed, 'Ce n'est pas avec ce que vous me donnez que je peux l'habiller." Already, the narrator sees the injustice women suffer. The narrator herself continues to live the stereotype once she is married, and even after she separates from her husband, it is she who looks after her children and she even accepts that her husband has an affair. When she starts to write down her experiences, she shows her writing to him, but she is still seeking her husband's approval. She realises that the reason she was ill was because she did not conform to the role she was supposed to fulfil, but now that she has escaped that mould, she can build her own future, 'j'avais trouv toute seule le chemin qui m'loignait de ma famille, de mon milieu, me permettant ainsi de construire un univers qui mtait propre." Cardinal is criticising a society that forces women into a stereotype and then condemns them if they do not conform. She underlines the injustices in the patriarchal society, showing women that this is often the root of their unhappiness.
Cardinal also raises the issue of class, which triggered off the May 1968 riots, and shows how the bourgeois values perpetuate oppression of women and widen gender inequality. From a young age, the narrator was told that she could not play alone with the boys, nor invite the children of her servants into the house. 'Je savais trs bien qu'il y avait une diffrence entre les enfants du peuple et moi'. Not only was she being forced in a specific gender role, she was also being forced into a specific role based on her class. Her mother indoctrinated her with the belief that, 'Les valuers bourgeoises taient les seules qui taient bonnes, belles, intelligentes, elles taient les meilleures." The narrator's mother was very aware of what society would say, and forced her daughter into living out these conventions. The lack of affection for her daughter stemmed from the fact that the narrator was born in the middle of her parents divorce. She was not planned and her mother made it clear that she was not wanted. As abortion was illegal, not to mention extremely dangerous at that time, her mother had tried to abort the baby herself, but nothing had worked. 'Aprs plus de six mois de ce traitement j'ai t bien oblige d'admettre que j'tais enceinte'. The relating of this story affected the narrator for the rest of her life, instilling in her a sense of unworthiness, of not being loved. Had society's expectations been different, her mother may never have been in that situation, nor felt the need to tell her daughter this harrowing story.
At the end of the book, the narrator accepts that if she wants to play her part in society, she must care for her family, ' si je voulais jouer un rle dans la socit, il fallait que je commence par ce qui tait  ma porte... Jean-Pierre et les enfants'. Yet the difference is that the narrator has chosen this role for herself. She is not forced into it, and she promises that she will not impose her upbringing onto her children, but leave them free to discover their own place in society. Possibly because these events took part before May 1968, there were not as many options open to women, and so the narrator chose this as the best of those options available. After May 1968, many more possibilities opened up to women. Cardinal highlights it is not necessary to have a husband and children to be a woman, despite that being what society dictates. The narrator suffered because 'je n'avais aucun rle  jouer dans cette socit'. What she comes to realise is that the patriarchal view of women as the servant of men, the mother and carer of children is false. 'C'tait faux! Moi, je savais ce que c'tait une femme. J'en tais une." Cardinal's message is that if you are a woman, that is what being a woman is. There are no roles to fill or moulds to conform to. Cardinal wishes to liberate women from the stereotype and allow them to live as they please. She also wants men to understand that forcing women to act in a certain way will only even be destructive.
May 1968 is significant as it helped to trigger the feminist movement in France. Cardinal owes a lot to that movement in terms of the impact it had on her writing and the liberty it gave her to express herself. Although her book was controversial, and often not taken seriously by male critics, she did have a big impact on feminism in France. By mentioning May 68 at the end of her book, she shows that the narrator's personal breakthrough came before the riots and formation of MLF, but all other women can benefit from the events of 1968 and should take the opportunity presented by it to escape from the conventions of traditional society and develop their own way of living.