There are many factors that affect the geometries of transition metal complexes, including thes relative energies of the metal's d orbitals, the number of d electrons the metal has, the oxidation state of the metal and the size of both the ligands and the metal. In this experiment, three d 8 first row transition metal complexes will be synthesised and their structures determined from their infrared spectra and magnetic properties.
There are two possible co-ordinations for four co-ordinate complexes: square planar and tetrahedral. The crystal field splitting diagrams for these two geometries are shown below filled with 8 d electrons as in the complexes in this experiment:
As these diagrams show, the square planar geometry is often more favourable for d 8 complexes, because all the electrons may be paired up in low energy orbitals, leaving the highest energy orbital unoccupied. However, the terahedral geometry is sterically much more favourable, because the bond angle in this case is 109, compared with 90 for the square planar geometry. Steric factors are much more important when considering first row transition metals, because the metals are much smaller, so the repulsion between the electrons in metal-ligand bonds will be increased. This means that bulky ligands will usually force the complex to adopt a tetrahedral geometry.
The energy difference between the e and t 2 set of orbitals in the tetrahedral geometry (T) also affects the geometry of the complex, sine the crystal field stabilisation energy (CFSE) of the complex depends on this (CFSE = - 0.8 T). The magnitude of T is affected by the oxidation state of the metal: a greater oxidation state pulls the ligands closer to the metal, increasing the splitting effects; and the field strength of the ligand: stronger field ligands such as (PPh 3) and (NCS) increase the splitting.
The magnetic moments of the complexes synthesised in this experiment (see in table 1) indicate that CoCl(PPh 3)3 and NiCl 2(PPh 3)2 contain 2 unpaired electrons, and Ni(NCS)2(PPh 3)3 is paramagnetic. This means that CoCl(PPh 3)3 and NiCl 2(PPh 3)2 adopt a tetrahedral geometry, while Ni(NCS)2(PPh 3)3 exists in a square planar arrangement.
From this it is clear that steric factors out weigh the benefits of the low energy square planar configuration in the case of the CoCl(PPh 3)3 and NiCl 2(PPh 3)2 complexes. Conversely the Ni(NCS)2(PPh 3)3 complex contains two relatively strong field ligands, which increase the size of T making the tetrahedral configuration even more energetically unfavourable than the square planar complex.
Geometric and linkage isomerism are possible for this complex:
The co-ordination of the (NCS) ligand can be determined with the infrared spectrum of this complex (figure 3). If the ligand co-ordinates to the metal atom via the sulphur atom, the stretching of the CS bond appears at 700cm -1 in the spectrum, and the CN bond absorbs at approximately 2100cm -1. If the ligand co-ordinates to the metal via the nitrogen atom, however, these stretching frequencies are different; approximately 800cm -1 for the CS bond, and approximately 2050cm -1 for the CN bond. In figure 3 the absorbances at 2084 and 692cm -1 are most likely to correspond to the CS and CN bond stretches in the ligand, which are closest to the values quoted for bond stretches where the ligand bonds through the sulphur atom.
As there are only two absorption bands for each of these bonds, I expect that the complex adbots a trans geometry. This is because on the asymmetric stretch for a trans complex will cause a change in the dipole moment, so only one absorption will be observed. For a cis complex, both the symmetric and asymmetric stretches of the metal-ligand bond will cause a change in the dipole moment, resulting in two absorbtion bands around this region of the spectrum. This is consistent with steric arguments, as the cis complex would place the two large (PPh 3) ligands next to each other with an angle between them of 90. This means that the Ni(NCS)2(PPh 3)3 complex exists as structure 4 shown above.