The technique of flash photolysis was developed in 1949 by Norris and Porter in order to study the kinetics of reactions that proceed at a very rapid rate. Initially a "flash" is emitted, which triggers the start of the reaction by breaking bonds to form radicals, removing a protective group from a reactant, producing a precursor to the rapid reaction or generating an excited electronic state, as in this experiment. Another probe beam is used to monitor the progress of the reaction.
In this experiment, the flash produces and excited electronic "triplet" state from the sample of anthracene. The probe beam is absorbed by ground state anthracene only, so a trace of the decay of the excited state can be obtained.
From this trace it is possible to determine the intensity of the light transmitted and thus the absorbance of the ground state anthracene at a fixed time interval from when the flash is emitted.
The aims of this experiment are:
The sample of anthracene, impregnated into a Perspex cylinder was placed into the sample compartment of the flash photolysis unit. The filter was aligned to allow only light of wavelength 424 nm to probe the sample and the computer was set up to record a trace between 0 and 5 volts, between - 10 and 90 ms, in relation to the flash. The trigger delay was set to - 10%.
The Trigger was set to "mode auto" and a sheet of black card was used too block off light from the sample. The back off unit was altered so that the voltage was 4.75 volts. The black card was then removed and the iris diapragm was altered so that the voltage level was set as 0.25 volts.
The trigger was then changed to "mode single" and the threshold set to 10%. The photoflash was then charged up to 400 volts, and then trigger button was pressed after a seconds delay.
Figure 1 shows the decay trace obtained for anthracene.
Application of the Beer-Lambert Law allows the lifetime () to be calculated without finding the extinction co-efficient () or the concentration of anthracene in the excited state (c) because the absorption of anthracene (A) is known:
Application of the integrated rate law for first order reactions shows that a plot of lnA against t will give a straight line of gradient - k if this decay is first order, because A is effectively the change in concentration of anthracene:
Table 2 and Figure 2 show the values obtained for k and by the two different methods and their associated errors. These values are in very good agreement with each other, which indicates that the difference between these values and the literature value of between 0.02 and 0.035  is due to the data obtained during the experiment, not the calculations.
The discrepancy is most likely to result from inaccuracies incurred when extrapolating values of I from the decay trace. This was made particularly difficult because the initial absorbance of the sample was just over 2.5 volts, making the decay curve quite shallow, so the values for I were all fairly close together, and difficult to determine accurately using the scale.
Another reason for this disagreement maybe that the apparatus is old, and had failed to produce decay traces in previous attempts. Repetition of the experiment would clarify whether the flash and probe beam had functioned properly on this occasion.
The method of filtering the probe beam could have been more accurate, especially as the required wavelength was quite specific. It is possible that the filter had been moved slightly, which would have affected the results. Also as the voltage of the flash began to decline quite rapidly once it had been charged up it was difficult to trigger the flash as it was at the correct voltage. If the voltage of the flash had been unsteady or not at the level expected the decay trace may have been inaccurate. More modern equipment would have eliminated both of these possible sources of error as these factors could be automated.
It is also possible that the sample used had deteriorated, as the age of the sample was unknown and this may have effected the lifetime of the triplet state.
There is also a possibility that the temperature of the lab was not exactly 298k as quoted for the literature value, but it is unlikely that the temperature was far off this, and this difference is unlikely to have a great effect on the results.
It wouldn't be possible to measure lifetimes shorter than 0.01 seconds using this apparatus because this is the shortest time interval the probe can monitor.
It was proven that the decay of the triplet state of anthracene is first order and the lifetime for anthracene in Perspex was found to be 0.135 +/- 0.0090 seconds; however, it would be necessary to repeat the experiment to be confident of this value due to the unreliable nature of the apparatus.