Since the middle of the twentieth century, the agriculture and horticulture industries relied heavily on a broad range of synthetic chemical insecticides, fungicides and herbicides to maintain crop yields and quality. Many of the active ingredients of these compounds were legacies of chemical warfare developments of the two World Wars (Carson, 1962).
Public and political pressure, resulting from high profile studies into the ecological affects of the long-term use of these chemicals, as well as their effects on human health has resulted in the withdrawal of many active ingredients in the last fifteen years . This has been as a consequence of either direct bans by legislative bodies, or by the increased costs of re-registering products (due to increased levels of testing) due to more stringent risk assessment regulations (Pesticide Safety Directorate, 2006).
The horticulture sector has experienced the largest proportional withdrawal of chemicals due to the relatively small size of the industry and thus smaller economies of scale for pesticide producers. Secondary to this factor, some serious arthropod pests have become resistant to many hydrocarbon-based pesticides, making the problem more acute. This has paved the way for an increase in the use of biological control in horticultural production, mainly to manage or eradicate arthropod pests with the introduction of natural predators and parasites / parasitoids. The use of biological control is generally accepted as being environmentally benign and side-effect free. There have, however, been some instances where the non-target effects of a control organism or biological compound has had a detrimental effect on ecosystems, even causing extinctions.
The use of biological control agents in horticulture dates back to the late nineteenth century (Perkins, 1897). Many of these early attempts at biological control were, however, unsuccessful. It is likely also that all such introductions were uncontrolled and that no assessment of possible ecological effects was ever made. Increased world trade of both fresh produce and plant material, combined with the likelihood of increased temperatures may lead to increased numbers of exotic pests in UK horticulture and hence a need to find effective controls for these pests. Regulatory bodies must therefore ensure that the inevitable rise of biological control is safe both in ecological and human welfare terms. Indeed, current legislation covering the use of biological control is identical to that governing conventional pesticides.
More than five thousand introductions of exotic arthropod agents for control of arthropod pests during the past 120 years have rarely resulted in negative environmental effects, yet risks of environmental effects caused by releases of exotics are of growing concern (van Lenteren, 2006). Between 1998 and 2002 the EU funded ERBIC project ('Evaluating Environmental Risks of Biological Control Introductions into Europe') reviewed past and current arthropod biological control and attempted to create guidelines to assess the potential efficacy and risks of future biological control programmes (Lynch et al, 2001).
Biological agents fall into numerous categories. The most prevalent types in horticulture exploit insect-insect or fungus-insect relationships. Some overlap exists, especially in open field situations between biological and cultural control methods, and between biological and chemical control. An example of such would be the use of allelopathic compounds, either produced by companion plants or extracted remotely and applied to crops as bio herbicides or bio insecticides. Each type of control carries a different type of risk, however the focus here will be on the ecological effects of insect and fungal controls and on the risks of phytochemical toxicity.
One term often used when describing the action of a biological control agent is 'host-specific'. In many cases, the agents introduced to control a pest are specifically adapted to prey on or parasitize that single organism. These types of organisms tend to be used in controlled environment situations where an established pest population guarantees a food source for the control organism. Whitefly is one such pest, controlled by a number of parasitic wasps, and whilst field biological control studies have been carried out, the results are very limited. The controlled environment of protected crops in northern Europe is an ideal situation for the safe use of classical biological control. The risk of escape is minimal, climatic conditions outside the glasshouse are unfavourable for the control organism and the specificity of the control agent means it is unlikely to find any prey / hosts outside.
Open-field or unmanaged situations, however, normally employ more generalist predators in the control of both pests and weeds. The polyphagous nature of these organisms greatly increases the risk of non-target effects and thus studies of species interaction within the ecosystem in question must be closely examined before the programme is implemented. The majority of outdoor arthropod biological control is conservation-type control or augmentation of naturally-occurring species. Such methods can be beneficial for both crop production in terms of pest / weed control and other animals due to an increased food supply (Tooley, 2001)
The activities of the control organism once the pest or weed problem is under control must also be examined. Much of the recent debate regarding the ecological effects of biological control stems from the lessons learnt in the control of alien Carduus thistle species in the USA by the flowerhead weevil Rhinocyllus conicus Frl. (Gassmann & Louda, 2001). This introduction was made into both Canada and the USA in the late 1960's following ten years of research on the feeding habits of R. conicus in northern Europe (ibid). During the twenty years from its introduction, R. conicus successfully expanded its host range to include native Cirsium thistles (ibid). This was not fully expected as it had been assumed that other, less damaging insects would competitively exclude R. conicus from this trophic niche (ibid). The opposite, in fact occurred, with a native insect associated with the native thistle being displaced by R. conicus (Louda et al 1997, Louda et al 2003).
There are numerous other examples of biological control practitioners overlooking the possible long-term effects of a biological control agent. Experiences such as those experienced in Australia following the introduction of the cane toad highlight the paradox of classical biological control in an external situation: the control must be able to establish successfully in order to permanently control the pest, but it must also fit into the natural food web so it does not become a pest in itself. Even if the control agent is perceived as a low-risk introduction, the ability for a species to make a host-shift either due to environmental changes or merely an eradication of its food source over a long period may still exist.
This unpredictability, combined with the potential permanency of the control agent when introduced means that some biological control agents may have similar effects to the chemicals they have replaced. The upsurge in anti-pesticide feeling over the last thirty years mainly stems from data pertaining to the persistence of pesticides such as DDT in the environment (Carson, 1962). In contrast, modern pesticides have been synthesised to have very short half lives, with synthetic pyrethroids showing values of less than four days in some cases (Awasthi, 1989).
Non-insect biological control tends to encompass the use mainly of fungi or bacteria. The former is a means of delivering the latter. The ability to apply fungal, microbial, or viral biological control agents using spraying technology developed for conventional pesticide application, but with none of the associated risks to human health, makes them attractive to biological control practitioners. The use of inanimate controls represents less of a challenge in terms of education when agents are to be used in the developing world, the Green Muscle project being a prime example (LUBILOSA, 1999). The combination of this factor with the low risk of insect resistance means that many such compounds can be advantageous for many producers. There is, however, evidence that the use of the mycoinsecticides may eventually lead to the development of resistance in some pests. Most notably, Lepidopteran species have shown potential for resistance to Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) toxins, meaning a re-evaluation of Bt toxin-producing crops (through genetic modification) may be required.
The non-target effects of mycoinsecticides have also been highlighted. Where the pest is closely related to indigenous species, products such as Bt may have undesired effects on these organisms. Again, Lepidopteran species are most at risk (Wagner et al, 1996). Generally, though, fungi tend to be highly host specific and thus harmless to humans and other organisms in the environment, hence the large amount of interest and investment in them as biological control agents.
Viruses also have the potential for use as biological control agents but their need for a living host means that the method of production and application presents a problem in the control of plant pests. The most notable use of a virus as a biological control agent is in the control of the European rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) in the UK, where Myxoma has helped to control populations since the 1950's in the UK (BBC, 2002). The use of this virus does, however highlight one of the most complex issues in biological control; that of indirect effects on an ecosystem. Whilst the control of a well established pest may be desirable from a human perspective, the diversity of the ecosystem of which the pest is part may suffer much more degradation than just the removal of that one species. Indeed, the reduced numbers of rabbits feeding on grassland indirectly resulted in the extinction of one of the UK's rare butterflies, the Large Blue, by 1979 (Oates, 2001). This is obviously one of the most difficult aspects of pest control to predict, whether the agent is biological or chemical. The potential for organisms introduced as control agents to effect the members of higher or lower trophic levels of an ecosystem than that to which they are introduced is the main focus of much of the criticism of biological control outside a controlled environment.
The use of phytochemicals as insecticides and herbicides is an area of research with great potential. Pyrethrins, commercially extracted from Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium (Pyrethrum) capitula are the world's most economically important bio insecticide (Hitmi et al, 2000). Yet these substances are nerve poisons, with the same mode of action as DDT (Journal of Pesticide Reform, 2002). The main difference is however that pyrethrins have a short half life and thus pose a reduced risk compared to persistent chemicals such as DDT. Whilst this may be advantageous, it could be argued that the necessity to repeatedly apply short half-life compounds somewhat reduces their environmental benignity.
Allelochemicals are also cited as replacements for synthetic herbicides. Whilst the negative effect on crop yields produced by intercropping with weed suppressant plants makes this aspect of allelopathy unlikely to be used commercially, the use of extracted allelochemicals and their analogues as herbicides may have a future. As with pyrethrins, many of the compounds isolated from plants and fungi as bioherbicides have high mammalian toxicity also. For example, AAL-toxins and fumonisins, extracted from cultures of Alternaria and Fusarium respectively have demonstrated herbicidal properties, but at the same time are suspected carcinogens (Abbas et al, 1995)
The trade of fresh produce worldwide is increasing and the affluent developed world demands exotic horticultural products all year round. With supermarkets currently attempting to present and increasingly environmentally friendly image to the consumer (Tesco, 2006) and at the same time wielding more and more political power, it is not unforeseeable that a reduced reliance upon synthetic chemicals in crop production may be forced on suppliers in the developing world. These producers do not always have access to the relevant education or resources to use non-chemical pest control techniques and hence will not be able to supply to those outlets. There is the added danger that such production could then fall into the hands of multinational companies who do not necessarily have the best interests of the local producers at heart. Such a scenario may be pure speculation, but this type of infiltration by large western companies is not uncommon in other industries and is becoming more unpalatable for many in both the developed and developing world.
Overall, the small number of documented cases of negative ecological impacts where biological control agents have been administered suggests that it is a safe method of pest control. The increasing acceptance by the scientific community that these recorded cases may only be the 'tip of the iceberg' means that thorough risk assessments are required for new biological agents. The absence of data on the indirect effects of biological control does not mean that it does not occur. Whilst legislation requiring complex assessments of the potential effects of an alien organism may seem superfluous in some cases, it would appear that without a full understanding of the complex interactions of species within an ecosystem, these procedures are a necessity. Biological control agents are controlled under directive 91/414/EEC (The Plant Protection Products Directive) and 2000/29/EU (controlling the introduction of non-native species). The development of pesticides from natural sources is attractive to many as there is a perception that theses substances will be harmless to humans and the environment. Whilst this is broadly true, and in the case of host specific fungi and parasites, the risk to non-target organisms is non-existent, the toxicity of some is as serious as many synthetic chemicals. Finally, the tendency for developed nations to force their will on the developing world for the perceived greater good must at times be tempered. One only has to examine the negative effects of the worldwide ban of DDT, and the reversal of the ban this year (BBC, 2006), to see that sometimes responsibly-used synthetic pesticides have their place.