The Plant Protection Products Directive (91/414/EEC), 'The Authorisations Directive' came into force on 26 July 1993 and is implemented in the UK by the Plant Protection Products Regulations 2003 (Pesticide Safety Directorate, 2006). The directive lists (as annex I) all active ingredients approved for use in the horticulture and agriculture sectors. Any additions to this annex can only be made once the EU commission has approved the compound for use, generally on an agreed range of crops and situations. Additions to the annex or renewal of time-bounded approvals are subject to involved risk assessments and re-registration procedures. For small markets, such as horticulture, the cost to herbicide producers of such tasks often outweighs the projected profit from that product. The result, therefore, of this legislation is that the UK horticulture sector now has access to a reduced number of herbicide active ingredients.
Combined with increasing herbicide resistance in weed species, and increased labour costs, this legislation represents a challenge for horticultural weed management processes in years to come. Indeed, Baumann et al (2000) cite the former two factors alone as strong reasons for producers to re-embrace traditional, cultural methods of weed control such as selection of crop planting date, rotation, cover crops, and polyculture cropping. The implication of re-introducing such practices will, however, increase the ecological complexity of agro ecosystems, demanding a higher level of knowledge and management skill (ibid).
In order to continue effective weed management, producers have begun, and must continue to practice integrated weed management strategies. This will often mean a switch from a chemical-driven, reactionary approach to a more strategic, integrated weed management methodology with a long term view of control rather than eradication. Whilst novel strategies for weed control have been reported, more traditional methods probably have more practical value and may be implemented at much lower cost (Brberi, 2002).
Many important horticultural crops in the UK are grown undercover, where weeds do not present such a problem, thus the amount of research carried out in the field of weed control specifically for horticulture is relatively minor. Horticulturists must therefore draw upon traditional crop management techniques as well as contemporary research in the agricultural sector to devise programmes of integrated weed management (IWM) which have relatively minor reliance on synthetic herbicides.
When the reliance upon chemical control is reduced, the application of a weed management strategy is affected most importantly by modified tillage and cropping practices (Aldrich & Kremer, 1997).
Type, frequency and timing of tillage activities have a profound effect on the size of the weed seed bank, the establishment of weed seedlings, and on the competitive ability of established plants. Repeated tillage will effectively control weed growth but has a profound, negative effect on soil quality through increased erosion, mineralization and nutrient leaching (Hkansson, 2003).
Inversion tillage is commonly used as part of soil preparation activities and helps to reduce the weed seed bank in a number of ways. However, the effects on weed seeds are more complex. Those seeds requiring darkness to germinate will not have sufficient food reserves to break the surface. Furthermore, once buried, the seeds are more susceptible to decomposition by micro organisms or loss of viability. It is worth noting that repeated inversion tillage of the same soil will bring buried seeds back, or near, to the surface and viable seeds may germinate (WRAG, 2003). The mechanical scarifying effect on seed coats by soil particles and plough may also be a factor in increased seed mortality or germination promotion (Hkansson, 2003).
The increased aeration provided by shallow tillage may also be beneficial in weed management, increasing the aerobic activity of micro organisms, and promoting seed-coat degradation and seed germination. Germination promotion may be desirable, especially when integrated with some chemical control or other direct, not chemical control e.g. mulching, solarization.
The timing of crop planting, especially delaying the planting date of crops traditionally sown in early spring, has been explored as a way of increasing the competitiveness of the crop plant. Lgere (1997) however found that delayed planting of early barley and oat did not achieve the expected levels of control of Galeopsis tetrahit and that yields were reduced by a shorter growing season. Exploiting weed phenology to reduce competition, has however been demonstrated when delaying sowings of soybean (Glycine max) to control Abutilon theoprasti (Oliver, 1979)
Individual 'roguing' of weeds by hand may be practical only for very localised infestations in small horticultural situations; however, most growers must employ mechanised weed control methods. The effectiveness of mechanical weed control practices such as harrowing or hoeing is largely regulated by the subsequent crop-weed competition (Hkansson, 2003). These procedures must strike a balance between the level of weed control and the negative impact this has on the crop and the soil structure (Kurstjens et al, 2000). Between row weeding is normally carried out using tractor-pulled hoes, harrows cage weeders or rotary cultivators (HDRA, 2004). The timing and frequency of any weeding activities is related to the crop being grown. Those with dense, rapidly expanding canopies may require only one early weeding operation before they shade competing weeds, whilst slow-growing crops or those with smaller leaves may require frequent operations (ibid). The cost of such control is by no means a small influence on producers. Labour and fuel costs mean running machinery reduce profits, and may become more expensive in the future as 'green taxes' come into force to control carbon emissions. More complex mechanical finger weeders and brush weeders have value for intra-row weeding, uprooting weeds rather than covering them with soil, however, soil type and condition may influence their effectiveness (Brberi, 2002).
In order to minimise the competitive effects of weeds, the crop needs to establish quickly and gain a competitive advantage for light and nutrients over any weeds. The height of the mature plant (combined with plant spacing) will also determine the amount of shade cast on surrounding weeds. Data available for wheat indicates that short stemmed cultivars (often selected as they are less prone to wind damage) produce less shading and therefore allow greater weed growth. Aldrich & Kremer (1997) and Bridges & Chandler (1988) suggest that four times as many annual grass weeds occurred in short-stemmed varieties. Low-growing cultivars also produce less crop residue, meaning there may be more weeds in the next crop in a low-till regime through reduced ground cover (ibid).
Successive monocultures mean the same cultivation practices at the same time each year. This means that a weed favouring this regime will become prevalent. Rotating crops and sowing, harvesting and tilling at different times each year means the cycle can be broken and the weed is unable to become so established. Current recommendations are for growers to alternate spring and autumn sown crops, although this is mainly to reduce instances of herbicide resistance (WRAG, 2003).
The relative crop morphologies of subsequent crops in a rotation will also play a major role in weed control. Weeds suited to the slow development and limited canopy of crops such as those in the allium family, for example, may be successful in setting seed in that year, however, if a rapidly establishing, large leaved crop follows, the weed seeds may germinate, but the weed may not be able to complete its lifecycle as it is out-competed for light and nutrients. This is advantageous as the weed seed bank is reduced. Organic production already relies heavily on crop rotation; however, its benefits are mainly seen as nutritional in this case.
Whilst crops tend to be seeded in agricultural systems, horticulture, with higher value crops has more of a tendency to use transplants. These small plants are able to be planted at their final stand density and, with there root systems already developed, can establish much more rapidly than seed. This reduces the impact of emerging weeds as the crop has a competitive advantage for both light and nutrients.
New technologies have been trialled in weed management, including laser weed measurement and cutting (Heisel et al, 2002) and microwaves (Sartorato et al, 2006). Whilst these methods have given some success, they will probably remain prohibitively expensive on a farm scale (Brberi, 2002). The withdrawal of methyl bromide as a soil sterilant also means that other techniques such as solarization and steam sterilization may become more prevalent, although steam sterilizing is an expensive and slow process and solarization relies on favourable weather and the ability to take areas of land out of production during the growing season.
A reliance upon one group of herbicides helps to speed up resistance in many weeds, with resistant genotypes rapidly become dominant. This is clearly demonstrated by the swift increase in resistance to group B herbicides (ACCase inhibitors) since the early 1980's (Heap, 1997). Bodies such as the Weed Resistance Action Group (2003) therefore advocate the rotation of herbicide groups. Increased ability to identify patches of resistance is also key in dealing with the problem as removal of localised proliferations of a genotype will restrict its spread.
It has been noted in field trials that some weeds reach a point of water stress earlier than the crop in which they are growing, thus becoming less competitive. It may therefore be prudent in some known crop-weed interactions for growers to restrict irrigation, providing only enough for the required crop growth. Timing the delivery of nitrogen fertilizer can also prove a key factor in weed control however the effects are dependent upon crop type and weed type. For example, the early application of nitrogen to a sugar beet crop has been proven to increase its competitiveness with Sinapsis arvensis whereas a late application increases its competitiveness in relation to Chenopodium album (Paolini et al, 1999).
These methods all control weeds by intercepting sunlight. Furthermore, cover crops and intercropping techniques compete with weeds below the soil surface for water and nutrients. Planting horticultural crops through plastic sheet mulch is already common practice and is effective in retaining soil moisture and increasing root zone temperatures as well as controlling weeds. Organic mulches must be well-composted in order to prevent the introduction of weed seeds and pathogens. Cover crops can be used between harvest and sowing of a cash crop, where they are ploughed in or killed with herbicide prior to cropping, or be grown with the cash crop (Hartwig & Ammon, 2002). Intercropping uses the same principle but grows two or more saleable crops in a polyculture. It is paramount that the negative effects of inter-specific competition do not render the produce unprofitable. Baumann et al (2000) successfully reduced the occurrence of Senicio vulgaris offspring by 98% by intercropping leeks with celery but the trial returned significantly lower yields of lower quality leeks compared to a pure stand.
Biological agents have a long history in the control of insect pests and although several examples of 'classical' type control of exotic weeds by arthropods exist, these successes have been in non-crop situations. Examples include the control of Opuntia spp. in Australia in the early 20 th century by the moth Cactoblastis cactorum and water hyacinth in a number of American and African waterways by weevil species. Increased awareness of the indirect ecological effects of such projects means that modern biological weed control of weeds is largely through the use of host-specific fungi. Some mycoherbicides have been developed, some becoming commercially available in the United States, however none are in widespread use at this time. Loose smut fungus Sphacelotheca holci has been successful in infected johnsongrass systemically, nearly eliminating seed set (Maission & Lindow, 1986 in Aldrich & Kremer, 1997) but again, this is not used commercially.
A reduction in seed production can also be achieved by seed feeding insects. Niesthrea louisianica has reduced viable seeds in velvetleaf between 5% and 90% (Spencer 1988 in Aldrich & Kremer, 1997). Seed predation after seed rain is also an important factor in weed seed bank depletion. In arable crops, it has been estimated that Carabid beetles account for up to 70% of predation losses, slugs and snails up to 30% and birds/mammals up to 10% (Tooley, 2001). This highlights the importance of biodiversity in the crop and the potential of conservation biological control as a weed management tool.
Phytochemicals may prove to be an important source of active ingredients for future weed control with new sites and modes of action (Duke et al, 2000). The exact effects of allelopathy are, however, very difficult to quantify when other factors such as nutrient and light competition are present (Brberi, 2002). Furthermore, the unpredictability of the amounts and quality of allelochemicals produced by entire plants due to environmental conditions (ibid) probably means the application of plant extracts as bioherbicides is a more probable scenario than polycultures that include allelopaths. Many plant-, fungus- and microbe-derived compounds have successfully been shown to inhibit weed seed germination or to promote suicidal germination and several studies have shown crop residues may release weed seed germination inhibitors (Putnam, 1988) .
The withdrawal of a large proportion of herbicides from use in the horticultural sector means that growers must implement a more holistic approach to crop management. Weed management is an integral part of such a strategy and whilst the over-reliance on synthetic herbicides in the last fifty years has reduced the breadth of knowledge of other possible control methods, there has been sufficient research in this field to arm growers with alternative management programmes. No single method of weed control can replace synthetic herbicides, but a combination of cultural weed management techniques and a greater understanding of weed population biology are likely to prove invaluable when used in conjunction with those chemicals still available.