An increasing demand for organically produced food in the UK is likely to lead to an expansion of the amount of land given over to organic production both in the agriculture and horticulture sectors in coming years. This is, however, expected to happen more slowly than during the late 1990s and early 2000s (Firth et al, 2005). The resulting challenge for a larger number of growers will therefore be to ensure the maintenance of economic yields by using organically-certified methods to maintain soil fertility. In order to embrace the true principles of organic crop production, conventional producers would need to move away from reliance upon external inputs altogether. Instead they would need to learn to build and preserve soil fertility by working in harmony with natural processes such as legume nitrogen fixation in crop rotations, and animal manure recycling. These methods of nutrient cycling prove slightly more difficult in organic horticulture systems than in organic agriculture as they rarely include livestock within the system and cannot practice such diverse rotation, as is common in organic agriculture.
In order to minimise external inputs, plant nutrients must remain in the system wherever feasible, and the cornerstone of any organic crop production is the maintenance of as closed a system as possible (Blake, 1987). In a mixed farm scenario where livestock feed is produced alongside crops for sale, the use of animal manure as fertiliser can return nutrients to soil. In stockless systems, where the sale of large amounts of produce will take soil nutrients out of the system, this nutrient replenishment requires external inputs. A strategy to maintain adequate levels of essential nutrients must be developed from accurate 'nutrient budgeting' (Stockdale and Watson, 2002), where the amount of each essential element taken out of the soil must be replenished in order to ensure the long-term sustainability of an organic system. Interestingly, Stockdale and Watson's work concluded that organic horticultural systems, by importing significant amounts of manure, showed the greatest mean nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and potassium (K) surpluses in their soils of all types of organic production surveyed.
The introduction of off-farm manure can be costly in both financial and environmental terms, especially if the manure must be transported long distances. A widely accepted fact of agriculture in the UK is that there is generally an East/West split of agricultural crop and livestock production respectively, mainly due to topographical and meteorological constraints. Whilst this may pose a problem for organic agricultural crop production in the East in terms of manure procurement, horticulture, which is generally practiced on a smaller scale, is less geographically restricted and may thus find external manure input more feasible.
In addition to green and animal manures, and nitrogen fixation by legumes, organic growers are able, under guidelines laid down by regulatory bodies, to apply other sources of essential elements. These can be animal-derived e.g. fish meal or hoof and horn, plant-derived e.g. seaweed and extracts mined or minerals and industrial by-products e.g. rock phosphate and slag. However, those who remain sceptical organic production's environmental credentials are quick to point out the unsustainable nature of some of these supplements (Trewavas, 2004). Along with compounds released by weathering of parent material, the decomposition of dead, naturally occurring soil biota, and dissolved compounds in rainwater, many of these supplements also represent important sources of essential macro and micro nutrients which may otherwise become depleted with prolonged cultivation. The elements to which the majority of attention is paid when formulating nutrient budgets are however nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium:
The level of available nitrogen in any type of system will normally be the greatest influence on crop yield (Jones, 1993) and reduced yields in organic systems are in part due to the lower availability of this element (DEFRA, 2003). Nitrogen is, however, the most readily available of all the essential elements in plant growth. In addition to that introduced as animal wastes, green manures act as nitrogen sources. Unlike other major nutrients, producers are also able to harness atmospheric nitrogen from the growth of leguminous crops in their rotation (Blake, 1987). The overall amount of nitrogen applied to an organic system may be comparable to that in conventional production, but the level of availability may be less controllable when growers rely upon microbial breakdown of manure for example. In contrast, in conventional systems, synthetic sources of plant-available nitrogen can be applied at the stages in crop development when it is most needed. The release by cultivation of nutrients from green manures and legumes may also prove problematic. If a period of heavy rainfall ensues between the incorporation of a green manure, and establishment of the cash-crop, much nitrogen may be lost through leaching. Again, in conventional production, the application timing of high-N fertilisers is much more flexible and can minimise leaching.
Efficient use of nitrogen to minimise losses is achieved through careful consideration in a rotation sequence of each crop's nitrogen requirements. In order to capitalise on the release of nitrogen from a fertility-building step in a rotation, crops with high nitrogen demand, such as brassicas, must comprise the following step in the rotation. As a general rule, rotations sequentially grow crops with reducing nitrogen demands (Blake, 1987).
As is well documented, once applied to the soil, phosphorus can rapidly move from labile orthophosphates into insoluble compounds with metal cations (Brady, 1990) Movement from unavailable to available forms takes place by mineralization of these compounds within the soil structure. Today's organic producers who grow on land that has been in conventional cultivation for many years, currently reap the benefits of decades of necessary over-application of phosphate fertilisers. Due to this fact, Blake (1987) assured that phosphorus supply in organic systems would not present an issue. Contrary to this assumption, and although phosphorus is derived from both animal and green manures, organic growers are permitted by regulatory bodies to add supplementary rock phosphate as necessary to maintain the required levels of availability. Notably for phosphorus, but applicable to many elements forming insoluble compounds is the fact that, since it is not in the soil solution but within soil particles, phosphorus loss can occur through soil erosion (DEFRA, 2003).
Potassium (K) is required in relatively large amounts and is relatively soluble in the soil water (Blake, 1987). Furthermore, exchangeable K+ can be adsorbed onto negatively-charged particles of clay and organic matter. Indeed, Alfaro et al (2004) showed that light, sandy soils, with a low clay content, are most prone to potassium leaching, reinforcing the importance of organic matter content when using organic production methods on these types of soil. Of the three most commonly-studied plant macro-nutrients, maintaining adequate levels of potassium represents the greatest challenge for organic growers and research has questioned the level of potassium self-sufficiency possible in organic production (born et al, 2005). The addition of potassium-rich mineral salts is generally required to supplement that released by weathering on nearly all soil types, with the exception only of young, clay rich soils (ibid).
Although reliance upon external inputs is not encouraged in organic production, there may be certain situations where environmental benefits may be realised by adding nutrient rich products to the soil from external sources. One example would be the use of composted municipal green waste, although the variable quality and variable organic status of this material could make it unsuitable for organically-certified growers. Seaweed, either incorporated into the soil, or applied foliar sprays also represents a useful source of plant nutrients (Malaguti et al, 2002).
The incorporation of crop residues returns nutrients to the soil that were removed in the production of the crop. Whilst this strategy appears an obvious way of maintaining soil fertility, the high carbon content of some residues often means that its microbial break-down robs the soil of precious nitrogen. Micro organisms draw the nitrogen from the surrounding soil in order to maintain the carbon to nitrogen they require to consume the material. Secondly, returning residues increases the chance of pest or pathogen establishment. In order to break pest and disease cycles, the composting of crop residues before returning them to the soil would therefore seem a more favourable method of reclaiming these nutrients.
The addition of organic matter is an important factor in maintaining soil fertility in low-external-input systems. All forms of organic matter added to the soil stimulate the growth of micro-organism populations where sufficient air is present. Whilst the addition of adequate essential elements to the soil may be easily achieved, the challenge for some growers is the retention of those nutrients in an accessible form. The ability of soil organic matter (humus) content, to hold on to available ionic nutrients is essential to the success of organic production on low-clay-content soils. The high cation exchange capacity if soil organic matter prevents mobile minerals such as potassium being leached from light soils with downward water movement. Johnston (1986) reported twice the level of soil organic matter in soils which had a long history of treatment with manure compared to soils that had received solely synthetic fertilisation for a similar amount of time. Johnston also cites the relationship between soil organic matter and crop yield, reporting a direct positive correlation. The fraction of increased yield attributable to the nutrient supplying qualities of organic matter in comparison to the increased water holding capacity of soils with a high organic matter content is not, however discussed.
An original concept of bio-dynamics, from which today's organic movement was born, stressed the need for growers to work in complete harmony with nature. The underlying concept that the soil must be treated as a living organism is one that remains the central theme behind the ideas of organisations such as the Soil Association. The continuous breakdown of applied organic matter by both micro-organisms and saprophytic fungi, as they access carbon and other elements for their own growth, and its physical distribution through the soil profile by earthworms and other fauna is key to the steady supply of plant nutrients to organically-grown crops. There is also evidence that healthy populations of soil microbes can improve the uptake of those elements that form relatively insoluble compounds by the exudation of chelating agents (Salisbury and Ross, 1992). The use of such 'bio-stimulants' in a refined form, essentially products which allow plants to access soil nutrients more efficiently, along with mycorrhizal fungi in fruit growing for example (Hoepfner et al, 1983) could also represent a way of allowing organic crops to access nutrients when they are available in lower concentrations in the soil solution.
The concentration each plant nutrient within the soil profile is variable. A proportion of tillage operations performed in organic systems, therefore need to be deep enough to bring much needed nutrients from below crop rooting depth into the topsoil. Deep cultivation also aerates the lower levels of the soil, increasing the speed of oxidation reactions and of microbial breakdown of organic matter and the parent material. Such operations may, however, disrupt the habitats of larger subterranean fauna; the increased rate of mineralization could also lead to nutrients becoming available more quickly than they can be taken up and hence being leached from the soil.
Refinement of the crop rotation to include plants with varying rooting depths and morphologies can also allows each sequential crop to access nutrients at different levels of the soil structure. Blake (1987) refers to this a drawing of nutrients from lower soil strata as 'vertical shift'.
The popularity of organically-produced food is highly likely to continue, due to public perceptions of its wholesomeness and of its reduced environmental impact. To remain successful, growers moving from conventional to organically-certified production must adopt strategic, long term approaches to soil fertility. By developing skills in fertility building and maintenance through a greater understanding of the chemical and biological processes occurring in their soil, organic producers can attain the maximum yield and product quality with minimal external fertiliser inputs.