E. Warwick Slinn describes dramatic monologue as 'the flagship genre of Victorian poetry', which provided 'a medium for multiple forms of cultural critique'. In Victorian England, the capacity of this form to highlight social and political problems was facilitated by both male and female poets, including Augusta Webster, Christina Rossetti and Robert Browning among others. These writers used their poetry to display concern for the dominance of men over women in the workforce and the home, as well as to discuss the injustice of class divisions. The dramatic monologue is a particularly effective method of cultural critique because it firmly detaches the poet from the narrator of a poem. This allows the poet to speak authentically through the voice of the oppressed or oppressor who is personally affected or affects these cultural problems. Bonnie J. Robinson reminds us that Victorian poets were often 'liberal thinkers and activists as well as writers', who wrote with an aim to promote cultural awareness and remove injustices from society. For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning's The Runaway Slave at Pilgrim's Point was published in the Boston anti-slavery annual in 1848, contributing to the American and British abolition debate in offence of slavery (Slinn, "Dramatic Monologue", p. 90). While the reader is compelled to sympathise with the illegitimate child voiced in Rossetti's dramatic monologue, The Iniquity of the Fathers Upon the Children, Browning invites us to judge the narrator of his poem, Porphyria's Lover, by offering a psychological insight into the mind of a man who is guilty of domestic violence. Although dramatic monologue provides poets with an opportunity to elude their gender, there is certainly a pattern which attaches female speakers with female poets and male with male. Browning's criticisms of his male narrator in My Last Duchess exemplify that writers do not necessarily voice an example of their gender in order to defend these examples or remove themselves from sympathies with the other sex. However, women writers were keen to extend a single female voice to speak for a plurality of oppressed women who have also been victims of patriarchal society. For example, Dorothy Mermin describes how Webster's A Castaway 'reached across the iron boundaries of respectability, money, and class to declare sisterhood with sexually disgraced women' in an attempt to relieve tensions of her gender in 19 th century Britain.
In this dramatic monologue, Webster defends disreputable women from society's stereotypical presentation of prostitutes by highlighting flaws within society that lead ordinary women to such a degrading occupation. Christine Sutphin observes that 'Webster showed up not only the economic and moral oppression of women, but the poverty of the transformative ideology'. Webster's narrator, Eulalie, displays society's disillusion with the marriage ideal, which confines women to the mundane, domestic sphere, monogamy and dependence on men for economic and moral welfare. Eulalie claims that she does not at all envy married women, who she prefers to address as 'Dianas under lock and key', suggesting her resentment for the entrapment of women in the home. Sarah Ellis did not see this confinement as totally negative, but uncommonly viewed it as critical 'in fostering female self-respect' and re-establishing 'a balance of power between husband and wife'. While Eulalie cannot perceive this balance, she can identify with women who thrive in the domestic realm since her diary informs her that she was once a 'budding colourless young rose of home' (8) with 'no wishes, no cares' and 'no hopes' (21). While she goes on to admit that her domestic days were 'better days' (194), she relates this experience to being a child, rather than a woman; to someone who is growing up, not someone who has grown up only to achieve this simple life. It becomes clear that Eulalie does not reject domesticity, but desires to firmly detach herself from its associations. She questions the justice in perceiving that a woman is only as good as she is good to her husband (392), pities women who wear 'no kisses but their husband's upon lips' (123) and the girl who 'not in the woman's true place, the wife's place' (509-11) is not able to pilot her own life. For Eulalie, it is not natural to become a wife or a mother since she hates men and believes that her occupation has not designed her as the role model she needs to be in order to bring up a child. Sutphin sees her rejection of motherhood as the poem's most controversial statement:
In a society where motherhood was synonymous with being a woman, Eulalie completely divorces herself from society's expectations of womanhood, implying that these designs need to undergo drastic change before they can satisfy this social group.
Webster displays her ambivalence towards the morality of prostitution through the use of techniques which are specifically applicable to the dramatic monologue. In reading this form of poetry, the reader should be aware that it 'creates speakers who are less concerned with truth than they are with "trying to impress it on the outside world"'. Therefore, the reader must acknowledge that the speaker has designed this poem with an intention to defend disreputable women and, therefore, is advised to be reluctant to rely upon Eulalie's honesty. Webster directs the reader to dishonest words when the speaker claims that she is modest, which is immediately contradicted with a confession that she flouts herself. The speaker realises her inconsistency and hesitantly stutters, 'but yet, but yet' (58), indicating her eagerness to defend herself and continue to engage her audience. Webster interjects irony into her poem when Eulalie decides that, since her personal thoughts will not meet judgement, there is no need to worry about being a hypocrite (59-62). This logic could lead her to liberate her voice from untruth since there's no one to judge her or, contrastingly, from truth as there's no one to disprove her lies. This ambiguity is skilfully placed in the text to remain in our minds while the speaker argues that her trade is relatively moral to that of a lawyer or a journalist. This technique allows Webster to distance herself from these culturally damning perceptions as they can be excused as opinions which, like the speaker, she does not truly believe. This idea becomes more probable when considered in conjunction with Sutphin's suggestion that, while women writers were keen to defend disreputable women, 'they were not immune to the idea that prostitutes were irrevocably "diseased"' (Sutphin, "Human Tigresses", p. 521). Webster may be keen to identify society's restrictions upon women as the root of this culture and suggest that the prostitute was once the ordinary woman framed by social pressures, but she is certainly reluctant to display prostitution as a decent way of living. In many ways, highlighting its degrading weight on women would assist her argument in support of social change.
Webster does not hesitate to criticise men throughout this poem by reminding the reader that their immorality allows the speaker to continue her immoral trade by creating demand for prostitution. Eulalie does not feel that her occupation is particularly harmful because the only people she affects are wives and she does not take anything off these 'poor fools' that is worth keeping (100). She strengthens her argument by establishing herself as an experienced figure to judge men as she can 'perceive there are more men than one', unlike blinded, monogamous women (103). Eulalie challenges society's perception of men by removing any illusion that her clientele are 'simple' and the victims of her predatory advances (157). To the contrary, they 'have their favourite sinnings planned / to do them civilly and sensibly' (158-9). The speaker insists that she attracts supposedly civil, sensible and educated men who society would regard as honourable. Webster locates weaknesses in a society which cannot correctly separate the moral from the immoral, and places the prostitute and her client in opposing categories based upon gender.
Kathryn Gleadle deposits prostitutes in a band of women who 'appear to have perceived their labour as a necessary, if often grim, strategy which would enable them to earn much-needed money'. In expressing a poorly-educated, single woman, with only a neglectful brother to boast as family connections, Webster attaches Eulalie's circumstances to financial insecurity. While the speaker is concerned for the goodness of her soul, her immediate concern is the survival of her body and she is therefore required to prioritise money over morals. She explains that, while her brother's university education was funded, her rights to education were neglected but she 'saw never aught to murmur at' (496) in this system. She believes that ''Twas no one's fault' (503) that her parents chose to invest money into the education of their son as they were sensible to perceive that this would lead him to a respectable occupation, unlike a woman. Eulalie regards Britain's attempts to elevate women to the level of men through education as pretence of 'teaching them / what no one ever cares that they should know' (377-80). She argues that offering women education is simply an outward display of efforts, with no serious intent on valuing their ability in the workforce. The narrator elevates herself above the common prostitute because she has a home 'all velvet and marqueterie and pastilles' (71) rather than exhibiting herself 'at infamous corners' (49). She becomes accustomed to these luxuries, admitting that the refuge did not suit her because it reduced her lifestyle from 'pampering to half-famishing' (244). At this point in the poem, the reader realises that, though Eulalie does not enjoy the dirtiness and loneliness of the prostitute lifestyle, she cannot give up the luxuries that it has afforded her. It becomes clear that, while prostitution is not necessary to preserve her life, it is necessary to afford her lifestyle and, with her poor education and skills, an alternative occupation that maintains her wealth does not exist for her.
Christina Rossetti's The Iniquity of the Fathers Upon the Children similarly defends a disgraced class of people by voicing Margaret, an illegitimate child who is interminably stained with the personal and social shame of her ignoble birth. She blames her father who 'wrought' upon the 'foolish youth' (525) of her mother. There is certainly some suggestion that the mother was a victim of physical and sexual abuse, suggested by the dynamic force of the father's actions and the emphasis on the mother's youth. In conjunction with these implications, she perceives her mother as a victim, like herself, who suffers a greater burden than that passed down to her: 'A lifelong lie for truth' (529). As well as defending the shames brought on women by the immoral conduct of men, Rossetti describes the ill treatment Margaret endures by society in order to provoke pity from the Victorian audience and encourage them to reshape their opinions of these innocent children. Without the skills or authority to voice their own unhappiness, Rossetti enters the mind of a defenceless child in protection of her interests.
When Margaret is removed from her biological mother, Rossetti introduces the total antithesis of the young girl in the form of a generous, 'jewelled' and 'grand' lady (240), who does not allow her superior class and respectability to interfere in nurturing Margaret like a daughter. In the child's idolisation of her Lady, Rossetti displays admiration for a woman who is able to overlook external class divisions in search for the child's internal morality. While Rossetti designs a role model for society in this woman, she contrasts her modesty with that of her visitors, who, for all their nobility, cannot conceal their contempt of Margaret. The child narrates that 'the women speak and stare / And mean to be so civil' (334-5) and highlights the excessive pride of those 'who sit as struck with blindness' as if she wasn't there (341). By rejecting and sneering at her existence, Margaret tolerates their torment until she is 'almost ready' (494) to wish death upon herself. While she begins to feel like she belongs to her Lady, indicated by her eagerness to define herself as 'almost child' to this figure, this progress is undone by her contemptuous guests, which signals how her happiness is completely dependent on society's acceptance of her.
While Browning often facilitates the freedom of the dramatic monologue's unrestricted structure to develop a conversational tone, Rossetti chooses to regulate her verse using iambic trimeter. The nursery-rhyme echoes of the iambic rhythm successfully connect the verse with children, assisting Rossetti in authentically immersing herself in a young mind. Unlike Webster's Eulalie, this voice is not vulnerable to judgement from the reader as its youth suggests innocence that is yet to be corrupted by skills in deceit.
Robert Browning's My Last Duchess voices a historical figure, the Duke of Ferrara, who was suspected of poisoning his seventeen-year old bride, Lucrezia de Medici in 1561. The poet traces back to an event in history to display a contemporary problem in Victorian Britain. Melissa Valiska Gregory reports that 'historical work on the subject of sexual violence within the Victorian home suggests that it was a relatively common feature of domestic life'. While this is highly problematic in a society which sought to create a sanctuary for women in the domestic setting, Browning portrays 'the dynamics of the home as deeply painful for both men and women...in the struggle for sexual dominance between husbands and wives' (Gregory, "Robert Browning", p. 494). An example of female dominance can be seen in Browning's Andrea del Sarto which voices the unhappiness of a man who justifiably suspects his wife of infidelity. However, these roles are completely reversed in My Last Duchess, where the jealous and untrusting Duke cannot control his suspicions, leading him to cruelly assert control over his wife through murder. Spoken by the Duke, Browning shapes possible psychological motives behind such an attack and the reader becomes more educated about the speaker than his Duchess, in discordance with the poem's title. The reader is encouraged to judge the morality of the Duke as this form of poetry ironically allows the reader to understand 'more than the speaker understands' (Slinn, "Dramatic Monologue", p. 82). Browning speaks through the voice of the Duke to reveal his flawed character to the reader. The reader builds an awareness of the power of the speaker's imagination to shape immorality in his wife, while, blinded by his jealousy and pride, the narrator remains completely ignorant of these details.
The opening line immediately indicates The Duke of Ferrara as a possessive and unaffectionate collector of wives. The use of the demonstrative pronoun, 'That's', perfectly demonstrates his impersonal attachment to his 'last' Duchess in a sequence of unfortunate wives. He prefers to speak indirectly about his spouse through her painting, rather than the lady herself, and avoids the familiarity of naming her personally throughout this monologue, suggesting his scornful rejection of her. In describing his wife's treatment of him and other men, he fails to convince the reader that, regardless of punishment by death, her behaviour deserved to be punished at all. He suggests that she practiced flirtatious behaviour with other men as 'her looks went everywhere' (24), but he better implies his damaged pride that she didn't spend her days looking up to him. He expresses that she thanked men for gifts 'somehow - I know not how' (32), but unintentionally displays his irrationality in using only his imagination as evidence of his wife's offences. He snobbishly cannot tolerate that she reduced his 'gift of a nine-hundred-years-old name' to 'anybody's gift' (33), revealing his arrogance and excessive pride in his noble birth. R.W. Buchanan described Browning's eagerness to judge men as comparable with 'a messenger from heaven, sent to teach the highest of all lessons to rashly-judging men'. The Duke certainly doesn't escape Browning's criticisms as the reader is invited to judge him while he enjoys unfairly judging his late wife.
Following revelations of weaknesses in his character, he goes on to explain that his wife was completely ignorant of his dissatisfaction with her behaviour as she received no warning from him. He places what he should have said in speech marks throughout the poem, yet these words remain a mere unperformed rehearsal of his intentions, as he was too cowardly to verbally address marital problems with his wife. Browning implies that he never spoke of them through fear that he would fail in managing her and exercises his new freedoms now she 'stands' (4) there in a stationary form as a manageable painting. In a description of their final engagement together, the Duke confesses that he only gave commands immediately before 'all smiles stopped together' (46). While his frustration with her treatment of other men discarded his authority in their relationship, she is reduced to the role of the passive by his imperatives and violent termination of her life. Browning heavily criticises the merciless nature of a man who rashly punished his wife, not only without evidence of her convictions, but without delivering a warning of his dissatisfaction.
In Webster's A Castaway, we imagine that Eulalie writes or speaks her monologue in isolation without a present auditor, causing her to develop an argument in anticipation of objections from her absent, imagined judge. However, Browning imagines an engagement between the Duke and the father of his next bride where the Duke presents his last Duchess in the form of a threat to her successor. Browning indicates the presence of the auditor by using the formal address, 'Sir' and the use of the second person pronoun. While the auditor in dramatic monologue is 'constituted more by the speaker's perceptions than by any separate reality' (Slinn, "Dramatic Monologue", p. 81), there is only a single indication that the father managed to insert any speech into the conversation. This can be found in the Duke's response 'Nay, we'll go / Together down, sir' (53-4) near the end of their acquaintance, implying that the Duke has been questioned. Gregory perceives the parallels between the 'rhetorically violent' speaker who forces his speech upon the listener and the dominance of domestic violence (Gregory, "Robert Browning", p. 495). The Duke displays modesty only once throughout his speech, when he ironically claims to lack skill in this very area. The reader is aware of the strength of his rhetoric, placing him closer to his flawed character with pretended modesty.
While the use of the dramatic monologue to criticise society is common to both male and female writers, their genders often decide that of the speaker they decide to voice. Therefore, female writers commonly voice the oppressor, and male, the oppressed. The task of women writers is particularly remarkable because they place prostitutes and illegitimate children, not only as the subject, but the narrators of the poem, which was a brave practice in this hostile society. For example, Dante Gabriel Rossetti uses the prostitute, Jenny as the subject of his poem of the same name, but does not attribute her with a voice or active role in the poem. Men and women are united in their concern for oppressed gender, but women writers discuss issues indirectly in defence of themselves and their interests. The dramatic monologue requires the writer to adopt different techniques and styles to authenticate themselves as the speaker of the poem and they are keen to design dramatic monologue as a political statement by encompassing a plurality of voices in a single voice. While Browning often fails to solve moral problems in his dramatic monologue, women writers provide society with answers in ambitious hope to inspire social change.