Hugh Blair voices an attack on the practices of 18th century poets in his Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres for the circulation of artificial and lofty pieces among the intellectual classes which detached poetry from the concerns of the everyman. Blair exposes the harmful effect on works that are motivated by money and reputation rather than using the imagination with an aim to educate, inspire, move, delight and communicate with the reader. Wordsworth and Coleridge's Lyrical Ballads indicated a revolution in literary history in reaction to the poetry created in the Augustan period, favouring tastefulness, elegance and civility. Wordsworth and Coleridge experiment with a new way of using language in this volume, eradicating features of 18 th century poets by composing organic, liberated and passionate verses inspired by real people and concerning real life experience. We Are Seven offers an excellent example of the power of simple and direct language to relate personal emotion and experience that is successful in accessing a wider readership. Wordsworth emancipates the common man into art by elevating the natural to the supernatural, entirely worthy of his glorification.
Wordsworth favours the ideas of childhood by allowing the thoughts of the naive, inexperienced and innocent little maid to triumph over the narrator's need to affect her young mind with the reality and cynicism of an adult's. While the narrator strives to educate the young girl, her view of death forces him to revaluate his own comprehension of this concept and, ironically, her insistence eventually succeeds in educating him. Wordsworth challenges the reader to consider if a child's incomprehension of death is any different from that of an adult. The process of death is only as factual as far as a person's heart stops beating and their physical body begins to decay. Everybody is limited to this scientific knowledge and therefore unable to ascertain what happens to a person when they die, making this an issue of great religious concern. While the adult attempts to correct the child, Wordsworth highlights that 'we are seven' is a statement which cannot be corrected as, in the absence of an absolute truth, the child has the freedom to believe whatever she chooses.
Wordsworth's imitation of a child is entirely convincing throughout this work by his application of simple diction that avoids any decoration including modifiers, figurative devices, and abstract nouns. In addition, the child's lexis is often limited to monosyllables:
This use of basic language is appropriate to voice a child of limited education and experience. The simplicity of her speech also helps her speak plainly and directly without any ambiguities, projecting an honest, transparent, young mind. Wordsworth continues to voice the young girl by using a euphemism to describe the death of her sister, Jane.
It is typical of a parent to relate death to a child using a euphemism in order to protect them from the pain and sorrow caused by death. This phrase avoids any implication of permanence as the use of 'away' is very casual, like a person leaving a room or going on a holiday. The child certainly does not see death as an indication of the end of a relationship or a person which is a refreshing perception. The child speaks of death without any fear, sorrow or mystery and treats the loss of her brother in a similarly hopeful way:
The child continues to avoid referring to the loss of her siblings as 'death' and, on this occasion, she implies this process is obligatory and her brother's involvement is purely passive. Rather than demonstrating incomprehension here, the child expresses a very mature attitude by accepting that it was simply her brother's turn to leave.
The infant perceives death as a kind image by describing the moans of her ill sister when 'God released her of her pain' (51). She implies that God intervened in her sister's life when the quality of her life diminished by relieving her of her sickness in death. The child displays very Christian ideas by using God as the figure who decides who should live or die. Christianity embraces a very positive perception of death in the belief that while it marks an end to life on earth, it creates the beginning of a new life with God in heaven. It is not at all surprising that Christianity has shaped the hope of this child.
The little maid does not seem to feel at all distanced from her siblings in death. She appears to enjoy regular visits to the graveyard where she sings to them, eats with them and plays around their graves. Death has not prevented her from keeping them company and they are still a comforting presence to her. The child is unfazed by being the only active figure in their ongoing relationship:
Wordsworth has manipulated the natural syntax of these lines by end-focusing the activity of the young girl in order to emphasise her as independently fulfilling the active role while the deceased are merely passive figures. This stanza opens with three simple clauses which supplement the undecorated diction of the child, lacking the complexity of adverbs and adjectives. This list of verbs describes day-to-day occupations of the young girl, suggesting that she doesn't distinguish the graveyard from other locations of her day. Since her family has moved from her home to the graveyard, she has simply extended her surroundings and feels equally comfortable in a setting that can be bleak and upsetting for others. While she provides company for her siblings, she understands they shall never suffer solitude as their bodies have been buried next to each other:
It does not concern the child that her deceased relatives cannot interact with each other or that they are separated by coffins. Her concerns are straightforward; if their bodies are physically close together they are accompanied in death.
It becomes increasingly difficult not to pity the young child who has experienced so much of death although her age should limit her experience. Wordsworth uses the seasons to convey the passing of time between the girl's loss of one sibling and then the next. In one stanza, she enjoys the summer playing around her sister's grave with her brother and in the next she loses that same brother:
The seasons are always a cause for excitement to children as the weather allows them to enjoy different outdoor activities but there is a sense that she misses out on these ordinary childhood experiences. The conditional verb, 'could' suggests there was an opportunity for her to enjoy the new season but this was eradicated by the death of her brother, helping the audience to sympathise with the young girl.
Wordsworth uses an oxymoron by including this piece in his collection of Lyrical Ballads as the lyric poem is conventionally non-narrative, unlike the style of We Are Seven. Wordsworth freshly interprets the old ballad tradition by retaining the simplicity of the ballad but incorporating a greater depth and complexity in the lyric form that is commonly used to convey an emotion or state of mind.
Wordsworth ironically accompanies the grave subject matter of this poem with a light-hearted tone embroidered in the ballad form. The poet adopts many conventions of this form including a four-line stanza with a simple abab rhyme scheme and heavy use of dialogue. Wordsworth uses iambs in tetrameter followed by trimeter and repeats this metre pattern to complete the stanza:
At the end of the iambic trimeter, a natural pause is formed before continuing to the second tetrameter that assists the formation of a sing-song, childlike rhythm of a nursery rhyme. Wordsworth adds to the buoyant, cheerful mood of this poem with internal rhyme on the words, 'green' and 'seen' in this particular stanza. The flow of the ballad is interrupted in the final verse where Wordsworth extends the stanza into five lines and modifies the rhyme scheme to abccb. This verse marks a change of speaker to the exasperated adult following a long period of dialogue from the young girl:
The adult introduces and bluntly repeats 'dead', exposing a great contrast between these two voices following the child's spirited euphemisms that avoid the grim reality of this description. Wordsworth's use of punctuation emphasises the adult's frustration that the child insists on referring to life and death as a unified existence. Wordsworth suggests a level of sophistication and complexity in the mind of the adult that does not pervade the mind of the child by using enjambment for the first time in this poem:
By allowing the child the last word, Wordsworth encourages the reader to allow the child's way of thinking to triumph over the adult's.
Wordsworth challenges the reader's perceptions of death in this poem by offering two opposing reactions to this process. The poet asks if the child's cheerful perception of death is simply attached to the incomprehension of her age or if it is an inspirational and heart-warming attitude that even adults could adopt. Wordsworth questions if an adult is better prepared for the emotional distress of this experience or if years just develop a more bleak and sorrowful reaction to loss that can never return to a child's beautifully simplistic methods of dealing with adversity.