An analysis of the concept of vicarious liability, whereby an employer can be held jointly liable for torts committed by employees 'in the course of employment,' serves to illustrate some of the salient points of debate underlying tortious liability in general. 1 In particular it highlights how, although the courts are careful to disguise it, policy choices play such an important role in adjudication, and the consequential inevitability of a balancing between competing interests in society. These policy choices are central to a common law system endeavouring to meet the changing needs of society.
While a substantial proportion of tort claims are dealt with by vicarious liability, its reasoning and scope remain equivocal. The debate is fuelled by a gradual expansion of the principle; some critics allege that there is:
So, what are the justifications for vicarious liability? How might it be argued that it forms the best compromise between the needs and freedoms of different groups in society? The most coherent rationale is that vicarious liability is a form of distributive justice, based on the 'deep-pockets' theory. 3 As it is a policy justification, this theory is not explicit in the ratio of English courts, yet, judges are undeniably influenced by the fact that employers are in the best position to bear the costs of tortious claims 4, through raising prices, reducing shareholders' dividends, lowering real wages and purchasing liability insurance. 5 The individual tortfeasor, particularly in a hazardous enterprise, would have neither the resources nor the access to insurance markets necessary to meet such costs. Leaving tort claims to be resolved on this one-to-one basis would lead to a disproportionate financial crippling of individual defendants and a frustrating
unmet need amongst claimants. 6 Crucially, tort law is concerned with monetary results, regardless of the
Similar pragmatism is raised by the argument of economic efficiency. Firstly, it is more efficient to negotiate a single insurance policy between the employer and the insurance company than for every employee to purchase their own policy. Secondly, if employees were individually liable businesses would be faced with a defensive, less productive workforce, and, in fields of particular risk, recruitment difficulties. Thirdly, in line with the deterrence theory 7 it is suggested that, in general, an employer has ultimate control of his business and is therefore in the best position to maximise safety in order to avoid tortious liability.
Rogers refers to vicarious liability as responding to a 'popular, instinctive reaction . . . a rather vague feeling that an employer should have to pay for the harm generated by his enterprise.' 8 This 'vague feeling' may be better expressed in terms of fairness or justice: the employer profits from his business therefore it is only fair that he should also bear the risk of connected losses. The employee's actions are so closely associated with the employer that the law constructs a more inclusive 'legal persona.' This may be a fiction, created for the purposes of assignment of liability, yet, in a purely causative sense, 'but for' the employer having employed the tortfeasor the harm would not have occurred. 9
As the 'but for' test allows very remote causes through, it is important to note that the employer is not held entirely responsible for the tortious actions of his employee. Vicarious liability is joint and several, thus recognising the employee's blameworthiness and, in theory, allowing for the claimant to sue that individual employee. Furthermore, the employer is protected from unjust burdens by a variation on the causation principle of 'novus actus interveniens': it has long been established that an employer will not be held vicariously liable if the employee was 'engaged on a frolic of his own.' 10 Even where vicarious liability is established, the blameworthy employee does not escape all personal responsibility: he will usually be dismissed and could technically be required to indemnify his employer. 11
Nonetheless, corrective justice theorists argue that the law on vicarious liability fails to respond to the substantive injustice of the tort. The law should not be about convenience and efficiency. Moreover, if we follow the logic of shifting risks to whoever is best placed to internalise the costs, why not continue until all costs are borne by the government? 12 Rather than focussing on who is best placed to compensate the victim, we should focus on who rightly should compensate the victim.
In many cases we may recognise the 'popular, instinctive' 13 desire to impose vicarious liability, but surely the instinctive reaction of the populace would not be to impose liability on the employer of a person who causes an accident when on the way to work 14; when the employer has expressly prohibited the act 15; or when the employee intentionally commits the tort? 16 Such uncertainty in the scope of the doctrine threatens the principle of fair warning and the rule of law. Moreover, modern methods of working are undermining both the 'control' justification of vicarious liability and the reasoning behind the deterrence theory. 17
In practice, vicarious liability may be criticised for diverse reasons. On the one hand, for many businesses payouts will be covered by compulsory insurance, rendering responsibility redundant and filtering deterrence into the relative insignificance of an increased premium. 18 On the other hand, particularly where vicarious liability is imposed on non-commercial and non-profit organisations 19, there is a danger of its crippling effects on socially useful enterprises. 20
It appears anomalous that English law should foster a 'compensation culture' running contrary to western libertarian, individualist philosophy. As Atiyah highlights, litigation enables lawyers to profit from a process which can be psychologically damaging to victims and is ultimately a lottery. 21 The alternative advocated by Atiyah is social security, the ultimate form of distributive justice, which would put an end to the 'industrial preference' and 'accident preference' by providing on the basis of need rather than cause or blame. His proposals are morally sound, yet to put them into practice would require a complete practical and ideological overhaul of a system which deplores taxation and dependence on a 'nanny state.'
At the other extreme, an alternative may lie in Personal Accident Insurance. Yet, private insurance could only be a complete alternative if it was compulsory and, while we are willing to pay insurance to protect our property, it may be objected that to extend this to the most basic human right of physical integrity would be to take individualism too far. Furthermore, such a system would be economically inefficient, with insurance companies being the only real winners.
Finally, it should be noted that the imposition of direct, personal liability on employers for breach of a non-delegable duty 22 is increasingly being favoured over vicarious liability, largely because it is easier to prove. As this preference is approved in further areas of the law of negligence 23, the importance of vicarious liability will fall. Yet, this alternative is not always appropriate on the facts of the case. Additionally is it not something of a misnomer to label an impersonal organisation 'personally' liable?
Given the advantages and disadvantages of the various means of compensation, the 'conclusions'of the Pearson Commission 24 were to be expected. Yet there was some disappointment at its failure to respond to the popularity of New Zealand's extra-legal 'No-Fault' compensation scheme. 25
Certainly, there are valid criticisms of vicarious liability. There is a need to clarify its scope and to acknowledge that 'policy choices are being made all the time.' 26 If we are to avoid a US-style litigation explosion, there is also a need to at least maintain, if not increase, the availability of extra-legal compensation. However, on balance, vicarious liability is the best compromise as it finds the middle ground between individualism and socialism. It derives compensation from as close to the tortfeasor as is
feasible, redistributing costs within the sphere of those who freely choose to engage with the business which generated the harm.
1 N.H.V. Rogers, The Law of Tort (2 nd edn., 1994), Sweet & Maxwell, at p30
2 Hepple, Howarth & Matthews, Tort: Cases and Materials (5 th edn., 2000), Butterworths, at p1017
3 Limpus v London General Omnibus Co. [1862] 1 H&C 526, per Wiles J
4 Hamilton v Farmers [1953] 3 DLR 382
5 op cit, n1, at pp30-40
6 J.G. Fleming, The Law of Torts (9 th edn., 1998), LBA Information Services, at p411
source.
7 c.f Glanville Williams (1951) 4 CLP 137; Richard Posner, The Economics of Justice (1981), Harvard University Press
8 op cit, n1, at p32
9 John Keeler, 'Thinking Through the Unthinkable: Collective Responsibilities in Personal Injury Law', Common Law World Review, 2001, LexisNexis
10 Joel v Morison [1834] 6 C&P 501; General Engineering Services v Kingston and St Andrew Corpn [1988] 3 All ER 867
11 Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978 e.g Lister v Romford Ice and Cold Storage Co. Ltd [1957] AC 555
12 op cit, n2
13 op cit, n1, at p32
14 e.g Compton v McClure [1975] ICR 378
15 e.g Rose v Plenty [1976] 1 All ER 97
16 e.g Racz v Home Office [1994] 2 AC 45
17 e.g Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v Coggins and Griffith (Liverpool) [1947] AC 4
18 c.f Peter Cane, Atiyah's Accident's, Compensation and the Law (6 th edn., 1999), Butterworths, at p190
19 e.g Lister v Hesley Hall Ltd [2002] 1 AC 215
20 op cit, n16, at p189
21 c.f P.S. Atiyah, The Damages Lottery (1997), Hart Publishing
22 c.f Broom v Morgan [1953] 1 QB 597; Elliott v Bickerstaff [1999] 48 NSWLR 214
23 e.g Barrett v Enfield London Borough Council [1999] 3 All ER 193 - local authorities
Waters v Metropolitan Police Comr [2000] 1 WLR 1607 - police
24 Royal Commission on Civil Liability and Compensation for Personal Injury, Cmnd 7054, 1978: recommended retention of the 'mixed system' of accident compensation from tort law, social security and insurance.
25 Appendix
26 B. Markesinis & S. Deakin, Tort Law (4 th edn., 1999), Oxford University Press