'The first thing to remember about Donne,' writes critic, John Carey, 'is that he was a Catholic; the second that he betrayed his faith." John Donne was born into a staunch Catholic family in Elizabethan England. At this time, followers of this religion were sensible to display an outward obedience to the Protestant consensus in order to avoid persecution. At the accession of James I to the English throne, there was little adjustment to the oppressive, religious framework laid out by Queen Elizabeth in the sixteenth century. While the pacifistic king offered greater freedoms for Catholics, it was clear that Catholicism in England was becoming an old, dying tradition which suffered a severe decline in numbers with the passing of each decade. Donne proved to be no exception to the masses who sought to protect their interests by rejecting their socially damaging roots. Donne's conversion to the Church of England allowed him greater access to employment and connections, which were formerly restricted by his faith, such as his position as Member of Parliament. It would be unreasonable to suggest that Donne abandoned personal, theological beliefs in his decision to leave the Catholic Church, as his passionate concern with his relationship to God is hardly concealed in his divine poetry. However, the Holy Sonnets seldom display a man who is entirely convinced by the doctrines he has chosen to follow. It is possible that the pressures of the Jacobean age framed his decision in converting to Protestantism.
While a member of the Church of England has the freedom to adopt the beliefs of Laudianism, Arminianism or Calvinism among others, N. Tyacke considers Calvinism as 'the theological cement of the Jacobean church'. There are a number of controversial concepts inherent to this tradition, formulating a far from moderate religion, which is difficult for man to accept. P.G. Lake highlights that it is not necessary to maintain that all the English Calvinists 'were indeed convinced Calvinists,' and it appears that Donne is indeed unconvinced. The Holy Sonnets display the poet's struggle to accept this unforgiving religion, which will not allow man to escape from the heavy burden of original sin and offers little hope in return for reconciliation. Donne uses the sonnet form to express his frustration, incomprehension, desperation and fears that he associates with the boundaries of Calvinism.
In 1796, John Byrne printed The Articles of Belief, professed by the followers of Calvin, Luther, and Arminius with an aim to dissolve the disagreement among Protestants concerning the five beliefs of their three major doctrines. Firstly, Byrne writes that the Synod of Dort agrees to the concept of 'divine predestination' where God elects a small number of mankind to be saved, without consideration of their 'faith, or obedience whatsoever,' and commits the remaining masses to 'eternal damnation, without any regard to their infidelity or impenitency'. Understandably, Donne struggles with this concept because it leaves him helpless, without a guarantee, or even a favourable chance that his consistent devotion will direct him to salvation. John Calvin admits that this is 'a cumbersome question' which many think 'nothing to be less reasonable,' but Calvin insists on condemning 'the curiousness of man' for questioning the fairness of God. Discontent with this explanation, Donne seeks comprehension by directing a series of arguments towards God in his Holy Sonnets. Sonnet IX uses a conversational style to address God directly, and, not dissimilar to others in this sequence, the conversation is one-sided by providing only silence in response from God. Lawrence Beaston suggests that God's apparent lack of response 'need not be an image of despair' or 'a surrender of doubts about his concern for humankind,' but rather, his absence can be perceived as a method of highlighting the great differences dividing mankind from God's divinity. While Donne's outspoken nature towards God can be criticised as confident to the level of arrogance at times, he is firmly put in his place as this sonnet develops. He opens the poem by challenging God with the following argument:
In Calvinist terms, Donne has answered his own question in the framework of this interrogative by returning to the fall of man. Donne refers to Satan as 'the serpents envious' and blames the tree of knowledge for bearing fateful fruit. Yet the poet has consciously emitted the role of Adam and Eve in this biblical story, who engineered their freewill to succumb to temptation. Donne perceives freewill as a curse on mankind, which animals and inanimate trees are lucky to have avoided. He argues that simply being a member of the fallen race staggers his spiritual progress as it 'makes sinnes, else equal, in mee more heinous' (6). While these arguments conduct the opening octave of this sonnet, Donne forms the volta at his moment of realisation that he is unworthy to challenge the mystical ways of God: 'But who am I, that dare dispute with thee?' (9). Sentiments of Calvin are echoed here in his belief that it is not fitting 'that man should freely search those things which God hath willed to be hidden,' (Calvin, The Institution of Christian Religion, p. 750) as wisdom would be adopted that God does not wish to extend to man. Within the brevity of the sonnet form, Donne has expressed the identical crave for knowledge that was responsible for the fall of humankind. He displays man's vulnerability to temptation, which constantly leads him off the path of righteousness.
Byrne published that 'by Adam's fall, his posterity lost their freewill,' so their acts of good or evil are 'predestined by the eternal and effectual secret decree of God' (Byrne , The Articles of Belief, p. 4). This idea implies that man is unable to please its leader because the human race cannot escape from the weight of original sin brought into the world at its creation. In the first of the Holy Sonnets, Donne expresses his fear that the depths of hell cannot be avoided by mere mortals:
Donne can accept that his fallen race is vulnerable to 'our old subtle foe,' (11) causing sin to pervade every part of one's being, but he struggles to comprehend why God chose to release death into the world as punishment for this fall. He opens his sequence of divine meditations by challenging the methods of his leader with an interrogative directed towards God:
Donne's inability to, in any way, control his path after death creates the fear exposed throughout this sonnet. Without freewill, he cannot do any evil or good that God will consider in assessing if he is deserved of an afterlife. The opening octave of this Petrarchan sonnet is weighted with terms that emphasise the pace and unexpected nature of death. Donne describes it chasing him in 'haste', how it meets him 'fast' and he dares not to move his 'dimme eyes any way' (2-5) in fear that he will be struck down at any moment. However, Donne offers a starkly alternative view of death in Sonnet X of this sequence, where the poet directs insults towards a personified version of this terminating force. He warns Death against believing the fearful compliments many attach to him that deem him 'mighty and dreadfull' (2). The poet lists forces capable of undermining Death, as evidence that this process does not hold supreme control. He is described as a 'slave to Fate, chance, kings and desperate men' (9) and Donne argues that this force simply places a person in a rest or sleep, which 'poppie, or charmes' (11) can also activate. More importantly, Death's blow is only temporary, unlike the eternity of the soul. This sentiment is repeated in his sermon preached at the funeral of Sir William Cockayne Knight where Donne comforted his congregation by preaching death's impermanence. He conveyed that, although the body and soul are physically separated in death, 'they are not divorced; they shall returne to one another againe, in an inseperable re-union in the resurrection'. This comfortingly peaceful presentation of the afterlife persuades the congregation that God sacrificed himself for the everyman. This perception rejects Calvinist principles of the elect and provides a hopeful perception, which lies closer to the doctrines of Catholicism or Arminianism in the belief that 'Jesus Christ suffered death for all and everyman'. (Byrne, The Articles of Belief, p. 8)
The penultimate statement of the Calvinist's Articles of Belief concerns God's persistence in converting those who oppose him. While God would be expected to elect only the faithful for salvation, Calvinists believe that God saw equal merit in converting hateful and sinful hearts. Donne describes his heart as 'iron' in the closing line of Sonnet I, conveying that God is indeed able to draw the cold, hard, opposing heart like 'adamant'(14). While Donne appears to be a passionately devoted follower to the reader, he is unconvinced of his goodness. In Sonnet XIV, Donne invites God to inflict physical violence upon him, persuading him that his kind treatment is not enough to repair his sinful ways. He syndetically lists monosyllabic, dynamic verbs including, 'breake, blowe, burn' (4) to convey the pain he feels he deserves. Donne repeats this attitude in Sonnet XI, which he addresses to the Jews who were responsible for the crucifixion of Christ. He condemns them for crucifying the only one 'who could do no iniquitie', while foolishly passing him by who has 'sinn'd, and sinn'd' and inevitably will do again (3-4). Donne entreats the Jews to show him equal ferocity to that bravely endured by Christ, but the poet suggests that, to 'buffet, and scoffe, scourge, and crucifie' (2) him would not be a gross injustice but a fair penalty for a man who doesn't fail to crucify Christ daily in thanks for his sacrifice to mankind. In a sermon preached at St.Pauls in 1626, Donne exposes his reason for desiring the feel the wrath of God:
Donne expresses his fear that God will reveal no sign of his anger to his followers until the Last Judgement when he will inflict his wrath upon them in the form of damnation. Donne expresses these sentiments since his ordination, implying his belief that committing his life to God will not allow him freedom from destruction. In this expression, Donne develops support of man's total depravity attached to Calvin tradition.
However, there is certainly a hope that pervades Donne's poetry through moments of desperation, despair and frustration. Donne begs to receive God's violence because he seeks to be repaired, renewed and bent back onto the path that will lead him to eternal life. The verb, bend, appears frequently in the poetry of Donne, establishing his belief that he can be shaped in the image of God, providing his leader grants him mercy. This image is conveyed in Good Friday, 1613. Riding Westward where Donne is 'carryed towards the West' when his 'soules forme bends towards the East' (10). A.B Chambers provides this image with an explanation, aided by Donne's own words from his second volume of sermons:
This image suggests that the only path to God involves receiving punishment, as man must absolve his sins before he can be invited to eternal life. Donne's dependency on God, in that he is the only one able to bend the soul of man, draws parallels with Calvinism in the belief that a man who raised up the dead can certainly convert people to his ways.
In the closing sestet of Sonnet XIV, Donne describes his relationship with God in terms of a love affair. He asks God to understand that he loves him yet is engaged to Satan, who, as described in Sonnet II, is 'loth to lose' him (14). It pains him to disappoint and anger God with sin, so he entreats him to either break his attachment with him through 'divorce,' or 'imprison' him so he is deprived of the opportunity to sin again. He admits he cannot possibly 'breake that knot' (11-12) that binds him to God because he is so entirely mesmerised by him. The only way for Donne to become 'chaste' is to be 'ravished' by God (14), creating a controversial paradox. As mankind constantly chases sin, the only way to terminate this endless path is to be overthrown by divinity. Donne asks to be corrected through affliction and demonstrates the purpose of this by dictating a passage from the book of Hebrews:
Donne continues by concisely interpreting this as an indication that 'as his love lasts, he corrects us, and as long as he corrects us, he loves us'. Donne's dependency on God to defend him in search of a holy path displays the poet's faith in his leader as well as the Calvinist's tendency to play the role of the passive figure in relationship with God.
Donne's expressions of helplessness throughout the Holy Sonnets direct him closer to the doctrines of Calvinism, where man cannot control the desires of God. Donne's crave for affliction to absolve his sins fits comfortably within this tradition, as does his perception that he is utterly diseased by sin, because Calvinists cannot forgive the total depravity of man. Indications of hope can be found in his deviation from this religion, indicating Calvinism's punishing nature compared to the softer doctrines of Arminianism and Catholicism. While he despairs at his subjection, it is possible that he is drawn to this religion because it offers less kindness to man which he believes to be just treatment of the fallen race.