Susan Wiseman calculated that the latest possible date for the composition of The Famous Tragedie was only four months after Charles' execution as George Thomason, a collector of contemporary publications, received this text on 26 th May. The speed at which this work was composed and printed displays the desperation of fervent Royalists to defend themselves and their murdered King. Dale B. J Randall perceives that the Interregnum was a time when many 'set down their own reactions as spontaneously and passionately as a man might curse', which often produced tastelessly conspicuous literature. A Puritan church leader, Richard Baxter, expressed his concern that the freedom of the press allowed 'every ignorant, empty braine (which usually hath the highest esteems of it selfe)' to communicate with the masses through poor quality literature. During the civil war, the press provided a tool to connect the upper and lower classes by offering, whether true or false, political information. This freedom contributed to the production of low standard material as it encouraged the common, less educated man to have an opinion and express it through writing. However, Lois Potter suggests that the pressure of a heavily informed, divided nation even affected the creative output of capable writers as they sometimes rejected 'their theories about style and vocabulary when, abandoning them, they could score a point'. Both Wiseman and Randall agree that, while The Famous Tragedie is neither a dull nor weak play, it is heavily flawed as a piece of persuasive literature. Its strong, aggressive attack on the Reformation and abandonment of any 'degree of religio-political analysis' limits its readership only to 'those already hostile to parliament' (Wiseman, Drama and Politics, p. 68). Although the success of this propaganda, in persuading its seventeenth-century readership, cannot be measured, this text was hardly written in vain as it is widely believed that royalist writings strongly assisted the restoration of the monarchy in 1660.
Although Parliament attempted to censor politically-sensitive material in the 1640s, beginning with the abolition of Star Chamber in 1641, the severity of penalties was not enough to silence Royalists until the Printing Act of 20 th September 1649, which promised heavy fines or imprisonment in response to treasonable behaviour (Potter, Secret Rites and Secret Writing, pp. 18-19). Therefore, The Famous Tragedie was printed at a time when masses of politically-biased literature was produced. This competitive market developed an attraction to attaching a writer's name to a work as 'a work written by a saleable author was considerably more saleable and authoritative than an anonymous one' (Potter, Secret Rites and Secret Writing, p. 23). Considering this advantage, it is possible that the writer chose anonymity in adherence to the courtly tradition not to publish material, rather than to protect himself from Parliament's wrath. The writer's decision to apply the vernacular to the large majority of his work displays courage as the accessibility of this language to the public increased the threat to the Reformists and, as a result, to the writer. However, a single bilingual sentence has been inserted in the introduction, which begins, 'Basely Butchered by those who are' and concludes in Latin. Although the play's entirety is the work of the writer's imagination, the dramatic choice of propaganda allows him, elsewhere, to indirectly place damaging criticism in the voices of others. The use of Latin cleverly disguises his personal attack on Parliament, while the bilingual sentence is enough to indicate to readers, who cannot comprehend Latin, that this section contains cutting insults. Potter explains that a true indication of the risk of creating royalist propaganda heavily depended on the anonymity of the publisher, as it was more difficult for them to be concealed (Potter, Secret Rites and Secret Writing, p. 23. The publisher of The Famous Tragedie has not attached his name to this work, suggesting that he perceived danger in performing illegal practices and chose to protect his income and reputation with anonymity. Nevertheless, Royalists were keen to write and publish, secretly if necessary, to continue the work of their King who controlled the first royalist literary activity. They were also eager to demonstrate disregard for Cromwell's authority through rebellion during the Interregnum.
The writer is determined to emphasise that, while the Parliamentarians act under the pretence of improving the nation, they perceive progression in destruction. This becomes apparent before the play has even begun. In the prologue addressed to Charles II, the writer uses italics to imply that the term adopted by Parliamentarians, to describe their practices, is ironic:
The author asks his readership how the termination of a valuable life can possibly be a progressive step towards a better nation. He suggests that the term, 'reformation', is an unconvincing disguise for the evil motives and practices behind parliament, and warns the public of their sly rhetorical complexity.
From September 1642, public theatres were closed on the grounds that the times were unfit for public sports. By creating this dramatic piece of political satire during this period, the writer, like so many others, displays his contempt for parliamentary decision and seeks a return to the conservative past. While these constraints cause him to write for a readership, rather than an audience, he comfortably uses theatrical devices throughout his play, such as the inset masque, promenading and soliloquy. These devices suggest an intention to perform the text which, in itself, undermines Parliament's authority, without the additional aggravation of inserting high-profile Reformists as leading characters in his play. The writer voices contempt for the 'beastly Ignorance' of the Reformists who initialised a project to 'raze, our Theaters to the ground' (VI). The use of antithesis in this criticism emphasises the devolutionary effect of the supposedly evolutionary Reform on the nation.
Potter observes that Parliament imposed transformation on old English customs, which led the Stuarts to become identified with 'the same golden past that had previously been associated with Elizabeth I' (Potter, Secret Rites and Secret Writing, p. 28). The prologue to the gentry, included in this work, outlines the author's hostility to the transformation on social hierarchy that had previously been provided by the monarchy. He enumerates literary icons, such as Johnson and Devenant, in order to promote the cultural aesthetic of Charles I's court, and declares the Reformists 'villaines' (VI) to have thieved such traditions from society. Potter asserts that this argument often distanced the public from support of the Royalist party as Parliament's "levelling" design was more attractive to the ordinary man. However, the writer's presentation of power-hungry Cromwell suggests that the abolition of social hierarchy is an unattainable ideal. He implies that, while Cromwell may publicly reject the hierarchical structure of the monarchy, he privately hopes that the regicide will earn him the crown. Cromwell's hypocrisy is particularly implied in his soliloquy where, in privacy from his army, the reader has the opportunity to witness his true thoughts. Following compliments to Peters' rhetorical skill in previous scenes, he does not hesitate to mock his 'deere Buffoone' (20) in his own company. Fairfax is also a victim of his leader's contempt. Cromwell's General and Commander in Chief is rejected as a 'silly Foole' (20) in private, and immediately transformed into 'our great Generall the Lord Fairfax' (21) when Cromwell is immersed in company. The writer implies that Cromwell is a dishonest and manipulative leader who, in elevating himself above his men, hypocritically parallels the structure of the monarchy and places himself in the highest possible position.
The inseparable connection between religion and politics in the 1640s is emphasised as early as the Patron's introductory note to this work:
The Patron implies that a man's political stance during the civil war was an indicator of the sincerity of his faith in God. Essentially, the war emerged from conflicts in religious thinking. The Royalists favoured the Church of England, as governed by the King, who heavily encouraged Archbishop Laud's influence. In stark opposition, the Reformists connected Laud's worship with popery and sought to destroy anything which attached Protestantism to the Roman Catholic Church, including The Book of Common Prayer, church festivals and images of saints, angels and persons of the Trinity. John Morrill came to the conclusion that a compromise between Parliamentarians and Royalists could have been attainable by returning to 'a sort of Anglican Congregationalism' where episcopacy was abandoned. However, the dismissal of this peaceful settlement, by a small number of committed puritans, caused the war to happen.
Although the Reformists won the war, they had to fight a second battle to win the peace. Their decision to kill the King hardly demonstrated conformity to Christian ethics of forgiveness or repentance, creating a necessity to dramatically transform their image from murderous rebels into virtuous saints. Throughout The Famous Tragedie, the writer aims to thwart these efforts by depicting the leaders of the Parliamentarian army as licentious, deceitful villains. The writer shapes Reformists as destructive devils whose plans are 'hatch'd in Hell' (II). This comparison implies that to be a Reformist is to support the greatest enemies of God and assist them in infecting Christianity. In addition, the writer implies that Cromwell and Peters are sophisticated Machiavellians who lack the moral capacity that provides the foundations of any religion. Peters is seen extending his unethical behaviour to Mrs Lambert by successfully persuading her to be unfaithful to her husband, while Cromwell's application of his intellectual strength to deceive his public is a constant reminder that he cannot be trusted. While these attacks boast some plausibility, Wiseman is unconvinced that this technique is entirely successful. She considers that the writer's extension of satire towards 'physical attributes and sexual transgressions' simply registers 'the increasing hopelessness of the royal position' (Wiseman, Drama and Politics, p. 68). The writer certainly enters unstable territory when he directs an insult towards Cromwell's nose, using a comparison to Mount Etna, in the unlikely voice of Peters. He also suggests Cromwell would dare to taint the sanctity of his own, or another's, marriage. Unsurprisingly, this corrupt image of Parliament is heavily contrasted with flawless representatives of the royalist party, such as Charles Lucas and George Lisle, who demonstrate tremendous faith, comradeship and valour throughout this drama. They are clearly outlined as virtuous victims of the siege of Colchester as, despite surrendering, they are ruthlessly killed. Wiseman notices that the author only scars his polarisation of Royalists and Parliamentarians through his presentation of Fairfax (Wiseman, Drama and Politics, p 68). The General is witnessed suggesting a verbal negotiation with the Royalists in protection of Colchester, which displays him as a balanced, pacifistic leader. The author implies that his name can be used as an aptronym, as he is both fair in name and nature. His attractive attitude towards warfare is emphasised by the inclusion of Rainsborough, who alternatively demonstrates strong aggression and blood thirst in his treatment of the opposition:
The author's presentation of Fairfax is echoed by Milton's Sonnet XV, On the Lord General Fairfax at the Siege of Colchester, which celebrates the Reformist victory. However, Milton indicates that he has faith in this General to serve his country in 'nobler' means than war. While he can perceive 'valour' (13) in Parliamentarian warfare, this is often disguised by bloodshed. He appeals to Fairfax to rapidly restore 'truth and right' (11) to the nation in order to limit further destruction. This disagreement amongst the men of Parliament exemplifies a wider problem. Throughout this play, the writer indicates that the Reformists are a great distance from being a united force. Peters demonstrates obedience to Cromwell throughout this play until he questions why he behaves so wickedly, while the soldiers commanded to murder Lucas and Lisle cannot forgive themselves for their sins and seek repentance by murdering Rainsborough. Potter underlines this problem by observing that 'Cromwell may have said that he knew what he did not want, but not what he did' (Potter, Secret Rites and Secret Writing, p. xiii) which questions how an army can be expected to work together towards a single goal when they are ignorant of their target.
The writer uses this tragedy to look towards a hopeful future by relating sorrowful events of the past. In the second Act, before the King meets his death, Sir Charles Lucas draws parallels between him and Christ:
The grief of losing their King can, in part, be consoled by shaping a martyr out of Charles I. As early as May 1640, Archbishop Laud stated that 'no man in England (was) more ready to be a martyr for our religion than his majesty' and Potter notes that some writers ambiguously abbreviated both Christ and Charles with 'Ch' (Potter, Secret Rites and Secret Writing, p. 186). The writer's emphasis of Charles' Christ-like quality presents the opposition in an incredibly harsh light by comparing them to the Jews who bestially and unjustifiably crucified a virtuous man. This technique also endorses the depiction of the Reformation as a battle against God and Christianity. One of the writer's strongest arguments against Parliament concerns royal posterity, as Cromwell's interference in the natural order of national leadership is presented as thieving the Prince of Wales of his kingdom. The writer indicates that, while the nation's ideas of justice are conflicted, the higher powers are observing Parliament's barbarous interference and preparing to correct the balance of power by punishing them:
This threat is endorsed by verses dedicated to Charles II, which encourage him to overthrow the Reformation and avenge his father's death by accessing his rightful position on the throne. His persuasive technique is carefully crafted, in these verses, by flattering the Prince and stressing the negative effect of the 'holy miscreants, and Religious Fiends' (II) on his nation. The writer implies that, although the Royalists' current efforts have not yet been rewarded, their names will be immortalised when their present becomes history:
This is heavily ironic as the writer aims to glorify Royalist heroes throughout this play in appreciation of their efforts to preserve King and monarchy. He looks forward to a time when great men, including Charles I, Charles Lucas and George Lisle, will be rewarded for the sacrifices they made to assist the Restoration of the monarchy.
As a persuasive text, The Famous Tragedie's cleverly crafted technical foundations display potential. The writer chose to express Parliament's destructive influence on the nation, present the Reform's transformation on Christianity as an infection, and display hostility to their interference in, what could have otherwise been, a peaceful decade. However, this potential is lost amongst sensationalised rumours that are stretched outside credible boundaries. While it may have been necessary to produce shocking material in competition for readership, the writer dramatically reduces the impact of this text by inventing unconvincing accusations in an already fictional work. Therefore, The Famous Tragedie is heavily flawed, as its lack of restraint creates an unreasoned argument that says more about the desperation of the Royalist position than the injustice of Parliament.