Ibsen's Hedda Gabler and Lorca's Yerma display two female protagonists who are seen to exercise masculine behaviour throughout their tragedies. Hedda's inactivity and dependence on marriage for financial support is typical of a woman in late 19 th century, Norwegian society. However, as a woman, Hedda is expected to find her raison d'tre in being a wife and a mother, but these designs do not at all content her. By rejecting the traditional practices of her gender, she becomes more masculine, which is displayed in her treatment of George Tesman and the power she attains over Eilert Lvborg. Unlike Hedda, Yerma desperately longs to use her ability to reproduce and, in conjunction with society, thinks it's degrading and wasteful to remain barren. As much as she yearns for motherhood, her husband is not at all compelled to have children, discarding Yerma's basic freedoms as a woman. In some ways, Yerma will never have the responsibilities of a man, the strength, or dominance in Spanish society. However, by neglecting the unique, reproductive capabilities of her womanhood, she is no longer defined by her gender and her lifestyle becomes closer to that of a man.
Camilla Collett was one of the first writers to highlight the feminist problem in Norway. She vented her frustrations with the inert existence of the middle-class woman in her diary:
There is little doubt that Hedda is similarly dissatisfied with her inactive, married life. She constantly complains of boredom as her presence at home is merely decorative, while her husband is heavily involved in his scholarly interests. B.J. Hovde observes the unjustness that 'Love and marriage was a woman's career', yet they were not free to marry for love (Hovde, The Scandinavian Countries in A Sourcebook on Naturalist Theatre, p. 73). Along with women of her time, Hedda did not exercise many freedoms in choosing a suitable husband. In conversation with Brack, she confesses that she married Tesman because he was determined he would be able to support her, none of her admirers made a similar offer and, above all, her 'time was up'. Hedda's decision was accelerated by her increasing age as she depended on her beauty to attract men and, with little else to support her, she was required to consider the financial stability of her partner. These factors led Hedda to an ill-matched marriage with a man who, regardless of love and affection, she treats with an air of indifference.
Unfulfilled by her husband and with no talent for motherhood, Hedda is compelled to create her own amusement to relieve herself from boredom. She considers that Tesman could inject some excitement into her life if she could persuade him into an occupation that interests her, such as politics, as she is not at liberty to pursue this career herself. In the opening scene of this play, she offends Miss Tesman by identifying her new hat as that belonging to the maid and later confesses to Brack that she consciously upset her for her own entertainment. While this mischievous behaviour is not exceptionally harmful, her objective to control the life of another can hardly be described in the same terms. Ibsen is keen to excuse her conduct as a consequence of her gender in patriarchal society. He argues that 'women have no influence on external matters of government. Therefore they want to have an influence on souls'. Ibsen successfully highlights this as a desire among women by extending similar behaviour to Mrs Elvsted. The introduction of her character encourages the audience to compare her with Hedda, as they are both married women of a similar age. It is certain that Elvsted is proud to have influenced Lvborg in the way Ibsen describes, but to influence a person is quite different from a desire to govern lives. Elvsted explains how she directed Lvborg away from his drinking habits:
While Hedda actively seeks control of Lvborg with the intention to destroy him, Elvsted's power is not something she sought, planned or understands. Hedda scornfully perceives that she 'saved' Lvborg, but her positive influence is completely undone by Hedda, who consciously moves him to destruction. Although Ibsen delegates a similar aspiration to these women, it is considerably more dangerous in the hands of the malicious, treacherous protagonist who applies greater pressure to Lvborg and achieves extreme results.
In comparing these women, it becomes clear that Elvsted does not experience inertia like Hedda in this play. She escapes her unhappy marriage because she cannot bear to simply be a convenience to an old man who 'cares for no one but himself' (25). Despite the criticisms of society and monetary concerns, she pursues a better life with Lvborg, who respects her and, through education, has elevated her to a level of equality with him. She seeks her 'comrade in arms' because she enjoys his company and he provides her with a focus by allowing her to assist him in writing his revolutionary works. J. Chesley Taylor observes that 'Hedda is a character who is torn between two selves: the romantic self, which desires to be liberated from all social restrictions, and the conformist self, which wants society's approval and thus dares not violate its taboos'. This causes Elvsted and Hedda to react opposingly to identical situations. Hedda is similarly unhappy in her married life with Tesman but, while she admires Elvsted for taking a brave leap, she would never repeat her actions because she lacks courage to challenge society's conventions. She used to enjoy Lvborg's company, like Elvsted, but she left him out of cowardice when their friendship began to develop. Therefore, while Ibsen realises that the contained lives of women can lead them to a useless, mundane existence, he displays hope in Elvsted who is an active figure because, unlike Hedda, she does not fear scandal for the sake of her happiness and a motivational object in life.
In a letter to Moritz Prozor in 1891, Ibsen explains the androgynous nature of his leading role:
Ibsen certainly succeeds in his intentions as it soon becomes clear that, although Hedda agreed to marry Tesman, she in no way belongs to him. Throughout the play, both Brack and Lvborg reject Hedda as Tesman's wife by addressing her by her maiden name. Theoharis C. Theoharis believes that 'Tesman makes a quantum leap in choosing his spouse', suggesting that society will challenge the idea of them as a couple and Hedda's class and elegance will always elevate her above her husband. The imbalance in their relationship means that Tesman will forever be indebted to her. He struggles financially to provide everything she wants in the house because he would not want to disappoint his wife and never asserts any masculine authority over her in fear that she would rebel. She constantly pushes the boundaries of his tolerance by behaving rudely to his family and refusing to spend time with him. However, most things escape his notice because his naivety cannot contend with her advanced skills in manipulation and deceit. An example of this can be seen in the fourth act of this play when Hedda pretends that she burnt Lvborg's manuscipts in concern for his interests. While he should see through her lies, he is too delighted and overwhelmed with his wife's pretended display of affection to question her honesty.
Hedda's use of pistols displays a predatory aggression which can associate her with the 'femme fatale'. She is seen threatening only men with weapons, which Brian Parker interprets as an enjoyment in reducing men 'to their biological level'. She delights in the authority that her pistols attach to her, but provokes entirely different reactions from her victims, Tesman and Brack. While Brack controls her actions with calm, authoritative imperatives such as, 'Don't point that thing at me' and 'Don't play the fool' (37), Tesman cannot trust her not to operate the pistols. He panics, expresses sheer terror and begs her to put them away, highlighting her manly control over him. By showing both reactions, Ibsen implies that Hedda's relationship with Tesman allows her to become more masculine because, as perceived by Theoharis, his 'gender is neuter' (Theoharis, "Hedda Gabler and "The Dead", p. 797). In Hedda's company, he becomes effeminised by submitting to her will and establishing no control over her. Meanwhile, she is at liberty to exercise the authority that is traditionally employed by the man within patriarchal society, where Ibsen locates his play.
Although Lvborg is less pitiable, Hedda also succeeds in directing his actions. Theoharis explains why the audience should be particularly impressed by Hedda's triumph over Lvborg:
Hedda is a sophisticated Machiavellian, whose intelligence outwits that of two learned scholars. Her demonic capabilities are thoroughly compelling and exemplify a woman's capacity for ingenuity. At the end of this play, Hedda's situation is reversed as her life is placed in the lecherous hands of Brack. However, Brack stumbles upon this knowledge and promises that it will be contained, unlike Hedda's skilled, pre-meditated attack on Lvborg. Hedda cannot bear to be controlled by another, although many women of her time were disciplined by men. She ends the action of the play by returning the control to her fatal hands and, in doing so, she restores her masculine independence.
Yerma's tragedy is set in Rural Spain where women's lives were similarly governed by patriarchy and society's code of honour. Through the dialogue of women, the audience becomes aware of the harsh restrictions placed upon them by men, such as arranged marriages. In the opening scene, Yerma describes how some girls 'trembled and cried before they got into bed with their husbands', suggesting that unwilling, ill-prepared girls were coerced into marriage at too young an age. In his essay entitled, "Honor, Blood, and Poetry in Yerma", Gustavo Correa outlines the Spanish woman's physical boundaries as 'the walls of her house' and her occupation as simply 'matrimony'. This is echoed by a young woman who complains of her arranged marriage and the expectations attached to this role:
The young woman resents the forced coupling of men and women and doesn't understand the necessity of such a system. She is keen to express the unfairness of a society which locates women in the suffocating parameters of the house, while the men are allowed the freedom of the field. Lorca firmly establishes Yerma in the home by confining her to this space for the full length of the opening scene, while her husband and friends come and go. More than a physical restriction, her stationary position can be viewed as a symbol for her immobility in life, which is rapidly becoming stale without the development of children. Unlike Hedda, Yerma is keen to embrace the woman's life of matrimony and motherhood. However, matrimony alone is not enough for her, as she cannot be certain she loves the man her father chose. She admits that, 'from the first day' she was engaged to Juan, she began 'to think about having children' (76) which, she believes, is not too much to expect from him. Not dissimilar to Hedda, Yerma requires an object to which she can devote her time and attention. While she doesn't reject the household occupations attached to her gender, there is a frustrating void in her routine that craves a child:
The cleaner the house, the more Yerma is reminded that this is her only responsibility and focus for her care and attention. She argues that her house is dying from a tense atmosphere between husband and wife and an emptiness which craves some lively, new energy.
Throughout the play, the audience is encouraged to feel greater sympathy with Yerma as the protagonist's anticipation and preparedness for a child is emphasised. She has a naturally feminine, maternal quality, as evident when she voices concern for Juan's health and nags him to improve his diet. She offers first-time mother, Maria, advice on pregnancy but is unable to provide information from first hand experience as she has not had the opportunity to practice her theories. Yerma longs for a child, despite her full awareness that it can be a demanding and exhausting struggle:
This was argued in response to a woman's complaints of motherhood, highlighting Yerma as fully-prepared and eager to experience a suffering that provokes moans from other women. By presenting the audience with the desperation of a barren woman and a host of examples of others who complain of their maternity, Lorca encourages great pity for Yerma, as she appears more deserving and willing than those blessed with children.
Yerma is located within a society where accordance with nature was celebrated and those who neglect the natural designs of their gender were vulnerable to ridicule and torment. Correa outlines the theme of maternity as essentially Spanish because 'the structure of Spanish society, with all the powerful force of tradition, has imposed upon its women a duty, a mission; before all else she is to be a mother' (Correa, "Honor, Blood and Poetry in Yerma", p. 98). To a modern audience, it would not be unreasonable to assume that the weight of society's pressure on Yerma would lead her to another man who can provide her with what belongs to her. This play opens with an illustration of Yerma's dream where a shepherd leads a child by the hand. As the only characterised shepherd of this play, Lorca suggests Victor could be the subject of Yerma's desires and does not abandon this idea as the play progresses. Although they are only ever seen innocently speaking to each other, their relationship triggers suspicions throughout the village, which could be enough to ruin her reputation. Juan is concerned for his family's honour, prompting him to regularly remind his wife that stepping outside of her home and simply speaking to others is a dangerous occupation for a woman. In particular, Yerma's barren state increases her vulnerability to gossip because she is expected to create a scandal by seeking another man. The washerwomen cruelly place Yerma in a category of unfortunate women who 'put on face powder and rouge' and 'wear a sprig of oleander in pursuit of a man who is not their husband!' (83-4). These expectations cause Yerma to be watched under a particularly strict eye in anticipation of a scandal. However, the women are not aware of the importance Yerma places on preserving her honour, as emphasised by Correa:
The protagonist displays her admirable morality by refusing the pagan old woman's offer of her son to provide her with a child. Yerma is greatly offended that the woman should presume she could be led to such a development by her desperation. As this option is closed to her, she is completely dependent on her stubborn and unfeeling husband, establishing her firmly in the submissive position of the woman.
In an argument with Juan, Yerma exclaims 'How I wish I were a woman!' (82) which commences the new fluidity of her gender. Without a child, she no longer shares the unique quality that unites and defines women and she is therefore no longer restricted to the occupations of her gender, to submission to Juan or dependence on him. Lorca engages Maria and Yerma twice in this play, with a gap of three years between the two meetings. In their first conversation they are perceived as very intimate friends, sharing secrets and advice with each other. However, it is clear that Yerma has become estranged from Maria in their latter engagement as her child has created a distance between them. Yerma has replaced her hope with bitterness after a painful five years of emptiness and cannot help but feel deprived when she sees her friend with a baby. Yerma no longer feels she belongs to the female sex, allowing her to extend her behaviour into masculine territory.
As Yerma's frustration progresses, her attitude to Juan undergoes great transformation. Yerma evolves from a submissive, disciplinable woman into an argumentative and opinionated power as she begins to prioritise her own interests. At the beginning of the play, she is seen sombrely agreeing to Juan's request to stay indoors but her days of yielding come to an end when she begins to dominate in arguments with Juan by confusing him with sophisticated metaphors and firmly expressing her criticisms. Yerma explains the reasons behind her transformation in the third act:
With little else to lose, Yerma refuses to resign herself to a barren life without a fight. She sees her rebellious words as a beautiful defence of the son she will never bear. Her powerful words become action in the final scene where she violently triumphs over her husband in terminating his life.
Yerma's new freedoms allow her to spend her time in a different way:
In performing a man's task, Yerma further detaches herself from her sex by crossing the boundaries that divide women from men. Yerma seeks a new independence in departing from her gender. 'If only I could have them all by myself' (101) suggests her desire to separate herself from men and displays her resentment for their necessary involvement in pregnancy.
Yerma never wants the life of a man, yet she is placed nearer to this gender by her husband in disallowing her children. She resents her ability to exercise new freedoms in this role because she never requested independence, power or to extend her occupations outside of the home. However, Hedda resents her inactivity and dependence on men that is attached with being a woman. She rejects motherhood and matrimony in favour of mastering skills that aid her control over men. While Hedda aspires to acquire the authority of a man, Yerma wants to use her abilities as a woman, yet neither of these figures are presented as traditionally belonging to a single gender, making them tragic, androgynous figures.