In the exploration of punishment in Greek tragedy, the targeted characters are ones of power; kings and the divine with the authority to administrate punishment to the guilty. Guilt commonly follows crime or sin and the level of justice in the given punishment must be assessed. For example, while a punishment is directed at a single person, it often affects the lives of many, which increases the severity of this penalty. The level of justice will assess the ability of people in power to make judgement and decisions. Euripides' Bacchae and Sophocles' Antigone display the capability of both man and the divine to error but the consistency lies in the authority of the gods. While man can be judged, the gods are the highest level of authority and are therefore able to design an image of justice that cannot be challenged by man. These are both fierce and bloody plays that do not attempt to disguise the conflicts between men, in the case of Antigone, while the dissonance lies between god and men in Euripides' tragedy.
Euripides introduces the gods as brutal and vengeful figures in the opening of this play through Dionysus' explanation of his birth:
Dionysus is keen to publicise the truth of his parentage to the doubting city of Thebes in order to establish himself as a new Olympian god who is worthy of their worship and praise. He believes that he is the son of the most powerful of all gods, Jove, who had an affair with Semele, Cadmus' mortal daughter. Dionysus implies a precarious birth which he later explains as the product of 'Her's immortal vengeance' (page 1) against his mother. Many sources agree that Dionysus was the product of two mothers as, provoked by Her, Jove revealed himself to pregnant Semele who was struck down by the sight of the divine figure that mortals cannot endure. Euripides suggests that while Her's jealousy enraged the action, Jove's fury was the guilty, catalytic power that 'Struck dead the bold usurper of his bed' (2), forcing him to bear Dionysus in his thigh to save him. By blaming Jove for Semele's death, Euripides attaches a brutality, ruthlessness and disregard for human life to this god that will be echoed by his son during the play. This account warns of the inharmonious relations often found between humans and the divine and emphasises the superior power of the gods over mortals through divine intervention.
Bacchus continues to prepare the audience for the tragic drama they should expect to unfold by emphasising his intentions in visiting Thebes:
Bacchus' intentions are wholly destructive, directing a play which, 'rather than a cautionary tale, is a vision of total despair'. He doesn't only wish to convince the city of his power but intends to inflict a gruesome punishment on the people for their sinful behaviour and instigate fear in them like their fears of any divine authority. The target of Dionysus' vengeance is collective as he believes that each and every citizen is guilty of persecuting him, rejecting his name in holy prayer and denying him as a god.
Dionysus' first stage in his intricate plan of vengeance targets the women of Thebes who, possessed by their malicious leader, have been forced from their homes and reunited with the raw landscape where they perform Bacchic rituals involving dancing in bare feet and sacrificing animals. Their harmony with the bare mountains and the beasts erodes the barriers between humans and the natural world, portraying the women as wild, savage and uncivilised. Their transformation into maenads pollutes the rational, innocuous order of the Theban lifestyle. Diller describes the effect of the injection of Bacchanals into Greece as 'the colourful intermingling of wild ecstasy with calm tranquillity, of every day life with unaccustomed events' which 'constitutes both its attraction and danger'. The attraction of the Bacchic culture lies in its devotion to liberation but this detachment from the rigidity of the civil order infuses a dangerous chaos within the city. As the embodiment of customary political authority, Pentheus immediately perceives Dionysus as a threat to his city and spurns the 'womanly man' who has infected Thebes with 'a new disease' (13) that he is determined to control.
As the leading representative of Thebes, it is inevitable that Pentheus will receive the greatest impact of Dionysus' punishment. However, he further attracts the angry god's vengeance by ignoring the advice of Tiresias and Cadmus who think it wise to demonstrate an outward recognition of the god even if 'he were no god' (12). Although these elderly citizens follow their own advice, this does not allow them exemption from Dionysus' cruel retribution. In particular, Cadmus is heavily affected as he is exiled from the race he established and the murder of his grandson terminates the future of his family. While these facts highlight the merciless nature of Bacchus who is quick to cut down anyone who doesn't immediately praise him, it is possible that this god refuses to save these individuals as he can see through their pretence. Cadmus admits personal motives behind his Bacchic celebration. He is concerned for his treatment by the gods in death that he fears is soon approaching and is delighted that his daughter is believed to have given birth to an immortal:
Considering Bacchus' treatment of Cadmus and Tiresias, there is no guarantee that, had Pentheus reacted differently to his intrusion, he would have been saved from the wrath of the unforgiving god. However, by actively opposing this force, Pentheus commences a heavily imbalanced war with the divine that originates from his desire to defend himself and his city from something he fails to comprehend:
Furthermore, he is outraged that someone should have the effrontery to undermine his authority over the city that he governs. Pentheus allows his anger to inspire a foolish hubris in him which guides his sense and judgment to a fight with the inevitable. Diller perceives that the winner of this fight will be dependent on who has the greatest measure of sophia which denotes 'the grasping of a situation or task and the ability to master it'. While Pentheus arrogantly believes he has a clear understanding of how to overcome the threat of Dionysus, Bacchus is realistically confident he will effortlessly triumph over his enemy (Diller, "Euripides' Final Phase, p. 364). Cadmus demonstrates the dreadful consequences of challenging an immortal through an account of the tragedy of Actaeon who claimed to be more skilful in hunting than Artemis. He reports an equally brutal punishment to that Pentheus painfully experiences at the end of this play; he was 'rent in wrath to pieces' (13). Pentheus' intentions are purely theomachein (hopeless) but he is utterly blinded by his pride.
In pursuit of conflict with a god, Pentheus is described as 'crazed' and 'at the height of madness' (13) by Tiresias who is frequently portrayed as the voice of wisdom and rationality. Dionysus and his foreign cultures have been condemned with similar descriptions throughout this play by both the chorus and Pentheus himself. Their irrational behaviour is just one of the numerous similarities these characters share:
Johnston implies that Pentheus' conflict with his cousin forms from a rejection of Bacchus as a member of his family as well as a divine figure.
Following his capture of the women of Thebes, the object of Dionysus' punishment becomes narrowly focused on the individual, Pentheus. Firstly, Euripides creates dramatic irony by fooling the king into believing he is only a follower of Dionysus, rather than the god himself. He then further ridicules him by encouraging him to wear women's clothes after creating an earthquake that shatters Thebes to ruins. The peak of Dionysus' cruelty is in his design of Pentheus' death where the immortal delivers a double blow; not only is Pentheus killed by his citizens possessed by his enemy but his very own mother. Pentheus' last words before his death form a desperate plea to his mother to return to her senses and recognise him as her son:
Euripides conforms to a popular convention of Greek theatre by verbalising Pentheus' death through the narration of the messenger, rather than designing this tragedy to be visualised on the stage. While the complexity of this particularly bloody scene would have been the primary motive in the playwright's methods, simply an aural account of the action allows the audience to use their imagination which often feels more realistic and dramatic than simply a presentation of reality.
Pentheus shows a failure to recognise the extent to which he is responsible for his own fall, expressing no guilt or regret. Therefore, it is difficult to perceive Pentheus as the tragic hero of this tale as he does not have the opportunity to reflect upon his actions. However, Schechner describes the actions of Agave, who, it can be argued, adopts the role of tragic hero in her brief but essential presence in the play:
It is not unreasonable to suggest that Agave is delivered the most severe punishment by Dionysus in this play as she performs unforgivable sins outside of her control. She then continues to inspire the audience's pathos by unconsciously expressing her delirium following her lethal actions. Most importantly, she is returned to consciousness to suffer the process of anagnorisis when she discovers the harsh reality of her hunt.
While Pentheus suffers bodily torture, Agave experiences a mental agony that will be intrinsic to her being for the duration of her life. Diller suggests that the audience can particularly sympathise with Agave because, unlike her son, 'we learn nothing of her resistance' (Diller, "Euripides' Final Phase", p.360). Her punishment is not terminated there either as Dionysus then thinks it appropriate to exile her and her family from Thebes. This is where the severity of this god is put into question as the audience is provoked to consider what kind of justice is administered here. Dionysus provides the people with a single warning in the play, towards Pentheus by advising him not to attempt to defeat this god. This is the only trace of mercy offered by this god who perceives his victory as a god in the devastation of a city and its people. Euripides displays a version of divine justice that breeches on insanity, greatly accentuated by the pleasure this god takes in wreaking his rage.
In Sophocles' Antigone, Creon plays the role of an equally proud, power-driven king who allows these ambitious discrepancies to misguide his character towards a catastrophic error of judgement. In this drama, the brutality of the gods seen in the Bacchae is transferred to the humans who are shown to be just as capable of bitter vengeance. However, Creon demonstrates tremendous guilt and regret for his merciless actions, highlighting the essential difference between gods and mortals; mortals are human, who sin and evaluate their actions with a conscience that does not allow them defence against lamentation.
When both heirs to the Theban throne are killed in battle, Creon feels inclined to establish his new authority as king with a merciless command to deny Polynices his burial following his traitorous actions to his fatherland. Creon invades the territory of the gods by rejecting an unwritten law that a dead body must be buried in order to be passed into the underworld. The king ambitiously attempts to overrule the authority of the gods who, he believes, are sure to support him in this decision as they are gods of the city who would not 'celebrate traitors'. However, Antigone correctly believes that the gods would fully encourage her actions and thinks Creon deluded to suppose that 'a mere mortal, could override the gods, / the great unwritten, unshakeable traditions' (82). Kitto suggests that Antigone 'is working with the gods, and the gods are working in her - exactly as Aphrodite, later, works in Haemon against Creon'. While there are no immortal characters in this play, divine justice is alternatively demonstrated in the actions of characters, including Antigone and Haemon but particularly in the warnings of Tiresias. The seer complains that the 'the public altars and sacred hearths are fouled' (111) with the carrion torn from the unburied corpse. He warns the proud king that the gods cannot possibly support this disrespect to their places of worship. More importantly, Creon has 'robbed the gods' (115) of a child of the earth and this injustice will only be resolved by surrendering a child of his own to them. While Creon is the leading power of Thebes, his decisions are also judged by the gods whose greater power allows them to justly punish the king.
Creon exhibits a hunger for cruelty in this play that increases in severity the more his pride and authority is challenged. In the king's opening speech he introduces his pitiless character by graphically describing his intentions for Polynices' corpse; that it become 'carrion for the birds and dogs to tear'. Creon understands that his law completely disrespects Polynices and his family but his concerns lie with the state. Knox reminds the contemporary audience of the common Greek reaction to Creon's punishment:
While the explicit description is unnecessary, Creon's actions are not thoroughly irrational at this point. He demonstrates an unwavering dedication to the state in his promise of death to anyone who acts against the interests of Thebes by disobeying his law. However, when it is revealed that his law has been violated, he is outraged that somebody should have the nerve to undermine his authority and his pride guides him to irrationality. He is determined that someone should suffer the punishment of death, regardless of whether they are guilty. He threatens his sentries with death for failing to seek out the culprit and Antigone's misfortune becomes their fortune when she is caught. When the king is challenged by Antigone, he cannot bear that a woman should mock his authority and promises her 'the most barbaric death' (83). Ismene indicates that killing Antigone would severely punish his son, Haemon, who is lovingly devoted to her, but Creon does not at all intend to reconsider his decision. However, when Haemon appeals to Creon, it becomes clear that rejecting his son's wishes is more than a rejection of the interests of his family over the state. This interaction between father and son is very revealing of the king's motives in the deliverance of his punishment. Haemon intelligently begins a plea to his father by feeding his ego with praise, declaring that he is subordinate to his father in everyway and he will never hesitate to obey his word. Unsurprisingly, Creon thoroughly delights in these compliments until Haemon indicates his support for Antigone. Rather than asking Creon for mercy based on his personal interests, Haemon relates the grief of the city who wholly sympathise with Antigone as they believe she has acted gloriously. At this point, Creon proves the instability of his devotion to the state by expressing 'The city is the king's - that's the law!' (97). The king is determined not to expose any weakness by altering his decision on the words of others, which he considers to be secondary to his own. Whether his actions are supported by the city is of no interest to this leader who solely perseveres to establish his authority over the city. Creon seems to believe that the greater the punishment, the greater the fear, inspiring him to kill Antigone in front of his son's eyes.
While Creon's intentions are utterly inhumane, he is certainly not the only character in this play who is guilty of irrationality. Antigone rashly decides to disobey Creon's command in the understanding that she will be punished with death. Kitto outlines Antigone's reasons for her rebellion as 'loyalty to her family, love of her brother, religious duty' and 'sheer physical and emotional revulsion against the horror' (Kitto, Sophocles, p.53). Antigone is single-minded, wilful and passionate, disallowing her to consider the sense in her sister's reasoned argument. Instead, she shames Ismene by condemning her for acting selfishly and betraying the interests of her family for the law of Creon. She provokes her into guilt by no longer referring to Polynices as 'our brother' but 'my brother' (63) and condemning her dishonour of the gods. Although Creon's punishment extends to a loss of marriage and children for Antigone, she shows little regret throughout the play, but rather an acceptance of the consequences of supporting her brother. When Creon finally regrets his decision and sees reason, it is too late for Antigone who, 'independent to the last, has chosen her own way to die'. (Knox, "Introduction", p. 53)
Unlike Dionysus, Creon both receives and delivers punishment in this play as he is subordinated by the omniscient gods. His decision to abandon Polynices' body to the elements punished Antigone's family. and indirectly destroyed his own. He deservedly receives a twofold punishment in the loss of his son and wife in the final scenes of Antigone. Knox discusses the suitability of this punishment:
Creon, like Thebes in the Bacchae, has painfully learnt a humbling lesson. This lesson encompasses the importance of using wisdom, of finding a balance of reverence to the gods and controlling pride. This lesson could similarly be applied to Pentheus whose lack of wisdom and pride leads him to the inevitable task of challenging the gods. While man is blamed for the tragic consequences of Antigone, Euripides has been considered as 'a critic of the Olympian gods' (Diller, "Euripides' Final Phase, p.356), suggesting that this play condemns the actions of irrational Dionysus. Both plays adopt the idea that, without rationality, power can be a dangerous thing to possess, both among humans and the divine.