Constitutional theory provides for the supremacy of Parliament as the primary legislative body. Yet, contrary to The Declaratory Theory of the Law [1], the nature of language; the complexity of content; the unpredictability of future cases; the need for statutes to provide for potentially conflicting interests; the limitations of a crowded parliamentary timetable; and the effect of contextual factors, confers upon the courts an active, discretionary role of statutory interpretation (Zander, M., 'The Law-Making Process' (4 th edn., 1994), Butterworths, at pp. 106-08). As their reasoning forms a precedent for future cases, when faced with a new point of controversy within a statute, theoretically the courts should seek an interpretation corresponding to the parliamentary intention behind that statute. In practice, however, statutory interpretation is not so straightforward.
The case of Manchester City Council v McCann [1999] 2 WLR 590, CA is an example of the wide scope of judicial discretion, both in deciding which 'rule' of statutory interpretation to apply and in subjectively applying it. The case was concerned with the interpretation of s.118 of the County Courts Act 1984, relating to the powers of the county court to protect its witnesses by punishment of those guilty of contempt of court. This essay shall consider the court's reasoning behind its decision on the two material facts of the case:
Although s.118(a) of the CCA 1984 provides for power to commit for a contempt which occurs 'in going to or returning from the court', the trial judge felt bound by the conflicting limitation of s.1(2), which stipulates that county courts, as inferior courts of record, only have the power to commit for contempt 'in the face of the court.' As s.118 provides for the offender to be taken into custody, the judge felt his authority was restricted to committals for contempts made in the face of the court. In his interpretation of the statute, the trial judge was guided by the general presumptions against deprivation of liberty and alteration of the common law [2]. Adopting a contextual approach, in terms of the statute as a whole, it was assumed that the phrase 'in the face of the court' was to be used to establish the boundaries of s.118.
On appeal, however, the Court of Appeal found that the mischief, that the county court's jurisdiction cannot extend to contempts outside of the courtroom, was already provided for by the common law. Although the cases cited by the trial judge were not directly applicable , the Court of Appeal based its decision on Bokhari v Blessed (1994), Court of Appeal (Civil Division) 7 November 1994:
This reasoning of Sir Thomas Bingham MR, that adopted by Lord Woolf MR in Manchester City Council v McCann, is purposive. Yet, in essence, it is simply a literal interpretation of the section in question. A literal reading of s.118 was not taken to conflict with the intention of providing the county court with the jurisdiction to protect its witnesses and hence ensure justice within its proceedings. In this case the grave effects of the contempt on the witness and his family [4] demonstrate that the intention of parliament should be applied to the situation in question and its equivalents. Contrary to the trial judgement, Woolf emphasises that 'the county court's power to commit for criminal contempts are those to be found in section 118, no more and, importantly in this case, no less.' There is no doubt that returning from the court is literally covered by s.118 and, therefore, there is no uncertainty which would dissuade from a decision resulting in a penal measure.
The applicability of s.118 to the second issue of the case is more contentious. Whilst s.118(1) only provides for power to commit for contempts consisting of insults or interruptions to the proceeding, it is clear that the contempt in this case was a threat [4]. The court was thus faced with the question of whether threats can be included in a definition of the word insult. Does the county court have the power to interpret the statute as including protection against threats to witnesses? This question was not addressed by the trial judge, as the case was wrongfully decided on the point of the contempt not being in the face of the court. However, the Court of Appeal was drawn to its significance by obiter comments in Bokhari v Blessed (1994).
In his decision that the threat should be considered a contempt for which the county court had power to commit, Lord Woolf, a literal interpretation of this point not capable of reflecting his purposive approach, relied upon the Mischief Rule. As the parliamentary intention behind s.118 was to enable the county court to deal effectively with affronts to the process to justice, it may be viewed as an accident that the mischief of threats was not explicitly provided for by the literal wording of the statute. This purposive construction of the word 'insult' to include threats enables the law to respond to unforeseen socio-political changes: Woolf's use of the Mischief Rule was a policy decision, based on the fact that the county courts now deal with more and more serious cases and, accordingly, its jurisdiction in dealing with contempts should not be restricted. The precise words used to intimidate the witness are irrelevant, as the effect of this threat was the same as that of an insult. Therefore, a strict, literal interpretation of the statute would have resulted in injustice and absurdity.
This use of the Mischief Rule in line with Denning's liberal, flexible approach [5], is questionable. Lord Diplock argued that the Mischief Rule should only be applied in very
limited circumstances of difficult ambiguity [6]. A particular caution, as was identified by the
trial judge when addressing the first point of statutory interpretation, is expected in cases of penal consequences. In this case it is arguable that there is no ambiguity to the word 'insult.' Understood in its plain, everyday sense, as it would be interpreted by an ordinary man, an insult is not the same as a threat. In this decision, Manchester City Council v McCann knowingly departed from the precedent of R v Havant Justices, ex parte Palmer [1985] Crim LR 658. As the Mischief Rule is traditionally limited by previous common law rulings, this adds to uncertainty over this case of statutory interpretation. Finally, following the established rule of language, expressio unius exclusio alterus, it would appear wrong to extrapolate threats from a specific provision for insults and interruptions.
However, the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal by Manchester City Council, establishing the ratio that where (i) a witness is threatened, this threat constituting a contempt of the proper proceedings of the court, (ii) and the threat occurred when the witness was 'going to or returning from the court' (per s.118(1)(a)), the county court has power to commit for contempt. In effect the court reaffirmed the fact that the powers of the county court to commit for contempt are strictly those given in s.118, whilst providing a new, wider definition of the word 'insult.' This case demonstrates the fact that approaches to statutory interpretation cannot be neatly categorised into one of the three 'rules.'
[1] per Brett MR, Munster v Lamb (1883) 11 QBD 588, CA, at pp599-600)
[2] Cases cited for the defence: Reg. v. Lefroy L.R. 8 Q.B. 134; Reg. v. Judge of Brompton County Court [1983] 2 Q.B. 195; Bush v. Green [1985] 1 W.L.R. 1143; Reg. v. Bloomsbury County Court, Ex parte Brady, The Times, 16 December 1987
[3] c.f. affidavit of witness (Mr Nield)
[4] Mr McCann is quoted to have shouted 'I'll fucking have you, you bastard.'
[5] c.f Royal College of Nursing v Department of Health and Social Security, [1981] AC 800
[6] c.f Duport Steels Ltd v Sirs [1980] 1 All ER 529