"Hello," to the elective I had been planning since my first year of medical school. It was a week since I had cleared my end of year examinations and now I was literally half a world away from revision and examination stress. I chose Egypt for my elective because I wanted to study emergency medicine in a non 1 st world environment and also take the opportunity to improve my spoken Arabic.
Cairo is a city at once confrontational and yet evasive. It is home to 16, 18 or 20 million depending on whom you talk to. But all agree that it is an all-out assault on the senses. On arrival the city will either seduce or repel. I was of the former persuasion and could not wait to explore this noisy, chaotic, vast and unpredictable location. The doors to Cairo airport split open in a mechanized mitosis and I was greeted by the khamseen, a dry and very dusty wind storm which blows in from the parched Western Desert at up to 150kph (93mph).
Taxis are cheap and provide an excellent means of exploring the city, which covers 214 sq. kilometers. There are five millennia of history to see in a city that guards its secrets well. Historic buildings are buried in age-old quarters of the city and everywhere is teeming with humanity; the corpuscles that give this ancient body life. The high population density and limited space can feel oppressive especially when the summer heat begins to rise beyond 30C. On hot days it is a blessing to be near the river Nile and to be cooled by the breeze that floats across its shimmering surface.
I was based at the Kasr El Aini Teaching Hospital which is the oldest and largest medical school in the Middle East. I chose to spend my time at the intensive care unit called the ICU, Professor Hossam Mowafi, 3rd unit. The days were long, consisting of 12 hour shifts, with an on-call every other night. I was expected to participate fully in the running of the ward. The doctors reminded me that the only way to advance professional development was through direct experience; "practice, practice, practice." After two weeks I felt a good deal more confident in my clinical skills and had learned a lot of emergency medicine.
There were many things that surprised me at the ICU. I had not anticipated that all the ward rounds would be conducted in staccato-paced Arabic. Although the Egyptian doctors studied medicine in English they did not have much opportunity to practice conversational English. I had to spend two or three hours every night studying Arabic but by the end of the first fortnight I was able to take a basic history in Arabic.
Some of the senior house officers very kindly offered to show me around their city. In an effort to combine medicine and sightseeing they would ask me two questions at the start of every journey; "Where do you want to go?" and "What do you want to learn?" I had a tutorial about orthopaedic surgery in the shadow of the sphinxes paw. I was given a verbal tour of ENT whilst we explored the treasures of the excellent Egyptian museum.
On the 7 th of April the doctors and I were at one of the myriad Ahwa's (coffee shops) that dot downtown Cairo. As we chatted amongst the heady apple-scented sheesha smoke our telephones began to ring in unison. We all looked around at each other to see who was instigating the prank. As we answered our telephones we realised that it was no joking matter. There had been a bomb blast in the Khan al Khalili bazaar. We were to report to the hospital immediately. It was insisted upon that I come because my English was more fluent than the Egyptian doctors and I might be needed to brief international reporters. We jumped into the car and sped towards the hospital. I flicked through the radio channels in order to catch a news bulletin - nothing!
"News black out." Said one of the Doctors gravely, "The government does not like to scare the public, or more importantly the tourists."
We had to push past photographers and press agents including CNN, NBC and the BBC to reach our ward. On arrival we were informed that the patients had been taken to another hospital but we were to remain on site in case there was another bomb. I was relieved but a little disappointed; speaking to the press would have been a great elective story. I was immediately embarrassed by my callous attitude especially when so many people had died and were injured. An American citizen, a Frenchwoman and a man who was probably the bomber had been killed. Eleven Egyptians and nine foreign nationals had wounds caused by nails and broken glass. We were warned the number of dead could rise; four of the wounded were in a critical condition.
The attack had shocked and angered the Egyptian doctors. They kept apologising to me as if they were personally to blame for the violence, we retreated to the doctors' mess to watch the news. If there had been a news blackout it had since been lifted. All the channels featured the bomb blast. The bomb had been detonated near the cafe we had been at last night and the night before, we would have been there tonight if we had not decided on a whim to go somewhere else. The familiar site was littered with glass, metal fragments and body parts.
"Why are they killing innocent people?" I asked.
"The bombers are trying to stop tourism so they can bring down the government of President Mubarak." One of the doctors said, "The bombers claim to be acting in the name of Islam, but what they are doing is the opposite of Islam. Islam is about kindness." As if to corroborate his sentiments the television screen panned across the scene of devastation and closed in on two Egyptian women in long black robes and headscarves caring for a western male tourist whose shirt had been blown off by the blast. The tourist was bleeding; one of the Egyptian women took off an outward layer of her veil and covered him while the other offered comfort.
Later, Ali Gomaa, the grand mufti of Egypt, appeared on television to condemn the attacks calling them "treacherous crimes that are totally against Islam and the teachings of Prophet Muhammad (pbuh). People who think about carrying out similar attacks must realize that they are not doing something heroic but are committing a great, unforgivable sin since Islam is totally against terrorizing people."
On the 30 th of April the doctors and I celebrated my birthday at the pyramids of Giza. I had been there many times before; they were very big, very old. I felt humbled to celebrate my birthday in their shadow. The Ahwa owners and shop-keepers seemed very glad to see us.
"Business is bad, tourists think there might be a bomb here next and they are staying away. The terrorists are killing people with bombs and starving us Egyptians in the process."
Whilst we were enjoying ourselves we overheard people talking about a bomb blast. At first I thought they were talking about the April the 7 th bombings until our mobile phones began ringing in unison again. We instinctively rushed to the hospital. There had been two terrorist attacks. A man, later identified as Ehab Yousri Yassin, had strapped himself with explosives and nails and jumped from a bridge near the Egyptian Museum, detonating the device. He killed himself and injured three Egyptians and four foreigners. In a separate incident and within minutes of the Egyptian Museum incident Yousri's sister and his fiance opened fire on a tourist bus in southern Cairo near Salah Eddin Citadel, injuring ten people, including four tourists. Yousri's sister shot the other woman dead before turning the gun on herself. All three were related to Ashraf Said, a suspect in the Khan Al-Khalili bazaar blast who died in police custody. Authorities said the attacks were "apparently acts of revenge for Said who they think was tortured to death during the investigation."
When we got to the hospital we realised we were not needed and the injured were being taken to another hospital. Just before midnight I thanked the doctors for the kindness they had shown me over the past eight weeks and said goodbye. I would love to recommend my elective because I did thoroughly enjoy it but I will have to state truthfully that Egypt is currently not safe to visit. Especially after the bombings in Sharm El-Sheikh on the 23 rd of July 2005. I am aware that advising people not to travel to Egypt plays into the hands of the terrorists but the atrocities look set to continue. It will be the Egyptian people who will suffer the most, either directly or indirectly. And that is a shame because the Egyptian people are more remarkable than any man-made monument. I was sad to say Goodbye.