By 1930 Stalin had not only managed to gain extensive personal control and eliminated all his opponents but had also managed to consolidate this power. Accountable to very few Stalin was free to pursue any policy largely unchecked. He had support from the party rank and file as well as from the central committee and the Politburo. How Stalin, the least obvious of Lenin's potential successors, came to be in this position is a much contested issue. With his death Lenin left a vacuum within the party leadership creating economic, social and political uncertainty. This in turn led to a left / right divide within the Politburo over the next steps the Bolsheviks should take, with Trotsky on the left arguing for rapid industrialisation. Stalin maintained a generally moderate position before siding with Kamenev and Zinoviev forming a powerful triumvate against the man they saw as their biggest rival. After Trotsky's eventual expulsion from the party, and then the country, came the political execution of Kamenev and Zinoviev followed by their actual execution. Stalin's other main rivals faded away either in to political destruction, suicide, execution or expulsion.
I find it hard to justify putting Stalin's rise to power down to any one single factor. It does not seem possible that Stalin reached his position purely due to his own manipulation or political cunning. Nor does it seem realistic that he was put in power purely because he was the politician that most reflected the party rank and file wishes. A number of reasons seems the most probable explanation; I will argue that the most important are as follows. Stalin proved a useful asset to Lenin and as a result Lenin often supported Stalin's appointments and promotions. The positions Stalin held within the party were of vital importance in helping him gain power, his personality and his political prowess were also very important in this respect. The mistakes of Stalin's rivals during the 1920's were to prove fatal and helped him in his ascendancy to power.
Many of the opportunities which led to Stalin's rise to power were actually accumulated whilst Lenin was still alive. Infact on many occasions it was Lenin that endorsed Stalin's promotion to important positions within the party. Stalin fitted the proletariat ideal lacking in so many of the profiles of the Bolshevik leaders including Lenin's own, Stalin was singled out by Lenin as having potential. His activities to raise funds for the party included bank robbing, and he was one of those 'hard core' Bolsheviks who had remained in Russia '...underground during the winter 1905 -6 repression and persecution of revolutionaries by the Tsar." This mixture of loyalty and practicality was one Lenin could not resist, he began to rely on Stalin who proved a useful asset. 'He was an unquestioningly loyal person who actually got things done... Stalin was Lenin's political fixer...packing the congress with his supporters'. Lenin supported and approved many of the positions Stalin was appointed to within the party. Although Trotsky claimed that after Stalin's appointment as party General Secretary Lenin expressed concern; '...this cook will serve only peppery dishes', he did not seem sufficiently concerned to raise public objection until very near his death when it was too late. Indeed, prior to his appointment as General Secretary Stalin already held positions of great importance; immediately after the civil war he was Commissar of Nationalities, Commissar of the Workers and Peasants Inspectorate and a member of the Politburo. 'Several of Stalin's crucial promotions - cooption to the central committee and appointment as Pravda editor in 1912 and as General Secretary in 1922- were brought about by Lenin's influence.'
Stalin has been described as 'the spider in the web' in terms of his positioning within both the state and the party apparatus. He had influence within all the main offices, and the posts he held gave him direct authority or at the very least powers of persuasion over a very useful range of contacts. At the time of Lenin's death when the struggle for power was fought out amongst the Politburo members, Stalin had power within the Politburo, (the highest decision making body), the Orgburo, (the administrative bureau of the central committee), the Robkrin and the Sovarkom, as well as in the regional and local party cells and the regional and local soviets. The very nature of the centralised organisation of the party and the state worked to Stalin's advantage due to the links between all the offices. Though all his positions gave him important influence, it was his position as General Secretary which allowed him to build up the kind of power base which defeated his rivals. In this post Stalin was responsible for Politburo administration including the agenda for discussion, Stalin was the link between the Politburo and the Central Committee, he also controlled the '...appointment and promotion of individuals to key posts throughout the country." As Edward Acton points out, this meant that 'the careers of party officials were becoming increasingly dependent upon their loyalty to the Secretariat." This in turn gave the '...central administrative organs enormous influence over the make-up of party Congresses and thus of elections to the Central Committee and the Politburo itself'. Acton maintains that this 'movement of power from the Politburo to the Secretariat', was initially '...masked under Lenin's authority over the Secretariat." However Deutscher claims that on Lenin's return from the recovery of his first stroke he sensed the increasing power of the bureaucracy with Stalin at its head, and immediately attempted (though unsuccessfully) to rectify the situation. The position of General Secretary had been largely overlooked as a source of power due to its administrative nature; '...the bright sparks of the Politburo felt themselves above such roles." However Stalin was willing to take on this shunted position, and was good at it; he worked hard, he was reliable, made no fuss and needed little assistance from the other Politburo members. He converted secondary administrative power in to political power, using the powerful self perpetuating nature of the vested interests within the bureaucracy.
Stalin's personality and his political manoeuvring and prowess have been interpreted in a number of ways. As evil, pre-planned, ruthless, manipulation, but also as a highly skilful reaction to economic, social and political situations. Which ever interpretation bears more truth, that Stalin's politics proved enormously valuable to him during the 1920's is undoubtable. The moderate position Stalin seemed to take during Politburo meetings both whilst Lenin was alive and after his death allowed him several advantages. It meant that he 'always seemed to follow others, never to direct them', making Trotsky, who was very active during meetings, seem the biggest threat to power. 'No one could have behaved less like a tyrant or dictator than did Stalin at Politburo meetings'. This moderate position also allowed Stalin to remain 'silent during debates...intervening only to support the majority view...giving the impression of one whose will always prevailed in the end." Although this may be a rather cynical interpretation of Stalin's political stance during meetings, it did allow him the luxury of supporting which ever people he wished because his views were not an open matter. It also kept him from the trap he used against so many of his rivals; that of criticising the now revered Lenin. Stalin had few political inspirations of his own, but by taking the safe and unremarkable route of following Lenin he could undermine enemies.
By placing himself in the position of Lenin's 'chief mourner', persuading the party to have Lenin's embalmed body on public show, and playing an active role at Lenin's funeral whilst Trotsky was absent, Stalin helped to create a cult around Lenin which he was at the head of. Stalin presented his views as the legacy of Lenin, following his wishes and therefore justified in whatever action he took. Stalin's work to interpret Leninism for the working man, simplifying it and explaining it, helped him present his brand of Leninism as the only one with authenticity. This initiative to enlighten the rank and file of the party was not a solitary one; Stalin seemed to pay attention to the rank and file wishes, as well as understanding how important their support could be. It has often been argued that Stalin's political actions, and some of the apparently contradictory moves he made, closely reflected the views of the rank and file members. The recognition of the importance of lower ranking Bolsheviks gave Stalin the advantage of gaining their support where other potential leaders lacked it.
In terms of the political stealth Stalin demonstrated during the 1920's leadership struggle, the battle between Trotsky and Stalin is a revealing example. In particular the contrast between their political styles is interesting; Stalin a more typical politician tentatively weighing up policies and seeking out support; Trotsky a rather superior, aloof character, forthright with his often unpopular views on policy, and expecting support to find him. Stalin seems to have exploited the fears of the other Politburo members that Trotsky remained their biggest threat in terms of personal power. It seems doubtful that his motivations for the alliance with Kamenev and Zinoviev were based on anything more than a wish to remove Trotsky from the leadership race. The seeking out of this alliance created a triumvate which proved very powerful against the already unpopular Trotsky, and all under the cover of policy disagreement. With this kind of backing behind him Stalin 'carried battle in to the wider field of the central committee where he could always secure a majority." Trotsky's potential support was either alienated by his brusque manner, or undermined by Stalin; the committee was reminded that he was a previous Menshevik, and of the many disagreements he had openly had with Lenin. Stalin often used the disagreements and arguments of the past, out of context, as a tool against his rivals. Trotsky was pitched against the Stalin, Zinoviev, and Kamenev majority as the 'other' rather than as a legitimate opponent with a valid argument. Stalin was able to use Lenin's ban on factions to make punishable Trotsky's attempts to argue his case, and at every chance undermined him; however when the committee called for action to be taken against Trotsky, Stalin defended him and bided his time. Infact throughout the battle with Trotsky, Stalin was careful to leave the heavy criticism to Zinoviev and Kamenev, again preserving the image of the moderate amongst the irrational that had proved so useful in the past.
The final factor in Stalin's rise to power involves the mistakes made by Stalin's opponents during this time. Perhaps one of the most important and most fatal mistakes was the underestimation of Stalin by his rivals; this underestimation in turn led on to other mistakes which were to seal the fates of Stalin's opposition. It was underestimation of Stalin as a worthy and threatening rival which led Kamenev and Zinoviev in to an alliance against Trotsky who they viewed as the most potent danger. 'Comrade card index' in his administrative tasks was never identified as a real problem. It was Kamenev and Zinoviev that endorsed Stalin's position as General Secretary despite knowledge of Lenin's uncertainty about the suitability of the capricious Georgian for this post. Whilst Stalin's fate hung in the balance, Zinoviev and Kamenev argued against the public reading of Lenin's testament, in effect saving Stalin from disgrace and investigation into his conduct as General Secretary. Trotsky made several key faults in his battle with Stalin, undermining himself and loosing himself support. He criticised party bureaucracy and the careerists who accompanied it; in effect criticising and threatening the positions of the very people from whom he required support. Stalin's other opponents made mistakes which Stalin with his 'peasant shrewdness' could exploit. The united opposition was such an unconvincing union of the former enemies Trotsky, Kamenev and Zinoviev that it was not only bound to fail, but bound to rouse little support from the party. These men were all politically broken from previous rounds with Stalin, and could provide little protection to any potential supporters from the increasingly ruthless tactics employed by Stalin and his followers. Likewise, the shaky union made between Zinoviev, Kamenev and Bukharin opposing Stalin's policy of rapid industrialisation and collectivisation, was almost inevitably discovered by Stalin and destroyed through utilisation of the ban on factions rule.
To conclude, I have identified four main factors which I have argued played the biggest part in Stalin's rise to power during the 1920's. The acceptance and support Stalin received from Lenin played an important part in allowing Stalin the possibility of playing any kind of key position within the party. The positions Stalin held permitted him great influence within a large number of party areas undetected. He was able to build up a support base and eliminate opposition; turning administrative power into political power. Stalin's personal gift at politics gave him an advantage during the uncertainty after Lenin's death. Stalin defeated those he needed to, he was a competent politician and was able to manipulate situations to his advantage in a way his rivals could not. Finally, the mistakes his opposition made, especially their failure to act upon Lenin's wishes to have Stalin removed from his post, and indeed the very uncertainty in which Lenin left the party leadership, allowed Stalin the chances which led to his rise.
I have not argued that Stalin was a passive actor during his rise to power in the 1920's. He was an active force, using cunning, manipulation, and politics to engineer his position. However, he could not have done this without the other factors I have mentioned in this essay. All of them were important and I do not think Stalin would have emerged as leader of the party if any one was missing.