It is a general presumption in English Law, after the Human Rights Act 1998, that European Law gains precedence over Domestic Law. The courts have sometimes ruled Domestic Law to be incompatible when it contravenes EC Law. In the present case, R (S) v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, this declaration of incompatibility is sought with regard to Article 64(1A) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) which allows Police to retain DNA samples of those arrested in connection with criminal investigation and subsequently acquitted of their charges. The Appellants argue that this contravenes Article 8(1) (Right to life) and 14 (Prohibition of Discrimination) of the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR). However, House of Lords rejected these contentions. The Judges while formulating the ratio decidendi focus on the uniform interpretation of Convention Rights and advantages of DNA samples as a form of evidence along with their role in facilitating the detection and prevention of criminal activities. The ratio, therefore, is that interpretation of any Article of ECHR must be universal amongst all contracting States without local tradition influencing application of any particular Article of the Convention, albeit it might affect objective justification if any Article of Convention is contravened. If an Article of Domestic Law has a legitimate purpose, the practice enabled through that law, will be considered lawful rather than an abuse of official power. Since a ratio decidendi has binding force upon all lower courts, the essay discusses the reasoning behind the majority and dissenting opinions.
Lord Steyn outlines the advantages of forensic science as having "inestimable value of cogency and objectivity...not affected by the subjective defects of testimony." When speaking specifically of DNA sample and other forensic science, he stresses on their advantages to the Criminal Justice System, which in cases of domestic burglary rises from 14% to 48%. It helps to exculpate the innocent and convict the guilty thereby controlling 'miscarriages of justice'. Lord Brown of Eaton-Under-Heywood echoes similar views but considers the fear of misuse and stigmatization of the innocent in his judgment. They are legitimate but cannot curtail the advantages of having a large database for efficiency in dealing with crime and in the deterrence of present and future criminals. With regard to stigmatization, it is important to note that sometimes samples are even taken on a voluntary basis. Privacy of individuals, although important, 'is not the only thing at stake' as prevention of crime as a matter of policy is of primary concern and one of the major factors in the majority decision.
The Appellants contended that Article 64(1A) of PACE is 'incompatible' with Article 8(1) and 14 of the ECHR. Even though the House majority decision did not accept this contention, they agreed that there is objective justification for breach of Conventional Rights under Article 8(2) namely to prevent and persecute crime if Article 8(1) is indeed contravened. It is important to note that the European Courts of Human Rights (ECtHR) has not yet made a decision on whether retention of samples contravenes the Convention. The European Commission in McVeigh v UK
, states it to be an 'open question'. However, retention of photographs and fingerprints were seen not to contravene Article 8(1) of ECHR in Kinnunen v. Finland
 in relation to fraud. Therefore, according to Lord Steyn the view of the Commission, as expressed in Kinnunen v. Finland, must be taken as the view of ECtHR. Lord Rodger of Earlsferry agrees but stresses on the fact that the Court of Appeal puts much emphasis on English tradition. Such beliefs may influence parliament in changing laws but does not affect the Convention itself. He highlights the importance of looking at "equivalent Rights in the Convention" along with the "spectrum of attitudes across the contracting States." Lord Steyn also advocates that as the samples do not give out any personal information, their retention does not affect private lives of people thereby not engaging Article 8(1). He then stresses on the facts that fingerprints and samples have limited purpose, are useless unless have fingerprints from crime area for comparison, cannot be made public, and interference with private life is minimal in comparison with the advantages of a large database in the fight against crime. Thus, Lord Steyn and the majority conclude that Article 8(1) is not engaged let alone contravened by Article 64(1A) of PACE, a conclusion even supported by Strasbourg case law.
The question before the court regarding Article 14 centres on the definition of discrimination and to what extent the Appellants are discriminated against. The answers to the fundamental questions originating in Wandsworth London BC v Michalak
 form the basis of Lord Steyn's judgment on discrimination in the current case. In ascertaining whether the Appellants are treated unjustly, he emphasises that it is unfair for them to compare themselves with people who were never required to give any samples to the police in connection with a criminal investigation. This is also supported by Lord Carswell, who stresses on the 'identical position' rather than 'same relevant situation' test when determining breach of Article 14. Therefore, there has been no difference in treatment between Appellants and people in an 'identical situation'. Lord Steyn then underscores that Article 14 is 'not limitless' and going beyond the prescribed boundaries is not its goal. If this is discrimination, Article 14 can be easily exploited or over used. Thus, in order to protect public interest, the majority judgment concluded that in this case even Article 14 of ECHR is not contravened by Article 64 (1A) of PACE.
However, the dissenting judgment of Baroness Hale of Richmond concluded that the retention of DNA profile and samples is an interference of Article 8(1) of ECHR. She accentuates 'informational privacy,' the concept of a person having the autonomous right and freedom to divulge any information he chooses, without which "the very basis of a civilized, free, and democratic society could be undermined" (Canadian Privacy Commissioner). She exemplifies that if reading bank statement, private correspondence, and medical record is an encroachment of personal privacy then keeping/reading of DNA profile should also be treated in the same manner. Even though it is believed that the samples do not divulge information, their retention may provide access to personal information. Both ECtHR and European Commission also regard "keeping or storing of private information by State Institutions" as an interference with Article 8(1) of ECHR. She fears that if Article 8(1) is not engaged in this case then neither is Article 14 and therefore the State becomes free to retain any samples without going against the Convention, increasing discrimination. However, she too dismisses the appeal in favour of the advantages of retaining samples in fighting serious crimes believing there to be objective justifications for the actions of the Chief Constable under Article 8(2) of the Convention.
The retention of samples by the police is an effective tool in the battle against crime. Although, there is nothing more private than genetic information, its retention does not "tarnish the innocence of the unconvicted in the eyes of the Law." The Lords agreed and concluded that Article 8(1) and 14 of the ECHR are not contravened in this case by Article 64(1A) of PACE whereas Her Ladyship dissented highlighting the objective justification for breach of Convention Rights. However, central to all judgements, was the 'inestimable value' of DNA analysis to eliminate suspects and incriminate the guilty. This allows for greater efficiency in law enforcement increasing accuracy in dealing with criminal activity- the primary concern of society.