"Every contract entails a free agreement, but not every agreement results in a contract." While both possess the elements of Offer and Acceptance, the key difference lies in the presence of 'Consideration' and 'Intention to create Legal Relations' which transforms agreements into contracts. Both these doctrines, although established concepts of English Contract Law, have their critics and supporters. While Treitel and Cheshire support the necessity of both doctrines, some believe that Intention to create legal relations cannot co-exist with the principle of consideration and is therefore superfluous functioning only as a 'substitute' for it or assist in 'determining the boundaries of contract' where consideration does not exist as a principle (Prof. Williston- US Educationist). However, it is contended that English Contract Law can survive without consideration as Intention can perform its functions. It is the purpose of this essay to examine the role of Consideration and Intention to create legal relations establishing that both form integral parts of Contract Law coexisting as independent principles essential to its functioning.
The doctrine of consideration is a "body of rules...the function of which is to put some limits on the enforceability of agreements in law." The traditional definition accrues a benefit to the promisor and a detriment to the promisee. It is also considered an 'exchange' model, 'the reason for a promise' or 'the price paid for one'. However, in the 18 th century, the concept of consideration was subject to criticism. Lord Mansfield believed that consideration was only a means through which one could ascertain the party's Intention to enter into a contract and this, if possible in any other way, would render it unnecessary. He later modified his approach to consideration being intertwined with moral obligation, condemned by Lord Denman in Eastwood v. Kenyon
 as one which would 'annihilate consideration altogether'. Atiyah criticizes consideration as 'artificial' and believes that its traditional meaning "no longer accords with the law actually enforced in courts". He advocates that consideration should only be a reason for a promise rather than vital to its enforcement. Rigidity of consideration is another of its major drawbacks evidenced in the rule of sufficiency rather than adequacy. In Mountford v. Scott,
 promise to pay 1 was thought to be sufficient consideration without regard for the actual value of property. So, why despite criticism, does consideration survive as a legitimate test for contractual liability?
There have been many developments in the doctrine of consideration fundamental to its survival in Contract Law. While these do not affect bilateral contracts (a promise for a promise) where consideration is easily established, they have profound influence in unilateral ones (a promise for an act) where contractual intention might come into play as consideration becomes difficult to ascertain. The continuing disregard for the Benefit - Detriment Theory has modified the definition of consideration. In William v. Roffey Bros,
 the concept of mutual benefit was favoured allowing extra payment for an already existing contractual duty to be valid consideration. If the traditional definition had been applied in this case, the claimant's action would fail, as there was no detriment to either party illustrating the flexibility of the courts with regard to consideration. Its ill effects are also taken care of by the principle of Equity. Consideration performs three main functions- dealing with the problems of evidence and establishing contracts, ensuring the enforceability of promises, and providing courts with a tool to strike out various promises based on public policy. Consideration is also paramount in making and enforcing contracts. In bi-lateral commercial contracts, consideration rather than Intention is of importance. However, when considering domestic and social agreements, Intention is given priority over consideration. If there is a breach brought before a court of law, both Intention and consideration play an important role in deciding the validity of the contract. Thus, despite all criticism, consideration continues to survive as a test to ensure contractual liability. However, Intention to create legal relations is considered superfluous next to consideration despite the crucial role it plays in determining contractual liability.
Experts believe that as Intention is intertwined with consideration, its existence as an independent element is unnecessary. However, it can coexist with consideration contrary to the belief that it is only a 'good substitute' if "consideration were ever abolished". In a unilateral contract, as per Lord Denning, acceptance of an offer through action can be considered a party's Intention to create legal relations rather than consideration for the offer. 
Carlil v. Carbolic Smoke Ball Company
 is an important case that allows a response to an advertisement to be a valid contract and brings forth, to English Contract Law, the concept of Intention to create legal relations. The promise to pay hundred pounds to who so ever caught influenza after taking the smoke balls was seen as the company's desire to create legal relations, a concept re-validated in Bowerman v. ABTA
 where ABTA's advertisement was held to be legally binding. The courts, therefore, began to give importance to Intention as one of the factors essential for contracts.
Intention to create legal relations becomes essential in agreements where courts do not 'wish to have jurisdiction'. These include family, social, government, and collective labour agreements. Contractual intention, although important in domestic agreements, is sometimes difficult to establish. In Balfour v. Balfour,
 the courts held that the parties did not intend to create legal relations as they were husband and wife at the time of agreement and such a family arrangement cannot constitute a contract. This is also evident in Jones v. Padavatton
 where an agreement between mother and daughter was not a contract because the parties did not intend to create legal relations. Therefore, the general presumption is against creating legal relations in family arrangements. However, in Merritt v. Merritt,
 since the marriage was breaking down, the agreement made between the parties was a binding contract because of their intentions. Courts also give importance to contractual intention in family business as in Snelling v. John G Snelling Ltd. In social arrangements, contractual intentions come into play when validating contracts. In Simpkins v. Pays,
 an agreement between co-inhabitants was a valid contract because the nature of the agreement purported that the parties had an Intention to create legal relations. However, collective labour (Ford Motors v. Amalgamated Union
) and Public Service Agreements (Electric Company/Post Office) are 'promises in honour' and not legal contracts in spite of offer, acceptance, and consideration being present. Although in commercial contracts Intention is assumed, it becomes important if the contract is ambiguous as in the case of Edwards v. Skyways
 where 'exgratia' payment was held not to rebut the presumption of contractual intention. However, this can be rebutted if e.g. an honorary clause is inserted within contracts proving that the parties did not intend to create legal relations, as in Rose & Frank v. J.R. Crompton
. Therefore, Intention to create legal relations is a valuable principle in Contract Law and not superfluous.
Both consideration and Intention to create legal relations are important principles of English Contract Law. Although sometimes overlapping, they are 'doctrinally distinct'. Consideration plays a greater role in making and enforcing contracts whereas Intention is fundamental when viewing domestic, social, and some commercial agreements. It is argued that absence of consideration may provide a 'simpler' and 'more realistic explanation' than Intention; however, sometimes the later "may best capture the spirit of decision(s)" (White v. Bluett). In conclusion, both principles are fundamental to English Contract Law, as their coexistence is vital to its functioning.