Vince, an employee working at a building site operated by BloggsBuild Limited, died after falling from the third story of scaffolding. His death can be attributed to manslaughter by gross negligence on the part of individuals or organization to maintain a safe working environment. The facts of the case indicate that Mr. Bloggs, Managing Director and majority shareholder of BloggsBuild Limited, visited the site only occasionally. Malcolm, the site manager, took all decisions regarding the site and permitted Colin, a dangerous driver, to operate the crane- the immediate cause of Vince's death.
Recklessness has been replaced by 'gross negligence' as the mens rea required for manslaughter following the decision of Adomako
 supported by previous precedents of Bateman
 and Andrews
. It identified that once breach of duty is established, the jury must go on to consider whether the defendant's breach caused the death of the victim and whether the conduct was of such seriousness that placed the life or health at risk, to amount to gross negligence given the circumstances. A jury may take into account the degree of harm risked and the defendant's 'state of mind' when dealing with cases of manslaughter by gross negligence. Against this background, one can consider Malcolm liable since his conduct maybe seen as the main cause of Vince's death and may be serious enough to establish gross negligence manslaughter. However, the principle of fair labeling is concerned to see that distinctions between kinds of offences and degrees of wrongdoing are respected and punished proportionately. This essay will not only consider liability for the death between Sid, Colin, Malcolm, Mr. Bloggs and BloggsBuild Limited under the current law, but will also evaluate the effect of the proposed changes in the field of corporate liability, although, the decision in the case rests with the Jury.
Since the 1990s, English Law attributes liability to companies to the same extent as person although, in focusing on corporate criminal liability, there is a danger of overlooking individual fault and responsibility. The individuals constituting the embodiment of the corporation can be identified with it thereby making the corporation liable for any crimes committed by them. However, effectiveness of this doctrine limits corporate criminal liability to small organizations, as there have been only 3-4 successful prosecutions for corporate manslaughter, most notably OLL Ltd. and Kite,
 where several children were killed in a canoeing disaster. Since only Mr. Kite and his wife ran the company, it was easy to identify Mr. Kite as the 'will' of the company. However, with increase in organizational structure, it becomes difficult to identify any one 'brain of the company', as was in P&O European Ferries Ltd
 where Turner J was faced with consequences of a tragic 'accident' but unclear legal liability when no one individual could be identified to satisfy the mens rea required for gross negligence manslaughter.
The field of corporate criminal liability is a relatively new arrival to the criminal law without which companies might escape regulations and individuals may be prosecuted for faults of the company. One reason why companies escape liability is the identification test applied by courts to determine their guilt, focusing on individual officers rather than company mismanagement. This has proposed important changes in the field of corporate liability as the "defects in existing law can cause real problems and, indeed, distress". This has forced the government to rethink corporate crime.
As a response to inadequacies in the field of corporate liability, the government has endorsed the proposals outlined by the Law Commission Report No. 237. Under the proposals, the separate offence of 'Corporate killing' and 'Substantial Contribution to Corporate killing' should replace the 'identification' doctrine. This broadens the scope of corporate criminal liability and a corporation is liable if management failure (mens rea) to maintain health and safety of employees or people affected results in death, falling 'below the standards' expected. It is not essential that (1) the defendant corporation foresees or appreciates the likelihood of risk and (2) the immediate cause of death is the act or omission of an individual. The focus is on general practice of organization rather than actions of an identifiable person. This would hold accountable BloggsBuild Limited for Vince's death under the new offence of corporate killing without need to identify the conduct of any particular individual. BloggsBuild Limited should have ensured adherence to Health and Safety Regulation through frequent checks and visits. Malcolm's conduct or Colin's negligence has no influence with regard to corporate liability under the new proposals although they can still remain individually liable separate from the corporation. This criterion also affects unincorporated organizations and is of significance when attributing liability to large companies (P&O).
The proposed new offence of corporate killing does not increase or decrease individual liability but merely provide a different basis of criminal liability for corporations. The Law Commission "intended corporate killing to be exclusively a corporate crime, lacking any direct punitive consequences of individual". However, government proposed two new offences (Reckless killing and killing by gross carelessness) in trying to differentiate between individual and corporate liability. The mens rea required for reckless killing is, that the individual was aware of the risk that his conduct could cause death or serious injury and consequently, it would be unreasonable to take the risk attracting a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. With regard to killing by gross carelessness, the risk of death or serious injury must be obvious to the reasonable man causing the defendant to fall below reasonable expectations, receiving the maximum penalty of ten years imprisonment. Therefore, Malcolm and Colin cannot escape individual liability as they fulfill the mens rea of the offences mentioned above. Colin may be guilty of killing by gross carelessness, as the reasonable man would have known that dangerous operation would entertain the risk of death or serious injury. Malcolm would be guilty of the more serious offence of reckless killing as given his position as site manager; he would have known that his decisions and conduct would cause risk of death or serious injury. If he is not convicted of reckless killing, Malcolm may be disqualified from work under the offence of 'substantial contribution' to corporate killing.
Eventhough, the Law Commission's aim for the proposals is to make corporations more accountable in law where death results due to management failure; they may have some gaps that require consideration. The commission has not extended its new doctrine 'management failure' to offences, which require subjective 'awareness'. They fail to take into account that corporate intentionality is projected through their policy. It would be difficult for the jury to consider, implicitly or explicitly, how the particular company 'could have been aware' or even the correct definition of 'corporate awareness'. With regard to 'corporate guilt', serious injuries are not taken into account, as the corporation is culpable only for death. 
The government believes that under the proposals, the holding companies will not be able to evade liability by transferring their riskier activities to subsidiaries that may lack assets to pay large fines, but critics fear otherwise. Fines still remain the chief penalty for corporate liability, which companies can regain from consumers. Lastly, the proposals will be difficult to enforce on companies 'not incorporated' in Britain and where "firms are made insolvent to evade liability."

 Despite having some criticisms, the proposals may be considered stepping stone to ensure "no one should be at peril unless there is clear evidence to place responsibility for the act...then the full force of law and penalties should be applied."
The key difference between the current law and the changes proposed under the Law Commission is crucial for not only this case but also the field of corporate liability. If the proposed changes are adopted, the scope of corporate liability will widen to encompass both corporation and individuals distributing culpability in equal proportions for Vince's death. However, what remains fundamentally unchanged is that such questions of fact are for the jury to decide.