Maternally expressed genes are essential for the correct patterning and cell-fate determination in the early Caenorhabditis elegans embryo. The PAR proteins and MEX-5/6 are responsible for initial polarisation of the zygote, skn-1 is required to specify the EMS fate, the bifunctional protein PIE-1 is required to maintain the totipotent germ cell lineage and specification of the AB lineage involves a system homologous to Notch in Drosophila. This review describes the current understanding of these molecular mechanisms in the specification of cell fates in the pregastrulation embryo.
The potential of Caenorhabditis elegans as a model organism for the study of embryology emerged in the 1970s (Brenner, 1974). This free-living soil nematode is ideal for studying in the laboratory as it has a rapid period of embryogenesis (16 hours) and each worm has an invariant cell lineage, with exactly 959 somatic cells in the adult, which can be easily traced during development through the transparent cuticle (Sulston & Horvitz, 1977). C.elegans is a small round-worm, approximately 1 mm long, that lives for 2-3 weeks and can be fed on Escherichia coli, which allows large numbers to be conveniently raised in a Petri dish. The predominant adult form is hermaphroditic, containing both sperm and eggs and therefore reproduction is rapid, either by self-fertilization or by cross-fertilization with the rare males.
The genetics for C.elegans is advancing rapidly. It has a small genome at 8 x 10 7 bp and relatively few genes for a eukaryote - around 17,500. It was the first multicellular organism for which the genome was completely sequenced (C.elegans Sequencing Consortium 1999) and approximately 8,000 C.elegans proteins have already been matched to homologous human gene transcripts (Lai at al. , 2000). Specific mutants may be produced by targeted deletion through transposon insertion or mutagens. Embryos may be manipulated by transformation or injection with transgenes and marker proteins such as green fluorescent protein (GFP) are easily visualised in the transparent embryos. RNA interference (RNAi) is a particularly useful technique for studying maternal effect genes by eliminating the expression of specific maternal or zygotic genes in offspring.
Patterning in the early embryo is a result of the complex interaction between oriented asymmetric divisions and cell-cell interactions. For example, the P1 cell is able to develop autonomously in the absence of AB, but the daughters of AB require interactions from the descendents of P1 - the EMS and P2 blastomeres. Proper development of the EMS blastomere is determined by signals from P2 (via the Wnt pathway) as well as the autonomous, maternally expressed transcription factor SKN-1, as described in this section.
SKN-1 is a predicted 61 kDa protein, largely hydrophobic, containing homologous regions to the bZIP (leucine zipper) class of transcription factors and the ant homeodomain in Drosophila (Bowerman et al. , 1992). Unlike the bZIP proteins, however, SKN-1 lacks a dimerisation segment and binds DNA as a monomer (Fig 3).
During cleavage of the zygote, SKN-1 protein is loaded unequally between the P1 and AB sister blastomeres, an effect mediated by MEX-1 and PAR-1. SKN-1 is required for differentiation of the EMS daughter of P1: in skn-1 mutant embryos, neither EMS nor its daughter E develops normally, instead of making pharyngeal and intestinal structures they produce extra hypodermal and body wall tissues. skn-1+ male sperm are unable to rescue embryos from skn-1-/- mothers, indicating that maternal expression of the skn-1 gene is necessary for normal embryogenesis. In mex-1 mutant embryos, pharyngeal cells are produced from both AB and P1 descendents (Bowerman et al. , 1993).
SKN-1 activates the transcription of at least two genes, med-1 and med-2, whose products are also transcription factors. The MED transcription factors appear to specify the fate of the EMS cell, since expression of the med genes in other cells can cause non-EMS cells to become EMS, even in the absence of SKN-1. SKN-1 protein is present in the embryo from the 2-cell stage until the 12-cell stage, when it suddenly disappears. However, zygotic expression is required post-embryogenesis, for the development of intestinal cells (Maduro et al. , 2001).
After the second cleavage, equal levels of SKN-1 are found in both daughters of the P1 blastomere, EMS and P2. However, only EMS produces pharyngeal cells and P2 is still able to develop into a healthy germline in skn-1 mutant embryos. The maternal protein PIE-1 is segregated with the germ lineage and is necessary for the germline fate by inhibiting both SKN-1 and PAL-1 function in the P2 and subsequent germline cells (Mello et al. , 1992). In embryos from pie-1 mutant mothers (pharynx and intestine in excess), germline blastomeres adopt somatic fates, with the P2 cell behaving as a wildtype EMS blastomere (Fig 5; Mello et al. , 1992).
The early Aba and Abp blastomeres are identical and exchangeable (Priess & Thomson, 1987); however, in the late 4-cell stage, these two cells are committed to different fates. This determination requires the Notch-like receptor, GLP-1, and the Delta-like membrane-bound ligand, APX-1.
Embryogenesis relies almost exclusively on maternal proteins and RNAs loaded into the oocyte during oogenesis. Patterning arises through a combination of oriented, intrinsically asymmetric cell divisions and cell-cell interactions. The PAR proteins and MEX-5/6 are responsible for initial polarisation of the zygote, skn-1 is required to specify the EMS fate, the bifunctional protein PIE-1 is required to maintain the totipotent germ cell lineage and specification of the AB lineage involves a system homologous to Notch in Drosophila.