The advances in medical technology and therapies in recent years have been rapid and have contributed to the increase in average life expectancy. There has also been an overall drop in mortality and morbidity rates within developed countries. On initial examination of this data, it would seem apparent that this trend is indeed advantageous to us and free of any dilemma. However, with further thought it has been shown that quite simply possessing the means to preserve life does not necessarily offer the patient the best option. It is quite possible now to keep a brain stem dead patient alive for many years. But this is neither beneficial nor humane for the patient concerned. The clinician, in this scenario, is prolonging life just because he has the capacity to and not because it is in the patients' best interests. Ethical arguments have therefore brought into contention the role of the clinician in these scenarios- are they prolonging life or are they prolonging the process of dying?
For some people 'life' is seen as intrinsically good and valuable and they feel it should be preserved at all costs. But for some people the quality of life takes precedence when trying to determine its value. Without quality, life loses its value and to preserve life over suffering does not seem worthwhile. As doctors we need to observe this assessment of 'quality' and when important decisions are made concerning life the psychological, spiritual and emotional aspects of a patient's life need to be considered. When administrating medications, it needs to be assessed whether the burden of treatments are unacceptably high for the patient and whether extending life would be in the patients best interest. Furthermore would the treatment offered provide a significant improvement or amelioration of the disease process? When making an informed decision, these questions have to be answered.
Recent events such as the 'Diane Pretty' case have shown that these questions are difficult to answer. They have bought to the forefront the argument of euthanasia. The word euthanasia derived from the Greek language means 'good death'. Euthanasia is performed either by undertaking acts that directly bring about death or failing to prevent death. The distinction between these creates two subgroups of euthanasia; the former is classed as active euthanasia and the latter as passive euthanasia. Draper, in 1998, defined euthanasia using three key points. He defined it as 'death resulting from the intention of a single person to kill another using the most gentle and easy means possible...motivated solely by the best interest by the person who dies'. Within this definition the motive is set and it is this motive that differentiates euthanasia from murder or manslaughter. In events of 'physician assisted suicide', the patient kills himself/herself using methods provided by the doctor. This is often confused to be euthanasia - but it is imperatively not as in this case the doctor did not do the killing. There are other scenarios where practices that involve ending a patient's life may be classed as euthanasia for example, withdrawing or withholding treatment. If a patient refuses life-prolonging therapy, and their decision is voluntary, informed and made with a competent mind and is free of any doctor coercion, then it is not euthanasia. The doctor in this scenario is not intending to kill the patient but is simply complying with the wishes of the patient. To further clarify, a case for euthanasia must involve intentional killing of another person using gentle means motivated by the best interests of the patient.
The Doctrine of Double Effect (DDE) is based upon the deontological view that intentions and not consequences are the important aspect of moral behaviour. For example, a terminally ill patient in severe pain may be given diamorphine to alleviate the pain. The continuing use of diamorphine may as a secondary result induce respiratory failure and cause death. The doctor's intention however was to alleviate pain and he/she made a sound clinical decision to take precedence of suffering over prolonging life. If the doctor was to administer a fatal dose of potassium chloride then his decision would not have been based on pain relief and in this scenario the doctor would be in the wrong. A brief look at the DDE has shown that it is very difficult to assess what was intended and what was a fatal consequence. The DDE may be recognised in legal judgements but it is very difficult to apply in practice.
Currently active euthanasia is illegal in the United Kingdom. In December 1997, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Irvine of Lairg told the House of Lords 'euthanasia is a deliberate intervention undertaken with the express intention of ending a life....the government is absolutely opposed to euthanasia in any form'. However as previously discussed a doctor may, with correct intentions, administer a large dose of pain relieving drugs to a terminally ill patient in order to suppress the pain whilst having the knowledge that this action may result in death. In the case of R versus Brodkin Adams (1957), the actions of the doctor in promoting comfort through lethal dose of analgesics in a stroke patient (which subsequently shortened the patient's life) was given the verdict of not guilty. The doctor was 'acting in the best interests of this patient.' Thus a doctor is entitled to do all that is necessary to relieve pain and suffering even if the measures undertaken may incidentally shorten life.
We have explored the complex nature of euthanasia and we shall now explore the pros and cons associated with it. Elements that favour euthanasia include respect for autonomy. A competent patient has the right to dictate the timing and circumstances of their own death. Moreover a patient had the right to alleviate themselves from any pain and suffering. This right is contained within the Human Rights Act 1998. Beneficence and non-maleficence are principles that aim to seek maximum benefit and minimal harm. If a doctor refuses to alleviate a patient's suffering and unbearable pain then he/she is violating his/her primary obligation of beneficence and non-maleficence. Another ethical factor which is in favour of the euthanasia argument is that of justice. It is both ethically and legally accepted for a competent patient receiving treatment whether medical or surgical, to refuse treatment even though this would lead to their premature death.
The opposing arguments for euthanasia include: killing is unlawful and unjust in any scenario. Life is an intrinsic value and should be preserved at all times. Doctors have the ultimate goal of avoiding harm and loss of life. Under no circumstances should doctors go against this. The advancement of medicine in this era would suggest a patient's pain and suffering are controllable. For example in the case of administering diamorphine for pain relief; is this the only analgesic available for pain relief? The answer would be a sound no. There are alternative analgesics available that do not hold the lethal side effects. But in argument to this, does a patient really want to be pumped full of drugs in their last moments of life. If euthanasia was to be legalised then there is potential for burdened carers, family members and healthcare professionals to consider it as the first option rather than the last. The illegality of euthanasia protects it from being abused. There is also a possibility of physicians making mistakes. False diagnoses, prognoses, errors in treatment and assessment of pain can easily occur which would generate false candidates for euthanasia. Further, the regulatory processes for legal euthanasia would be too complex. The aspects of abuse of power can also be a problem if euthanasia was legalised. In the case of Harold Shipman it could be argued that he was acting in the best interest of his patients and was quite simply giving them a good, pain free death. This 'license for killing' can be potentially dangerous to introduce into clinical practice.
Whether we are for or against euthanasia, one thing is surely true- that the case of euthanasia needs to be discussed openly. Euthanasia occurs all the time. It is often behind closed doors and is done in a 'seedy' and often un-dignifying way. Simply because it is illegal regardless of whether the doctor was acting in the patients best interests, often gives the whole scenario a guilty and immoral feel. When scandals are released into the news and press, the doctor is always shown to have done something wrong. This maybe because the situation was kept quiet or because something 'illegal' was committed. These scenarios can also seem unlawful and wrong when people do not have enough information on the ethics and legality of euthanasia. Open debate can help solve this unawareness and uneasiness involved in euthanasia. Open debate could help illustrate that something that is illegal is not necessarily wrong.
As future doctors it is our right to bring these issues into light. We should promote open debate and insist that the GMC and other related bodies give their full backing and support when bringing these issues to parliament. A doctor, in my opinion, is negating his promise of acting in the best of interests of his patients if he/she refuses to discuss these matters. An informed opinion is vital if care of the highest standard is to be delivered.