The element of consideration is a requisite component of a contract as governed by the common law principles encompassed by the English Law of Contract. It is inherent to the element of exchange through bargaining in contracts, and is needed to validate contracts when found in conjunction with a legitimate offer, acceptance and an intention of the parties to create legal relations.
Consideration has always been somewhat of an unclear, problematic doctrine, often being left to the courts to decipher in individual cases - a point clearly illuminated by this investigation in question. Traditionally, consideration's definition is translated into a model of mutual benefit/detriment, as expressed by Lush, J in the case of Currie v. Misa
: "A valuable consideration, in the sense of the law, may consist either in some right, interest, profit, or benefit accruing to one party, or some forbearance, detriment, loss, or responsibility, given, suffered or undertaken by the other".
Looking at consideration in the context of the case of Williams v. Roffey Bros
, the sufficiency of consideration given by a particular party is contested by the other party over the issue that arose as to whether or not good (sufficient) consideration can be given by one party simply promising to perform their existing contractual duties. The Court of Appeal came to a significant conclusion in this case that such performance could constitute consideration when it conveys a 'practical' benefit to the promisor. This somewhat revised the orthodox legal position on the matter.
Traditionally, the courts had maintained the rule that in situations where one contracting party, A, promises to pay an additional sum to fellow contracting party, B, provided B undertakes to perform their existing contractual obligations to A, B's return promise does not provide sufficient consideration, and that if one party promises to modify their obligations without fresh consideration being provided in return, the promise to vary the original agreement is gratuitous and hence unenforceable. The case of Stilk v. Myrick
 classically represents these rules. It was held that a captain was not bound by his promise to pay additional sums to his crew, after the desertion of two sailors, if they would complete their voyage as contracted, due to the court concluding that the crew offered no fresh consideration for the captain's promise. Arguably, the captain enjoyed some 'practical benefit' in the form of his crew working harder, under greater pressure due to lack of crewmen, and that this could amount to consideration. However this idea was dismissed, the court concluding that the sailors "had sold all their services till the voyage should be completed
". Lord Ellenborough placed the most importance on deciphering the legal obligations of the remaining crew, deciding that they had not done anything more than what they were already legally obliged to do under the contract, hence no consideration. The position of the courts was hence established, strengthening the importance of investigating benefits/detriments under contract as a matter of law, rather than as 'factual' or 'practical'.
The case of Foakes v. Beer
 furthered the authority of this rule. The courts position thus seemed unambiguous. Mrs Beer had obtained a judgement for the sum of 2090 19s to be made payable in instalments at an interest rate of 4% by Dr. Foakes. Later, at Foakes' request, a new agreement was made that prolonged the time allowed for debt-payment despite not mentioning any further requisite interest payments. Beer sought to recover this interest after Foakes refused to pay it. The House of Lords agreed that there was a one-sided benefit being obtained by the new agreement (Foakes had a longer time to pay at no added interest) and that this agreement should fail for lack of consideration from Foakes.
How so was it then, that in Williams v. Roffey Bros, consideration was deemed sufficient in the form of a promise to perform existing contractual obligations? We must look at the details of the case. The plaintiff had entered into a subcontract with the defendants, who held the main building contract which itself contained a time penalty clause, to carry out carpentry work in a block of flats for an agreed price of 20,000. The plaintiff then ran into financial difficulty due to the agreed price being too low for him to operate profitably at. Consequently, a new agreement was made under which the plaintiff would be paid an additional 10,300 (575 per completed flat). The defendants were wary of incurring the penalty clause that was likely to take effect if they were to try and find a suitable replacement for the existing carpenters. After the substantial completion of 8 more flats, Williams had only received a further 1,500. He subsequently left the site and sued for remaining payment. The Court of Appeal judges unanimously agreed to uphold the County Court decision that had awarded the plaintiff 4,600 for such substantially completed work.
Crucially, here the judges emphasised the importance of 'practical benefits' that accrued due to the re-negotiation of the contract - i.e. the assured avoidance of the penalty clause and the mutual benefit enjoyed due to the creation of a system of payment reconciling the haphazard original agreement. It also remained largely uncontested that the original agreed amount of pay owed to the sub-contractors was too low. Lord Glidewell defined a newly revised legal position, essentially stating that in situations when one of two contracting parties runs into difficulty and is potentially unable to fully perform their contractual obligations, a new agreement can be legally binding if, through a promise to pay additional sums to the party suffering difficulty, the other party obtains some practical benefit or obviates a disbenefit. Good consideration can be in the form of such promises in these situations, provided the new agreement is not induced by fraud or economic duress.
It is arguable that this rouses ambiguity in the scope of consideration as it appears to contest and hence distort the traditional stance of the courts. On first appearance it seems to be in direct contrast to the ruling in Stilk v. Myrick. Williams was only doing what he was already contracted to do, as were the sailors in Stilk, and yet the promise to perform his pre-existing contractual duties was construed as good consideration in the new agreement. Essentially, the court has become ambiguous in the sense that it, on the basis of Williams v. Roffey, it now appears to concern itself more with the realism element of the contract and the true intention of the parties - the 'practical' benefits/detriments seem more significant to the judges than those existing legally. It is a shift from the traditional, pragmatic approach, placing the law in its more modern context - "a decision inspired by modern market-individualism
".
However, the court itself saw the decision as not to overrule the principle established in Stilk v. Myrick but more to "refine and limit the application of that principle"
. This seems fair as it is perhaps inevitable and useful that such a long-established precedent relating to such a vexed area of contract law should be placed into a modern arena to be tried and tested. The case of Williams v. Roffey was obviously very different to Stilk v. Myrick, thus it was distinguished by the court. The 'practical benefits' enjoyed by the defendants, post re-negotiation, made it unconscionable that such a contract should not be upheld for lack of consideration. Furthermore, it is worth noting that two cases from the 1950's, Ward v. Byham and Williams v. Williams had also established a precedent suggesting that performance of existing legal obligations can constitute good consideration in a contract. In Ward, the performance of the pre-existing duty of a mother to care for her child was deemed sufficient consideration for the father's promise to pay her 1 per month to do so. In Williams v. Williams, having deserted her husband, a wife's promise to 'maintain herself' (as already bound to do) during their separation was construed as being good consideration for his promise to pay 1 10s for said upkeep.
To conclude the discussion, a powerful argument exists suggesting the law has become more ambiguous in relation to the scope of consideration due to the ruling in Williams v. Roffey. The courts now seem unpredictable. It is still unclear as to whether they will continue to affirm the traditional approach established in Stilk v. Myrick and Foakes v. Beer and only focus on the construction of consideration from a legal benefit/detriment model (as approved in the more recent case of Re Selectmove
), or whether they will further embrace the modern benefit-led, policy-sensitive theory of consideration that recognises the significance of 'practical/factual' benefits/detriments accruing in contracts. However, it is also arguable that perhaps the law has not been made as much ambiguous as it has been re-defined to account for a more modern species of case, extending existing principles established in cases such as Ward v. Byham and Williams v. Williams.