In the essay "Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development", Mancur Olson proposes a theory of how economic growth is related to the development of democracy. Using rational-choice theory as the basis of his argument, he concludes that "[t]he conditions necessary for a lasting democracy are the same necessary for the security of property and contract rights that generates economic growth". Thus, Olson does not claim a causal relationship between democracy and economic growth, but that democracy and sustained growth - requiring the same set of institutions - will occur simultaneously. Olson's theory may provide an explanation for why the Chinese economy under Qing rule (1644-1912) experienced no intensive growth at all, whilst per capita income during the same period in Western Europe more than quadrupled. This essay will outline the key features of Olson's argument in the context of China and Western Europe at this time. By contrasting the gradual emergence of democracy in Europe after the fall of medieval feudalism with the "autocratic" bureaucracy prevailing in China throughout the Qing dynasty, it will be argued that Olson's theory is indeed applicable, yet not sufficient, for explaining the contrasting economic experiences of China and Western Europe since the late Middle Ages.
In the spirit of Hobbes, Olson claims that "no society can work satisfactorily if it does not have a peaceful order" and pictures a state of "roving banditry" where recurrent plundering eliminates every incentive to produce above subsistence level. He argues that, due to this, any human society of considerable size will be seized by a self-interested, rational autocrat - a "stationary bandit" - which "monopolizes theft ... through regular taxation" and protects his victims from the occasional theft of roving bandits. In effect, this is Olson's model of autocracy, the system of rule he claims has dominated human societies at least up to the eighteenth century. According to Olson, the "autocratic ruler has an incentive to extract the maximum possible surplus from the whole society and use it for his own purposes". Thus, it will be in the autocrat's interest to provide public goods, such as military protection, if the returns from such investments, in the form of increased tax revenues following the increase in market income, more than cover the cost of providing the good itself. Under Qing rule, the Chinese empire was technically a bureaucracy, governed by an upper-class elite - the gentry - to which entrance was gained by passing an official examination. In practice, admittance was often acquired by purchase, and the gentry itself were in many ways reminiscent of Olson's "stationary bandits" (that is, tax revenue-maximising autocrats). This is confirmed by Lippit's description of the gentry as "drawing its income from the surplus produced by the peasants, artisans, and workers above their own subsistence requirements". Lippit also points out the gigantic income gap between labourers and officials, where officials' earnings range between 3,000 and 18,000 times that of labourers. The gentry was only symbolically waged by the central government, and obtained the main part of their earnings through unauthorised taxes and bribes., Thus, they were essentially free to collect whatever tax they preferred. Olson predicts that a rational autocrat chooses the revenue-maximising rate r*, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1 demonstrates how taxation distorts economic incentives: as tax rate increases from zero to revenue-maximising r*, the marginal increase in tax revenue diminishes due to the fall in output. At r*, any further increase lowers output to much that tax revenue falls. Olson contrasts the expected behaviour of an autocratic ruler with that of a democratic one, and asserts that a rational democratic ruler will not push tax rates up to r*: to look after his own self-interest - ensuring re-election - he must consider the interests of a majority of the electorate. The electorate is not only interested in tax revenue, but more importantly in the overall market income. At r*, a democratic ruler will reduce the tax rate (say to r
1) - because that stimulates an increase in income (by restoring economic incentives) proportionally larger than the fall in tax revenue, making the electorate - and hence the ruler - better off. Consequently, it is arguable that democratic rule boasts the intrinsic potential to facilitate economic growth. North and Thomas saw different kinds of nation-states arise in post-feudal Europe: France and Spain developed into autocratic monarchies, whilst "the Netherlands and England succeeded in placing checks upon their rulers in the form of representative assemblies". Hence, the fact that economic growth during the early Modern Period in Western Europe was particularly observable just in the Netherlands and England, bolsters Olson's theory. Olson underlines the Glorious Revolution (with the consequent establishment of constitutional monarchy) of 1688 as a critical precondition for British industrial development. Comparing Qing China with Western Europe at the same time, Olson's model for tax rate determination by autocratic and democratic rulers seems to offer some explanation for the diverging economic experiences of the two economic empires.
Olson claims that an economy may experience sustained growth only by the means of long-term investments, and introduces the concept of the "time horizon" in his discussion of autocratic and democratic regimes. Logically, long-term investments are only carried through if investors are confident that their assets will not be stolen or expropriated. Olson argues that this sense of security can only be realised through an independent judiciary and a court system powerful enough to uphold and enforce individual and property rights, and stresses the fact that these conditions are the same as required for sustained democracy. This ideal situation can be contrasted with the Chinese administrative system under Qing, which Moulder suggests "had a curious quality of fakery about it", as it entailed a range of official rules and regulations which were rarely or never enforced. Balazs blames the failure of the Chinese empire to industrialise, despite its "ingenuity and inventiveness", on the ubiquitous bureaucracy which he claims to have stifled the economy and eventually "killed technological invention in China". Jones declares a similar view and argues that a major obstacle for development of Asian (as compared to European) markets in general was that "the local governor was all too likely to sweep down at any time and exert force majeure to buy up anything..." According to Olson's theory, the rational self-interest of the autocrat will spur him to make promises to protect and not to confiscate the property of his subordinates, but that such promises - since they cannot be enforced by an independent judiciary - cannot be credible. Thus, he concludes that the mere possibility for the dictator to adapt a short-term view (starting to expropriate property) creates a threat substantial enough to deter investment and hamper economic growth. Hence, it could be inferred that the lack of property and individual rights under the effectively autocratic gentry rule in Qing China almost certainly interfered with the incentive structure required for long-term investment. However, as Lippit points out, it is hardly sensible to blame the stagnation of the Chinese economy on the oppressive bureaucracy alone, since other factors, such as Western and Japanese imperialism should be held culpable as well. In Western Europe at this time, the two most "democratic" countries as well as the most vibrant economies - the Netherlands and England - shared an essential common feature: the extensive system of legal and property rights enjoyed by their citizenry. In the Netherlands, the "private property of land ... was incorporated into the fundamental institutional arrangements" and according to North and Thomas, the Dutch institutional framework was essentially equivalent to that of developed economies today, with the only exception that it lacked an efficient system for ensuring intellectual property rights. An important discrepancy between the Netherlands and post-1689 Britain was that in the latter, a patents system for protecting intellectual property and innovations was actually put in place. It is arguable that this was one of the main trigger for initiating large-scale industrialisation in Britain, which other European countries would come to imitate later on. Thus, in accordance with Olson's theory, the establishment of a more democratic system of rule and an institutional framework potent enough to protect property rights in early Modern Europe seems to have stimulated economic growth.
This essay has discussed Olson's theory of the correlation between democratic rule and economic development in the context of China under Qing rule and Western Europe since the late Middle Ages. In accordance with Olson's theory, the fact that the Chinese empire was governed by a gentry acting like tax-revenue maximising autocrats - failing to ensure property and legal rights in the long term - seems to have been a major impediment to economic growth. Similarly, the concurrent development of democracy and an institutional framework ensuring legal and property rights in Western Europe also seems to validate Olson's theory. In conclusion, it could be argued that Olson's model provides a feasible explanation for economic growth in these instances, although it must be recognised that economic development in general cannot be considered the result of a single factor.