To determine whether the Dutch Republic, a leading economy in Europe from the 15 th century to the 17 th century, should be seen as the first modern economy as suggested by de Vries and van der Woude, we must first define what is meant by modern economic growth. To differentiate between pre-industrial growth and modern economic growth, we use Kuznet's definition of modern economic growth, which is summarized by the following 6 characteristics.
The first criterion is to show high rates of growth per capita as well as growth in population. In other words, growth must not be associated with extensive growth, where GDP levels only rise because of a rise in population while standards of living remain the same.
The second criterion is to show a high rate of growth per output per unit of all inputs. This means that there must be total factor productivity growth, where productivity of all inputs rises (e.g. not just a rise in output per labour).
Thirdly, there must be a high rate of structural change in the economy. For example, a shift from an agriculturally based economy into an industrially and service based economy. Also, there should be a shift from small personal enterprises to large firms.
Institutional changes are also important; so Kuznet's fourth criterion was that there should be structural and ideological changes in society (urbanisation and secularisation). Fifthly, Kuznet stresses the importance of adopting an openness to international communications, or in other words being integrated with the international community.
Lastly, large gaps between developed and less-developed countries should occur. This criterion illustrates the international aspects of development, while previous ones indicate structural/ institutional transformations; and the first two characteristics imply a breaking out of the Malthusian trap.
The Dutch Republic did indeed exhibit some of these characteristics of modern economic growth. Between the 15 th century and mid 17 th century, the Dutch Republic was one of the leading economies in Europe in terms of per capita income. In 1400 to 1700, The Dutch Republic had the fastest per capita income growth in Europe, and by 1600 it had the highest level of income per capita in Europe. It also saw a rise in population when the struggle against the Spanish regime led to a large number of immigrants from Flanders and Brabant, increasing the Dutch population by 10%. This inflow of immigrants, including a large number of merchants and bankers, brought with them capital, skills and contacts. The Dutch institutional framework also allowed freedom of ideas and free flow of information, as well as secure property rights for merchants, which contributed to economic development.
In terms of agriculture, the Dutch Republic also had a very developed system of hydraulic management, as the geographical circumstances (e.g. low-lying lands) created undesirable farming lands. Windmills were also used to control water flows in canals. This allowed a large degree of freedom for peasants in The Netherlands compared with the rest of Europe. Also, the agricultural sector was very specialised in producing meat, milk, butter and cheese, while grain was largely imported, resulting in high labour productivity in agriculture. By 1700, only 40% of total employment was in agriculture, compared with 56% in the UK. On the other hand, the Dutch economy was less involved in industry, with shipping, textiles, brewing and timber as its main industries.
It can be said that the Dutch Republic had developed a comparative advantage in services rather than industry, as it had sophisticated commercial institutions that allowed for significant financial developments such as bills of exchange, stock markets and perpetual annuities. From this, we see that the Dutch Republic performed much better in agriculture and services rather than industry.
Shipping in the Dutch Republic was also an important industry. The Dutch built up large shipping fleets, and by the 16 th century, it had the largest trading fleet in Europe, with carrying capacities in 1670 higher than those of Germany, Britain and France combined. Thus, the Dutch were able to replace the Portuguese's monopoly position in trade with Asia, as well as developing trade with Africa and Americas. However, its trade position was weakened as the Dutch became involved in wars with Britain. This affected the Dutch commercial sector as well as trade, and by the early 1800's, the Dutch Republic was overtaken by Britain.
From the above evidence, we can conclude that the Dutch Republic did not show all the characteristics of modern economic growth. Firstly, although it did enjoy growth in per capita income and population (1 st criterion), it ran into diminishing returns as it lacked "macro inventions" such as powered machinery and fossil fuels. Furthermore, it did not show industrial progress, as they did not see any development in modern factory industry. Thus, growth in the Dutch economy was largely based on specialisation rather than industrial progress, and was therefore unsustainable.
In terms of structural and institutional changes, the Dutch economy did indeed shift from the agriculture sector to service sector, but they did not show a change from personal to large-scale firms. However, there was a high degree of urbanisation and religious toleration, and the state played the role of securing property rights of merchants and entrepreneurs.
From the importance of trade in the Dutch economy, we can also say that the Dutch economy was indeed highly integrated into the international community, and was able to enjoy higher standards of living than other countries, thus demonstrating the "gap" between rich and poor countries in Kuznet's 6 th criterion.
Hence, it can be concluded that the Dutch Republic was not the first modern economy as de Vries and van der Woude said, but rather "the last stage of merchant capitalism". To determine why, we must first look at the Industrial Revolution in Britain, and to compare the differences between the 2 economies.
During the Industrial Revolution in 1780 to 1840, Britain experienced per capita income growth as well as population increases. Using Crafts and Harley's more accurate estimates, we see that GNP growth was approximately 1.97% in 1801-1831, whereas GNP per capita was only 0.52%. This accounts for the fact that Britain experienced high population growth rates (0.8% in 18 th to 19 th century), and was still able to exhibit GNP growth, hence implying a breaking out of the Malthusian trap.
To determine the extent of growth of which can be explained by a rise in efficiency of inputs (i.e. TFP growth), we use the growth accounting identity:
From 1700-1760, growth in Britain (Y/Y) was 0.7%. If we assume share of national income received by capital () and share of wages in national income () are equal (each 0.5), then capital accumulation can be calculated as 0.35%, while growth in labour force was 0.15%. To calculate TFP growth (r*), we simply calculate the difference in output growth and total factor input growth (0.35+0.15=0.5%). Therefore, TFP growth is 0.7%-0.5%=0.2%. This means that the bulk of growth during the Industrial Revolution was actually due to an increase in inputs, rather than TFP growth, although TFP growth did increase to 0.35% in the 19 th century.
During the Industrial Revolution, several key features of "modern industry" occurred in Britain, namely the use of machinery, fossil fuels, synthetic materials and an emergence in large-scale enterprise. These "macro inventions" greatly contributed in overcoming law of diminishing returns, which was precisely what the Dutch Republic was lacking. The steam engine, a more reliable power source, was also widely used in many sectors, including mining, cotton, iron, railways etc.
Although Britain had a higher percentage of employment in agriculture during the 1700's, this figure quickly fell to 37% in 1820. Like the Dutch economy, agriculture in Britain was highly commercialised, with use of enclosure methods to improve techniques such as selective breeding.
The state also played an important role in establishing suitable institutional frameworks to protect property rights. One of the most significant institutional developments in Britain was the Glorious Revolution of 1688, which resulted in a constitutional settlement allowing the government to commit to protecting property rights (patents), which encouraged market-led growth through innovation and technological progress. The Glorious Revolution also contributed to the development of a strong public finance system in Britain.
Also, institutional changes such as parliamentary supremacy gave the parliament a certain degree of power over important issues such as finances, effectively reducing the 'divine rights' of the King. The dethronement of Charles I and James II acted as a warning for Kings, but it was also crucial that the parliament did not have too much power so that it could become the new autocrat. The parliament also played key roles in significant developments in the 18 th century, such as the building of canals and railways, as well as the invention of the turnpike trust, which aided with road building. These new institutional frameworks assisted London in becoming one of the biggest commercial centres in Europe, challenging Amsterdam's position as the leading financial centre.
Some people argue that imperialism played an important role in Britain's economic growth. However, although trade does help commercialisation, it alone cannot be the only factor in stimulating economic growth. Furthermore, colonies are expensive to maintain, so free trade is a more ideal policy.
Again using Kuznet's 6 characteristics of modern economic growth, we can see that Britain did make the transition into modern economic growth, mainly through the Industrial Revolution. Like the Dutch, it had a rise in population as well as per capita income. However, unlike the Dutch, the British were able to sustain this growth, thus breaking out of the Malthusian Trap. Furthermore, Britain's growth was based on industrial progress, and not just specialisation as in the Dutch case.
Unlike the Dutch, Britain also showed a high degree of structural change from personal to large enterprise, and not just structural changes in the economy from agriculture to industry. As in the case of the Dutch economy, there was a high degree of urbanisation and religious toleration, and Britain was also highly integrated into the world economy. In terms of standards of living, Britain also enjoyed higher living standards that other countries, and it overtook the Netherlands as leading economy with highest per capita income by 1790.
To conclude, we can say that Britain succeeded in making the transition into "modern economic growth" while the Dutch did not. The main reason for this, in my opinion, was the lack of "macro inventions" in industry, such as the steam engine, fossil fuels, which prevented the Dutch economy from moving into modern factory industry, and therefore ran into diminishing returns, making growth unsustainable.