Dubbed as Blair's political guru, Anthony Giddens has been the leading proponent of the Third Way. It has had a huge influence upon New Labour's political outlook and has informed the party's approach to the welfare state since it took power almost eight years ago. As such, it will be the Third Way as promulgated by Giddens and its implementation overseen by New Labour, which will provide the main focus of the analysis. The essay will first elucidate the meaning of the Third Way and then will endeavour to answer key questions about its nature; namely, are the values that underpin the Third Way distinct from the New Right or are they rooted in it? Are there any parallels between the Third Way's approach to welfare policy and New Liberalism's? Does the Third Way constitute a new and coherent philosophy for welfare policy or merely a collection of previously thought of ideas? Having outlined the arguments on both sides of the debate this paper shall argue that the Third Way is neither particularly new nor totally coherent and that it is more of a political project than a political philosophy.
In "The Third Way and its Critics" Giddens outlines four key principles that shape the Third Way (2001, p.50-56). Firstly and most fundamentally, the Third Way rests on the belief that both globalization and Thatcherism have brought profound changes to both Britain's economic and sociological landscape. Economically, the opening up of markets to the global economy has meant that more than ever the well being of society is determined by the whim of global capital. Countries need to compete with one another to create as attractive environments as possible for footloose businesses and foreign investment, and as such the Keynesianism and tax and spend policies of yesteryear are redundant (Martell & Driver, 1998). Sociologically, deindustrialization, the declining power of the Trade Unions and the post-Fordist pressures for flexibility have weakened the old working class solidarities and thus weakened Labour's traditional electoral base. Thus, in order for social democrats to achieve political success, welfare policy can no longer reflect the sectional interests of the working class alone, but the whole community, and in order for social democrats to achieve economic prosperity and sustain the welfare state, markets have to be embraced.
Secondly, the increased individualism and the attendant dangers of social anomie renders the old-style social democratic tendency to treat welfare rights as unconditional defunct. A "new social contract" (Giddens, 2001, p.52) has to be forged between the individual and the state. A new settlement based on the notion that there are "no rights with out responsibilities" (Giddens, 1998, p.62) should emerge, enabling the government to obtain consent from the public to fund the welfare state and achieve social cohesion. Whilst the state is obligated to equip the individual with the skills required to gain jobs, individuals should recognize their duties as citizens and find work
Thirdly, tying in well with the second point the welfare state should primarily become a "social investment state" (Giddens, 1998, p.42). While the post-war welfare state was defined negatively, constructed around the passive notion of risk and of security, seeking to fight against want, disease, ignorance, squalor and idleness, in this new era of heightened globalization in which a much more active risk environment prevails, the new welfare state should be defined positively seeking to encourage the entrepreneurial spirit, and increase the resilience necessary to cope with a world of accelerated change. By means of supply-side economics the state should thus invest in human capital, encourage life-long learning and incentivize work, offering as Gordon Brown said "not a minimum safety net but a trampoline." (Driver & Martell, 1998 p.107)
Lastly, the endgame is to foster a society based upon diversity, mobility and equality of opportunity. The idea of achieving a greater equality of outcome should no longer be the top priority of the left- it is both homogenizing and as argued above economically unsound, instead welfare policy should be focused on eradicating social exclusion so that every citizen can have a chance to enjoy rising living standards. In line with what Giddens calls detraditionalization- the break down of old structures which had dominated people lives in the past, and the increasing propensity for individuals to want to make their own decisions, there should be greater pluralism in welfare provision reflecting the multi-dimensional and ever-changing needs of its citizens.
In Gidden's eyes this amounts to a distinctive and coherent philosophical framework that renews social democracy in an era in which capitalism is triumphant. It enables the values of Old Labour- community, equality and social justice- to remain, albeit in a redefined form. (Driver & Martell, 1998) In the lexicon of the Third Way community no longer refers exclusively to the working class but to the whole nation bound together by reciprocal obligations; equality pertains no longer to people's wealth but people's opportunities and social justice no longer entails economic redistribution but the empowerment of all. Through synthesizing social democratic ideas with some New Right practices Giddens posits that the Third Way goes beyond left and right. (Giddens, 1998)
There is a large body of opinion headed by the likes of Roy Hattersley (The Guardian, 2001) that subscribe to the view that rather than moving beyond left and right the Third Wayers who drive the New Labour political machine are simply moving beyond left in their welfare policies, implementing little more than Thatcherism Mark II. This rests on the argument that New Labour's welfare policies are socially authoritarian. (Callinicos, 2001) This can be seen in the government's morally conservative emphasis it places upon civic duty and reciprocal obligations, and its apparent belief that acts of criminality are symptomatic more of individual's own moral deficiencies than with the state's failure to redress the inequities that might have precipitated such behavior.
Secondly, it rests on the notion that New Labour has adopted a neo-liberal approach to its health and education policies. They have broken with the social democratic disposition of old to view public sector employees as, what Stephen Pollard terms, "knights"- people whose service-ethos and expertise has carried welfare forward, and have become much more aligned with the Thatcherite conception of them being "knaves"- a mere interest group, whose championing of an increasingly bloated welfare state insulated from the rigors of the market, rests in their desire to secure and advance their own position. (Driver & Martell, 1998, p.92-5) New Labour have distrustfully harassed them with targets and gauges of their performance, retaining the apparatus erected by the Conservatives such as OFSTED inspections and the national curriculum; and have generally endorsed the Conservative's impregnation of the welfare state with markets. The imminent introduction of foundation hospitals and variable top-up fees within tertiary education in Blair's probable third term in office is just the latest example of this.
Lastly Blair's espousal of New Right welfare reforms can be seen in the contraction of the social insurance system. Whilst the latest example has been New Labour's narrowing of the eligibility for incapacity benefit in January this year, there near continuation of the Conservative policies in pension schemes has been a theme running throughout Blair's tenure- with the further encouragement of private provision and simplified means-testing and the refusal to revive the link between basic pensions and the rise in earnings. Likewise their continuation of the Jobseeker's allowance as put into place by Major in 1996 evidences a clear adoption of the New Right notion of their existing disincentives to work creating a dependency culture. The opinion of Frank Field (the first minister of welfare reform) that success requires the "reduction of the welfare roll, not redistribution" (Driver & Martell, 1998, p.179) is as such quintessentially Third Wayist.
Having said this it seems foolish to argue, that the Third Way is merely the latest manifestation of Thatcherism. True, New Labour have come to embrace some of the key assumptions of the New Right, however it has retained a communitarian focus and has been mildly redistributive, (Hills & Stewart, 2005) with Brown producing policies such as free pensioner transport in this year's budget and levying a windfall tax on public utilities in his first. An illuminating example of the different emphases in approach of Labour and its New Right predecessor's can be seen in a comparison between Nigel Lawson's polices to alleviate unemployment in the 1980s and Gordon Brown's New Deal today. While the former aggressively tried to reduce wages, in order to lure in businesses, the latter has adopted a more positive approach in attracting businesses and workers alike, through creating a more educated workforce, and making "work pay" through policies like the minimum wage and working family tax credit.
On the other hand, Giddens appears too sanguine in heralding the Third Way as a renewal of social democracy. The welfare policies proposed by the Third Way seem to be a near futile attempt to marry if not dichotomies or polar opposites, concepts that don't seem by any stretch of the imagination mutually supportive: rights and responsibilities, social cohesion and economic dynamism, social justice and fiscal prudence, fairness and enterprise etc. When faced with the impossibility of this task New Labour have opted to make "hard choices" (Driver & Martell, 1998, p.179) - which invariably translates into producing welfare policy taking a Thatcherite complexion as shown above. Thus, while the Third Way does not merely constitute substantive neo-liberal policies doused in communitarian rhetoric, it does represent a dubious and only partial synergy of New Right assumptions and social democratic sympathies.
New Liberalism was particularly prominent in the early twentieth century- a period where laissez-faire looked increasingly anachronistic and the rise of democratic Socialism looked increasingly threatening. One can identify three main areas where New Liberalism as expounded by L.T Hobhouse in his famous book "Liberalism" looks remarkably like the ideas of the Third Way. Firstly, Hobhouse argues that while economic competition is desirable, it presumes community and cooperation. Secondly, the state should not "feed, house or clothe" its citizens, but should "secure conditions upon which its citizens are able by their own efforts all that is necessary to a full civic efficiency" (1911, p.148). Lastly, there has to exist reciprocal obligations between the individual and government to keep public and private concerns in balance. While these striking similarities are incidental as the antecedents of the emergence of the Third Way were the increasing prestige of free markets, and the demise of socialism and the antecedents of the emergence of New Liberalism were the reverse; it does show that Gidden's attempt to combine the power of the market with social cohesion is hardly unprecedented.
In conclusion, referring back to the aims outlined in the introduction of this essay it is hoped that it has been established that the Third Way represents an attempt to renew social democracy, based on fundamental assumptions about the irrevocability of sociological changes brought about by Thatcherism and the irresistibility of the economic forces of globalization. It is a project that seeks to redefine the goals of the "old left", emphasizing social exclusion rather than wealth inequality, social investment rather than social security, reciprocal obligations rather than unconditional rights. And it is an attempt to forge a new settlement between the individual and the state- engendering a society based upon pluralism, civic duty and social mobility.
The idea of a Third Way for the welfare state therefore reflects the tension between pursuing the support of an electorate which has become increasingly consumerist and individualistic and attaining social justice. Rather than offering a coherent or ground- breaking philosophy on welfare, it amounts to a loose framework of values belonging to a pragmatic project that strives to enable what Giddens calls "the left" to have real purchase on Britain, with the paradox being that this requires realigning itself in many ways to "the right." Hence, far from leading to the rebirth of social democracy it has led to its partial abandonment, leaving British people with what can perhaps be classified, despite its evident nebulousness, as a humanised, more socially sensitive version of Thatcherism.