This essay will first outline the main assumptions and tenets of the liberalist, neo-liberalist, realist, neo-realist, and the different Marxist approaches to the study of international relations. Having done this groundwork it is hoped that a personal conclusion will be reached about whether there is a theory that competently deals with international relations and its many constituent parts. The exclusion from the analysis of international society theory amongst other constructivist and reflectivist approaches does not reflect disregard for the considerable achievements this approach has made, merely an acceptance that there is only so much one can cover in two thousand words.
Liberalism's central concern is the liberty of the individual. It posits that the main determinants of world peace are: open state governments which are responsive to the needs of its individual citizens; inter-state governments which could help safeguard the rights of these individuals; international cooperation which would foster a sentiment of trust across all national boundaries; and finally free trade which would further entrench the notion of a shared purpose between countries.
Liberal internationalism is based upon the beliefs that: undemocratic leaders disrupt the present international community; policies centred upon the balance of power are antiquated; and that contact between the peoples of the world through commerce and travel will lead to greater prosperity for all. Liberal idealists stress the need to construct an international order where freedom for the individual is enhanced and the freedom of the state actors scrutinised.
Liberal institutionalists offer a far less normative approach than the two outlined above, positing that regional institutions (e.g. pressure groups) and international institutions (e.g. non-governmental organisations, and transnational corporations) act as an effective and welcomed counterweight to the power of sovereign states.
Neo-liberal internationalists focus much upon the relationship between democratic state actors with other democratic state actors and democratic state actors and authoritarian regimes. They tend to argue that prosperity can be achieved once state actors deliberately set out to spread democracy, pointing to the democratic peace thesis which asserts that there have never been wars between two democracies.
Neo-idealism emphasises the importance of democratising not only on a macro level in terms of international institutions, but also on a micro-level in terms of grass roots state structures. It also shares with the other members of the liberalism family the view that interdependence fosters peace and justice.
Neo-liberal institutionalists accept that the state is the most significant actor within an essentially anarchic environment. However they refute that this renders cooperation either impossible or worthless, arguing that states are concerned with absolute gains (the goodness of consequences of a political act for that state per se) rather than relative gains (the goodness of the consequences for the state in relation to other states).
For the realist the raison d'tre of foreign policy is to ensure the security of the state. The state is the principle actor within a perilous, anarchic environment and thus can use force as a legitimate means of protecting itself. To expand on this, one could argue that Realism has three main characteristics: statism, survival, and self-help, as outlined in the paragraph below.
It is statist in that there is a definite dual moral standard in which the very virtues of the individual for instance piety, caution and honesty would, if employed by a state, be completely inimical to its flourishing. It places importance on survival in that the one and only duty of the state is to ensure the sustenance of the moral community that resides within it. Whilst 'sustenance' for defensive realists means the attainment of security as a means of securing its survival, for offensive realists it translates as territorial and concomitant expansion. Finally the theory is based around self-help because world politics is to them a zero-sum game, each of the major states vie for pre-eminence resulting in their interests being mutually exclusive and co-operation pointless. A gain in power for them is judged in relative rather than absolute terms.
Neo-realism shares the basic assumptions of its forbear, but it has nonetheless made the approach more theoretically rigorous. Thanks to the work of Kenneth Waltz structural realism has rose to the fore in international relations theory, and remains to be perhaps the dominant theoretical approach within neo-realism. Structural realism has three distinct characteristics. Firstly whilst classical realism explains state's action within the anarchical international system in terms of unit or bottom-up analysis (i.e. by looking at the salient issues and individual positions of the states concerned), structural realism contends that it is the system of anarchy and the 'distribution of capabilities across units' above anything else which determines a states' political actions. Secondly whilst the former generally sees power in terms of military prowess, the latter sees it more on a general level- as a means of effecting change on the international scene. Lastly while the former sees the anarchical nature of world politics as a factor that effects states simply 'in accordance with their size, location, domestic politics, and leadership qualities', the latter argues that anarchy defines the system, that as all states are 'functionally similar units' as they are all presented with the same constraints, so the differences in action must be due to the differences in power and capabilities.
Another product of the continuing discourse within neo-realism is an increasingly clear and coherent division of offensive and defensive neo-realists. The former stresses the importance of absolute power, the incompatibility of states' goals and the inevitability of conflict; the latter highlights the economic burden of military mobilisation and the possibility of cooperation.
The central tenet of world-system theory championed by the Marxist Wallerstein is that the two dominant systems in international history- world empires and world-economies, transfer resources from the peripheral, underdeveloped countries to the core, developed countries, the former by means of the market, and the latter by means of centralised control over resource distribution. The market's inherent instability, in terms of its cyclical booms and busts combined with its many internal contradictions coupled with its ability for resources to drift from the hands of the poor to the rich (as outlined above) renders the system that presently prevails, doomed for downfall.
Critical Theory's most outstanding contribution to International relations discourse is perhaps its championing of radical democracy. It can be explained as being a:
From this Andrew Linklater argues for the expansion of the moral boundaries so the 'borders of the sovereign state lose their ethical and moral significance' so social justice is globalised and human dignity is recognised everywhere.
Liberalism's assumption that humans and by extension states have a natural propensity to cooperate does not stand up to either historical precedent or empirical fact. The League of Nations- an institution constructed upon liberal assumptions was an unmitigated disaster. It started badly when in its nascence the US congress blocked America from joining partly because many feared the country's interests would be subordinate to an international institution (an example of state egoism if ever there was one). It then got worse because of Italy's, Germany's and Japan's patent pursuit of self interest, in Abyssinia, the Rhineland and Manchuria respectively.
To point to a more recent example the League of Nations successor, the United Nations, had a Security Council that had achieved near to nothing in its first 40 years because of the stand off between the USA and the USSR. Even when relations did thaw, the Security Council still failed to operate effectively. This can be seen in the run-up to the second Gulf war in which there was an impasse amongst its permanent members. Thus it seems evident that liberalism's most fundamental assumption seems to hold little weight, rendering the approach somewhat nave and utopian.
Neo-Liberalism's much celebrated democratic peace thesis also seems to be vulnerable to attack as well. The link between two countries being democratic and them having a peaceful coexistence may not be causal but instead merely associative. Indeed liberal states tend to be wealthier, and wealthier countries tend to have less to gain and more to lose in entering large-scale conflicts. That Cuba and Mexico have also never had any significant war with one another, and they have histories of revolutions and upheavals seems to negate the thesis.
Neo-Liberalism's assumption that free-markets free people also seems unfounded. Augusto Pinochet, a man who most assiduously adopted monetarist economics had an absolutely appalling human rights record when he was leader of Chile. On a general level it also seems justifiable in saying the lower a country drops its trade barriers , the greater the role that transnational corporations play in its public domain, and concomitantly the less accountable and relevant the government are to its people- thus undermining rather than enhancing democracy.
Realism is satisfactory in that offers an analysis which fits in with the experiences of the Cold-War. Its thesis on the balance of power explains why both the Soviet Union and America only got involved in proxy wars and why the era was a time of prosperity for Western developed countries. Thus it gives the scholar a great understanding of the nature of power, wars and the politics of survival.
Despite these considerable strengths, the theory is lacking in many areas. It is too state-centric in this globalising world in which worldwide organisations such as transnational corporations and NGOs play an increasingly large part of each and every individual's life. Whilst offensive realists put an inordinate amount of emphasis on military solutions (when there are areas in the world such as Israel-Palestine which are in dire need of diplomacy to produce a lasting peace), defensive realists lack clarity about the preconditions for conflict. The emergence of 'terror' (perpetrated by networks and cells rather than nation states) and the concomitant asymmetric conflict as the dominant issue for most western liberal democracies has also raised further questions about the relevance of rationalism and neo-rationalism in today's world.
Marxist theory has a strong ideological flavour to it, and as such often underplays the fact that markets are effective generators of wealth and overplays the idea that capitalism will come to ruin. Once one has recognised this reading Marxist theory can be very rewarding. It no doubt offers the most coherent critique of neo-liberalism, highlighting the importance of social justice and indigenous social development. It can explain the emergence of non-state actors such as the Zapatista movement in Mexico far better than any realist or neo-realist; and critical theory's calling for an expansion of moral boundaries to encompass the whole world makes it the most progressive and solidaristic if not the least realistic of the approaches.
In conclusion realism and neo-realsm are too narrowly state-centric to be embraced in the ever-globalising world we live in today. Its bleak conception of human nature creates a disagreeable political paralysis in which heinous act can be legitimated by the use of such terms as 'power-politics'. Although it has offered most effective explanations to past-events its salience has waned and it serves no constructive purpose for humanity today. Its myopia lies in the fact that it fails to see that through the establishment of justice long-lasting peace may be possible.
Liberalism and neo-liberalism have an overly sanguine view of human nature placing too much faith in the states' willingness to cooperate. Its championing of attempts to implant market-driven liberal democracies all over the world is hubristic and may lead to growing estrangement in world politics rather than increased cohesion.
Marxist critiques are made by looking through heavily ideologically tinted lenses, causing critical theorists amongst others not to grasp the magnitude of the changes in the international political landscape and come to terms with the redundancy of Marxism in its purest form. Thus despite its much needed critique of the immiseration that is often caused by the imposition of monetarist economics on countries ill for prepared for such seismic shifts, it can only serve any utility if used in conjunction with other political theories.
In completing this modest investigation it can be safely said that I am very dissatisfied with the theories covered. Nonetheless this disappointment has to be tempered with the appreciation of the fact that in the very act of seeking to rationalise political phenomena, theorists produce models of explanation which offer an inevitably simplistic picture of an infinitely complex world: