The most extensive population study of the early modern period was carried out by E.A. Wrigley and R.S. Schofield, The Population History of England, 1541 - 1871: A Reconstruction, which set out calculated estimates of population trends for this period. They used the method of back-projection to estimate the population levels of the country between 1541 (the beginning of the first decade after the introduction of parish registers) and 1871 (the date of the second reliable census). This project was an immense undertaking which used four hundred and four surviving parish registers which recorded baptism, marriage and burial, to estimate demographic trends at five year intervals between these two dates. Many criticisms of both the methodology used and the results achieved have been made of this study. In very general terms these criticisms focus upon the following main areas. The sample of four hundred and four parish registers used to estimate national population figures makes up only four percent of the total number of parishes in early modern England. In addition, the sample includes too many large parishes (usually Northern areas) and too few smaller parishes (usually Eastern areas). London is also underrepresented in the study due to its lack of surviving parish registers. Even good registers however were inaccurate for certain periods (such as during the civil war) and thus only for the year 1662 were all the registers fit to use. The unreliability of back projection as a technique for working out population levels has been criticised in terms of the assumptions Wrigley and Schofield made in using this method; for example assumptions about the age structure in place throughout this period will have influenced the final results.
Despite such criticism the information Wrigley and Schofield provide does appear a plausible reading of the demographic trends of early modern England. After all, the authors are aware that methodological shortcomings exist; this work does not pretend to be concrete evidence but merely a likely estimation. Even taking in to consideration the limitations of the evidence and the methodology as well as the limitations of the study itself, i.e.: it operated on a very statistical level and was not placed in much of a social or cultural context, this remains a very useful work. Furthermore the huge financial costs and time commitments involved in this kind of research make it unlikely that another work of this nature will be undertaken. These are the best results we have, and particularly when used in conjunction with localised studies as well as studies of social and cultural factors this is very revealing research. In this essay I am going to argue from a standpoint assuming that the data compiled by Wrigley and Schofield is a realistic estimation of population trends. However, I will argue that an acceptation of the population trends presented by the Cambridge Group does not necessitate an acceptation of their interpretation of the causes of these population trends. I will argue that fertility and mortality were important in influencing population change. I will argue that the essential inter-linkage of these two factors makes any either/or demographical explanation implausible. Instead I will suggest that a model whereby both fertility and the two parts of mortality (disease and starvation) helped shape population and each other is a more realistic explanation to such a complex and wide-spanning phenomenon.
The demographic trends that Wrigley and Schofield have mapped out for early modern England begin with growth between 1541 and 1661; this growth was generally steady although it slowed during the 1550s and became rapid in the 1570s and 1580s. Between 1656 and 1686 the population decreased in size before stagnating and slightly recovering between 1686 and 1750. From 1750 onwards the vigorous growth of earlier periods was resumed, although Elizabethan growth rates were not reached until the 1790s. Thus there were two periods of growth divided by one hundred years or so from the mid seventeenth century to the mid eighteenth century when population numbers stagnated. During these main periods of growth the population increased significantly almost doubling from 2.8 million to 5.3 million between 1541 and 1656, and after the years of stagnation again doubling between 1731 and 1816 and between 1861 and 1871. As I have suggested this basic information seems both plausible and realistic, however Wrigley and Schofield's interpretation of this information; an attempt to understand what caused this rapid growth, check and decline followed by renewed growth, seems less plausible. The principle question they look at is whether '...a rise in GRR (gross reproductive rate) from 2.5 to 3.0 for example is more important than a rise in eo (life expectancy from birth) from 35-40 years in effecting growth rates." Or in other words, was it fertility or mortality that was the definitive factor in determining these population trends.
The Cambridge Group certainly believed that '...marriage was the hinge upon which the demographic regime turned." They suggested that '...fertility change was more important than mortality change in altering population growth rates', that '...fertility change in turn chiefly reflected fluctuations in nuptiality' and that '...nuptiality was primarily determined by real wages'. Thus Wrigley and Schofield presented a structure where a rise in real wages would lead to a rise in the number of marriages as well as a rise in the number of early marriages and therefore a rise in the numbers of births. Wrigley and Schofield themselves note the inevitable sacrifice of comprehensiveness with the construction of simple models, however they argue that the benefits gained in clarity are essential to understanding. Therefore the picture of demography that they present for early modern England at this time is one where the preventative check system of Malthus was in operation. This system proposed that societies could control their population growth so that the need for a positive check (natural disaster, famine, disease) to regulate population size to fit food production would be unnecessary. The actual data Wrigley and Schofield present for fertility includes 'high fertility in the sixteenth century followed by slow a decline from GRR (gross reproduction rate) from 2.8 to 1.9.' This in turn was followed by 'a gently rising trend to reach 2.3 by 1756', before an acceleration of this trend 'to reach a peak value of 3.06 in 1816.' Thus they argue that 'towards and between the major turning points of about 1660 and 1815...there were very few marked departures from the trend line, but rather a steady progression.'
There has been a lot of criticism of this model, both in terms of the methodology used to get the data on fertility and the final results presented, but also in terms of the Malthusian framework in which these results are placed. The method used to estimate age at marriage was 'family reconstitution', which traced individuals' lives through their parish. This method requires both baptism and marriage to have taken place in the same parish and assumes out-migration rates are low. In many cases however the 'sparrow phenomenon' or people flitting in and out of the records made this method impossible; in fact only twelve parish registers provided reasonable estimates for age at marriage. It has been suggested that it is probably these twelve parishes which are unrepresentative; the norm, as shown by the majority of records, was to move around the country rather than to remain in the place of birth. Thus this method uses a mere 0.12 percent of the total number of parishes to work out estimates of age at marriage on a national basis, and it is likely that this 0.12 percent is unrepresentative of the total population in terms of lifestyle habits. Marriage did not even become a regulated and controlled institution before 1753 when laws were introduced in order to make those marriages not carried out in a church illegal. Before this point marriage could be legal simply through the saying of vows in front of a witness; Laura Gowing points out that before 1753 the promise to marry followed by sex also constituted legal if irregular marriage. This ambiguity in the definition of marriage leads to further questions about the ability of Wrigley and Schofield to estimate marriage accurately because of course these non-ecclesiastical weddings would not have been recorded. John Hatcher argues that the fertility rates estimated were forced into the model of Malthusian preventative check which had already been formulated by the Cambridge Group before they even began their research. He asserts that a model where the demographic regime can be '...distilled into a counterpoint between marriage and the levels of real wages...is overly singular, simple and mechanistic...and incapable of capturing historical reality.'
Even if the marriage and fertility rates, potentially unrepresentative and framed as they may be, are accepted as plausible, questions have been raised about the placement of emphasis in Wrigley and Schofield's interpretation. David Weir argued that marital behaviour altered considerably over time causing a shift in the dominant factor affecting fertility and thus population trends. 'From a period in which the incidence of marriage was dominant to one in which changes in the ages of those marrying was dominant." Some have noted that it is difficult to assert the dominance of fertility on population trends, particularly when within the boundaries of the Malthusian model. 'Imposing' this framework on the fertility data has required Wrigley and Schofield to argue that a 'long lag' relationship of about fifty years existed between a change in real wages and its affects on fertility. 'A key puzzle of the demography is why fertility continued to rise when real wages were stagnant...the lag of course solves this problem." J.A. Goldstone accepts that a lag is a plausible explanation; however suggests that reducing it to a twenty year difference would be more accurate. Others however are less convinced by the theory; Steve Hindle suggests that we do not know enough about marriage horizons, the preference for nuclear family households, factors influencing nuptiality and in particular the influence of institutional pressures (such as apprenticeships and the poor law) in shaping marriage, to make assertions about a long lag and the population correcting its own development in reaction to conditions of scarcity and plenty. Indeed it has been noted that as a period of low life expectancy the possibility of parents surviving to influence the marriage patterns of the next generation is most unlikely. Similarly, questions have been asked about the amount of influence a parent would have had over their children. Perhaps in cases where inheritance would depend on parental approval influence would be quite significant, but for the majority of the population inheritance would not have been left. The deterministic nature of this fertility led explanation for the population growth of 1541-1656 and 1731-1871 does not allow room for other factors, and does not take regional variations in to consideration. Although I do not wish to argue in a deterministic fashion that mortality was the most important factor in shaping the population 'replacing one bald stereotype with another', it is important to look at the quite significant part played by mortality in order to question Wrigley and Schofield's interpretations.
The two parts of mortality; starvation and disease were both influences on the early modern population, not least because their presence pre-empted any potential rise in fertility through restricting marriage partners, increasing migration and affecting prices and wages. The influence of factors other than fertility can be seen in the rise of the population despite a fall in real wages; I am afraid that I remain unconvinced by the long lag theory and thus this slowness of response between the two seems to imply that mortality had more influence than Wrigley and Schofield suggested. John Hatcher points out that the volatility of both fertility and mortality during this time is suggestive not of Wrigley and Schofield's model where '...there were very few departures from the tend line', but of a model where many influences were working to shape the population. 'Conclusive statistical proof of the exceptional instability...high annual deviations between 1550/1 and 1574/5 of 17.7 percent in the crude death rate, and 12.2 percent and 8.0 percent respectively in the marriage and birth rates." Hatcher also notes that assumptions made by Wrigley and Schofield to fill in gaps left by poor evidence and their small sample had led to the effects of mortality being underestimated. 'A far more severe impact is revealed by the registers not included in the study and also by the abundance of wills probated in a wide range of ecclesiastical jurisdictions." Additionally, Wrigley and Schofield's determination to prove the dominance of fertility can be seen in their relegation of mortality to a mere 'condition' of population change whereas fertility is considered a 'cause'; mortality is presented as something which affects fertility rather than as an influence on population in its own right. As Hatcher points out 'in any analysis of causality the designation of some factors as 'conditions' or 'circumstances' and others as 'causes' is liable to exert a powerful influence over the outcome." What Hatcher calls 'a tangle of contradictions and reservations' in fact 'lie behind the series of confident judgements...made.'
There are a number of issues surrounding the fertility led preventative check theory and the above criticisms are useful to demonstrate a rather general lack of accuracy in Wrigley and Schofield's model; however it is also useful to look at more specific studies to identify the effects of mortality on localised areas. Peter Laslett's study on famine in early modern England concluded that the threat of starvation or 'crisis mortality' was very unlikely to occur. However, death via malnutrition and via food poisoning (through eating rotten or poor quality foods) , though not technically starvation as such, could still cause population rates to fall as well as making the population more susceptible to disease and lowering fertility. This distinction between outright starvation and malnutrition is something which Andrew Appleby also remarks upon, arguing that death due to starvation and malnutrition could be very hard to identify. Appleby suggests that the years of 'recurring population crises' between 1550 and 1640 were in fact due to mortality and further that 'the role of famine as a killer  in its own right has been underplayed' generally 'in the history of early modern England,' (my italics). Wrigley and Schofield do recognise that at particular times throughout history mortality has been more dominant than fertility in shaping demography, yet they conclude that overall fertility had the more decisive influence. Appleby's findings in Westmorland and Cumberland show that perhaps this decisive influence is misleading because the effects of mortality have been repeatedly and mistakenly underplayed.
Disease had specific characteristics; it was often recorded in parish registers as a cause of death and appeared in other primary evidence such as wills. Famine did not have such a 'discernable pattern to help the historian identify it' it did not have such specific characteristics, it was rarely recorded in parish registers, and those who could write (more likely the upper sorts) would have been less likely to feel the effects of famine and able to relocate in plenty of time before actual starvation set in. Appleby looks at available sources and compares them closely with the known characteristics of the prevalent diseases of the period; epidemics were rarely rural problems, they declined in Winter (the winter disease Typhus rarely killed children and is thus identifiable), disease set in very quickly and in the case of plague 'would often follow the main lines of trade between cities, fairs and seaports'. The characteristics of starvation are much harder to identify and provide proof of; parish records were often unhelpful, famine did not follow a specific development like that of disease and when it appeared in the form of malnutrition it is even harder to discern. Appleby develops a more detailed methodology for identifying famine than the three main requirements of Peter Laslett; he noticed that in cases of starvation gradual or rapid onset of deaths could occur but a dramatic increase in mortality (burials twice normal) should be expected. Several neighbouring villages would also have increased deaths, a correlation between prices and mortality should be noticeable, usually some reference to dearth would exist in one form of source or another and there should be fewer conceptions than usual. Not only does this list of the characteristics of famine offer evidence that it can be very hard to identify, but that it is very closely linked to fertility; not as a condition of the rise/fall of fertility, but as a factor in its own right. Appleby discovered that famine had played a significant part in shaping the population in Cumberland and Westmorland; at certain times it was the dominant factor causing the death toll to mount, at other times it made areas more susceptible to disease (through lessened immune systems, and through desperate importing of foods from areas with epidemics) and made women less willing and less able to conceive.
In their study of Mid-Wharfedale parishes in 1623 Moira Long and May Pickles also found that evidence of 'crisis mortality' was often a part of early modern life, if not in the form of full blown famine certainly in the form of 'crisis months'. What Long and Pickles also recognise is the importance that the threat of famine played in shaping populations, for example the fear of shortages could affect births (not necessarily through less marriages but also through stress and amenorrhea) and could persuade locals to import food raising the likelihood of an epidemic. It is the backdrop of general high mortality in England in 1623 against which Long and Pickles set their study and they found, as suggested by Appleby, that in the areas they looked at scarcity and famine were the hardest to identify. However they suggest that 'erratic' results for famine exemplified this period and that 'the balance between sufficiency and dearth in many parts...was finely poised." Victor Skipp found considerable regional variation in occurrences of famine and shortages which might conceivably have led to their relative invisibility in the small sample of Wrigley and Schofield. These findings and Appleby's findings from specific area studies seem to reflect Hatcher's argument that the presentation of both the steadily rising influence of fertility and steadily decreasing influence of mortality is inaccurate. In the same way Wrigley and Schofield's treatment of famine as a mere condition rather a cause affecting the turning of the demographic regime is equally misleading; yes fertility was important in 'turning the regime', but it was by no means alone in its efforts.
Throughout this essay so far, I have tried to emphasise the continuous links between mortality and fertility during the early modern period; it is this essential inter-linkage which I wish to look at more explicitly now. There were interconnections between disease, migration, death, birth rate, price and wage, amongst others; in practice of course the nature of and the strengths of these links varied, nevertheless they did exist. The incidence of famine whether long or short term affected disease rates, fertility rates and migration rates as well as affecting prices and wages as the population lessens. Likewise, high fertility could force prices up, wages down, encourage migration and make disease more probable. It seems to me that the circular nature and knock on effect of all these factors combining to shape each other and the population would be better described in terms of a set of dominoes rather than as a hinge which suggests not only the domination but also the presence of only one factor. Does not the very reality of high fertility demand low levels of disease and plenty of food? And does not the very reality of famine demand high levels of population? As Laslett suggests 'each part of our subject is also our whole subject...the fund of food was obviously related to age at marriage and numbers marrying.'
Hatcher suggests that Wrigley and Schofield manipulate data to exaggerate fertility and lessen the significance of mortality; he argues that the presentation of information in The Population History of England is 'skewed' in favour of fertility. Even the date at which the study begins favours their Malthusian framework; 'the first half of the sixteenth century was a period of demographic transition, results would have been very different if the parish register series had begun a couple of decades earlier or later.' Although Hatcher accepts that this was purely coincidental, 'a historical accident', it still demonstrates that the prominence awarded to fertility by Wrigley and Schofield is not necessarily historically accurate but is based more upon interpretation, evidence and methodology used. In fact, a case for the essential interaction and inseparability of the factors influencing population can be made from within The Population History of England. From '1551 to 1566 falling fertility was the main driving force until the "golden period of low mortality" turned the tables; 1571 to 1611 was a period of relatively stable fertility and mortality "fertility and mortality contributed equally to the steady fall", fertility was dominant from 1671 to 1691 but mortality was most clearly the more important influence on growth rates from 1691 to 1751." Hatcher sums up these characteristics and finds that 'fertility is held to dominate for around thirty-five years of the two-hundred year time span, mortality for around sixty-five years and that for a century the two variables exerted approximately equal influence." This evidence is 'immediately contradicted' by Wrigley and Schofield through the use of 'quinquennial averages', and the discarding of 'three episodes of very high mortality before 1751'. Nonetheless it seems evident that 'fertility and mortality exchanged leadership many times within the early modern period' and that pinpointing which one was dominant at different times would prove a more useful exercise than attempting to prove which was dominant full stop.
In conclusion, despite the problems with Wrigley and Schofield's methodology and evidence the population trends they map out are plausible and the best figures historians have to work with. I have suggested however that in many ways their interpretation of the causality of this trend is flawed. The judgement that living standards and wage rates determined nuptiality and therefore fertility, or that 'marriage is the hinge upon which the demographic regime turned' is inaccurate. Family reconstitution provided data on fertility which was unreliable and unrepresentative. However, even accepting these methodological limitations the figures then seemed to be moulded to fit a Malthusian framework of preventative check homeostasis. The 'long lag' theory used to justify the lack of direct correlation between fertility and real wages over simplifies a very complex phenomenon whilst simultaneously relegating other important factors to mere conditions or circumstances rather than causes of population change. The fact that we do not know enough about marriage patterns, non-church marriages, or the parental influences over children of every day people makes the long lag an unsustainable claim.
The deterministic nature of this model undermines the significance of mortality and other factors upon population changes and upon shaping fertility. The relative instability and volatility of both fertility and mortality suggests more detail is needed in the model Wrigley and Schofield provide. Evidence such as those registers not used in The Population History sample as well as personal documents from the time show that mortality had more influence than the Cambridge Group suggest. Mortality in the form of starvation was often extremely hard to identify due to its lack of recording in parish registers. The type of scarcity which never developed in to full blown famine is even harder to spot, but was equally influential in shaping fertility and population. Studies of Westmorland and Cumberland, the Forest of Arden and of Mid-Wharfedale parishes reveal a mistaken and repeated underplaying of starvation, and its often very localised nature. In fact the presence and at times domination of mortality was important and deserves more attention in  The Population History. Similarly, although I have not focused greatly upon the influence of migration and in particular sex specific migration on population trends, through reducing the pool of those eligible for marriage, its importance should not be underestimated either. I have tried to show that the links between starvation, disease and fertility are more important and relevant than which of these major demographic variables was dominant overall. Each affected the others and each in turn was affected by many other minor demographic variables. Therefore I have suggested that a model whereby the essential interlinks of mortality, migration and fertility would prove most accurate. Hatcher claims that in total between 1551 and 1751 'fertility is dominant for 17.5 percent of the time, mortality for 32.5 percent and for 50 percent of the time the two variables exerted approximately equal influence." Manifestly he argues that causality cannot be established until it is accepted that fertility and mortality were both important factors within the early modern period '...and a host of social, cultural and economic factors played on them to help fashion demographic behaviour." To finally answer the question, I would suggest that the metaphor of fertility as a 'hinge upon which the demographic regime turned', be discarded and replaced with a metaphor which better encompasses the historical reality of the exertion of manifold influences, and a co-relation of factors which developed to shape what was infact less a regime, and more a volatile commune. 'Any valid depiction of reality is likely to resemble a vast irregular web'. The achievements of the Cambridge Group should not be underestimated, but equally nor should the inadequacies of their interpretative model. 'Patterns of births, marriages, deaths and migrations helped to shape society and economy and were themselves shaped by society and economy' as I have attempted to show in this essay.