"Theory of International Politics" was written by Waltz in the context of the pluralist challenge to classical realism and the rise to dominance of rationalist theory in political science in the 1970s. Through injecting scientific rigour into realist theory and refining its focus, the book is probably the most significant work on international relations in his generation. Waltz was heavily influenced by Lakatos' model of theory construction on the epistemological level, and microeconomic theory on the methodological level. The former led him to construct a theory based on minimal assumptions and a heuristic set of propositions that could generate empirically verifiable hypotheses. The latter led him to assume that nation-states were rational egoists whose behaviour was shaped by structural determinants.
Upon this theoretical foundation, the three main tenets of the neo-realism he propounded are: that the distinguishing characteristic of the international realm is its anarchic nature; that nation-states have the same function (ie. they all strive to survive) but have different capabilities; and that it is the distribution of these capabilities which determined the structure within which they acted. From anarchy a self-help system arises in which states are obliged to look after themselves as all are potential threats. This can only be achieved through continually adjusting their stance in the world in relation to the changes in stances and power of others. They become what Waltz called 'defensive positionalists'. The unintended result of such behaviour is always the restoration of the 'balance of power,' the means by which security is attained.
Neo-realism of the Waltzian variety has a large number of conceptual flaws. To ensure some kind of structure to the critique these flaws will be outlined in one of the following challenges:
Neo-realism's strengths have been well-rehearsed and to some extent are self-evident. Most importantly by combing micro-economic assumptions with structuralist theory it provides a compelling analysis of how international "anarchy" effects nation-states' behaviour and it accounts for the often conflict-ridden nature of international relations with a scientific certitude possessed by no other theory. Having this in mind, the essay shall now critique neo-realism's main conceptual ideas.
One of the more evident conceptual flaws within neo-realism is its adoption of the nation-state as the key unit of analysis in international relations and thus its abstraction from historical reality. This is because the nation-state is not a "concrete unit" (Cox and Sinclair, 1996, p.13) whose existence can be assumed a priori. It is a historically contingent artifice whose origins lie in 15 th century Europe; its emergence did not occur naturally prior to human agency and there is no evidence to show that under the pressures of globalisation its continued significance is assured. Indeed, the rise in power of non-state actors such as non-governmental, transnational and supranational organisations suggests that the nation-state is being squeezed from all directions, with transversal movements of labour, capital and information having a deterritorializing effect. To reify something that appears so amenable to internal and external influences and to accept it as a given in world politics is erroneous indeed.
Extending on from this, by putting so much emphasis on the effects external structure has on international relations, neo-realism marginalises domestic politics, ignoring its profound effect upon nation-states' foreign policy. That no two democracies have ever gone to war against each other (Doyles' 'democratic peace thesis'); or that no two states which have a McDonalds franchise within their borders have battled (Friedman's 'Golden Arches theory'); or that the roots of the 1914 war lied partly in: "the deep social and political tensions shaking the various imperialist powers of the continent in their transitions to modern capitalism and the role that orchestrated chauvinism and militarism had long played as a linchpin of domestic domination, keeping the wolves of labour and suffrage at bay" (Gowan, 2002, p.76) is evidence that neo-realists are mistaken in not recognising the profound importance of political culture, class relations and civil society has in international relations. For Elshtein, this above state/below state theoretical demarcation is not merely an intellectual blunder but like the public/private divide, a deliberate move to keep women isolated from the areas of power.
Ashley's deconstruction of the 'anarchy problematique' is illuminating when addressing the normative implications of neo-realism's conferring of ontological primacy upon the nation-state. Through disassembling the anarchy/sovereignty dichotomy, Ashley asserts that for the two concepts to have any validity in international relations inside the sovereign state there must exist: identity, homogeneity, order and progress and outside: difference, heterogeneity, disorder, threat and repetition. Thus for neo-realist ideas about the nature of the nation-state to be tenable there must be a "well-bounded sovereign entity possessing its own 'internal' hegemonic centre of decision-making" capable of expunging all internal dissent and "projecting a singular presence" (Ashley, 1988, p.245) and in the domain beyond sovereignty a Hobbesian war of all against all. Neither of these two conditions is reflected in reality, but nonetheless the anarchy problematic serves to legitimize the existence of all states, nurturing the misconception that states exist to protect their citizens when in fact they more often endanger them.
The power a state possesses is basically understood by neo-realists as its military capabilities. This is a gross oversimplification of what is in fact a multifaceted and hugely complex concept, sidelining not least the situational and psychological dimensions of power. For instance, the USA according to neo-realist logic should have won the war against North Vietnam quite easily; the conflict was essentially between a peasant guerrilla army and the most highly sophisticated military force in the world. But they didn't. This was because there were other determining factors, like quality of leadership, the effect the American media had on undermining public morale and the skill of the Vietminh and Vietcong in irregular jungle warfare. Most important of all was perhaps the asymmetry of aims, whilst America sought to implant an anti-communist regime in a hostile land, all North Vietnam wanted was to survive until the USA could not face any more humiliation. Another example would be that of the situation of Israel in the Middle East. It enjoys military preponderance over its Arab neighbours, and it has defeated them in conventional warfare (1948, 1967, 1973), but it has been unable to convert these victories into solid political results, with Israelis still vulnerable to sporadic terrorist attacks perpetrated by stateless Palestinians.
With this last illustration in mind it is evident that power and security are terms that need to be reconceptualised. The neo-realist conception of power emphasises to an excessive degree the 'masculine' notion of "power as domination" and underplays the 'feminine' notion of "power as mutual enablement"- the ability to persuade rather than coerce. Coupled with this, the neo-realist conception of security stresses zero-sum outcomes at the expense of mutually beneficial ones. The result is that is has succeeded in dehumanizing the 'other' rather than highlighting the common humanity we all share. Further more, neo-realism manifestly fails to say anything meaningful about the new transborder threats that globalisation has exposed us to, such as world environmental degradation and transnational terrorist networks (eg. Al Qaeda). It has also ignored more specifically the effects global capitalism poses to states' security. After all it was not war that completely ravaged East Asian states in 1997 but unregulated flows of financial speculation, it was not insufficient military capabilities that led to Argentina's devastation in 2001 but its assiduous implementation of an IMF structural adjustment programme.
Neo-realism's principle that one can separate subject from object and facts from values has quite rightly aroused strong criticism from post-structuralists and critical theorists. They point out that attaining an Archimedean standpoint- an objective position divorced from the social world we find our selves in- is an impossibility. Through Foucault's genealogical approach to the history of thought it is evident that there is no grand theory but instead a procession of self-enclosed, historically and spatially-bound "regimes of truth" that are wedded to power interests. Indeed, the very idea of a real-world is a chimera: "there is only a perspective seeing; only a perspective knowing" (Nietzsche, 1969, III, p.12) and "our investigations are limited and constrained within the linguistic world within which we have constructed for ourselves" (Wittgenstein, 1972, p.142). This renders neo-realist terms like 'balance of power' to be "mere sounds" (Cobden, 2001, p.143) and thus contrary to its scientific claims, the theory lies not on a bedrock of truth but on the shaky foundations of contingency.
Neo-realism is also guilty of taking a simplistic reading of structure (anarchy) and agency (nation-states) in international relations. It assumes that political actors are atomistic, self-interested and rational, with interests exogenous to social interaction. As such it pays scant regard to the enormous impact ideational structures and identity formation has on states' behaviour. In his celebrated article "Anarchy is What States Make of it" Wendt suggests that rather than the self-help system being the inevitable consequence of the anarchic nature of world politics, it is a social institution forged by the inter-subjective meanings that emerge in the interaction between states. Interests and identities are thus endogenous rather than exogenous to structure in international relations. On this basis he convincingly argues: "if states find themselves in a self-help system, this is because their practices made it that way." (Wendt, 1992, p.407) This emphasis on the importance of shared knowledge and identity clearly accounts for why, for example, the USA's relations with Canada are different to that of Cuba- while the former shares with America a common identity, the latter is a sworn enemy.
While claiming to be value-free on the grounds of its quasi-scientific approach to international relations, neo-realism is actually value-laden. It is as Cox points out a 'problem-solving theory' and as such sees world politics as non-historical, positing the permanence of existing and institutions power-relations. This assumption of fixity means that it implicitly accepts the prevailing order as its own framework and neglects the possible sources of change, the internal contradictions and the emergence of counter-hegemonic forces within the system. It thus reifies the international system making it appear as an 'opus alienum' over which man has no control rather than as 'opus proprium'- something socially constructed and amenable to change. Linklater's work for example, has shown how neo-realism's sanctification of the nation-state, an entity based on an exclusionary principle, has hindered the surfacing of a cosmopolitan identity. It is evident therefore that the theory acts as a force for conservativism- stultifying human imagination and impeding progress towards a more harmonious world order.
All of the above criticisms show that neo-realism is inadequate in many areas; most notably in its ignorance of the contingency of the nation-state, of the new threats globalisation poses us, and of the crucial impact that ideas and identities have in world politics. However, this should not detract from the point touched upon on in the introduction; neo-realism remains the best theory to date in offering a systematic and rigorous account of inter-state relations. In light of this, Keohane's judgment that: "neo-realism is better at telling us why we are in such trouble than how to get out of it" (Keohane, 1986, p.15) appears to be well-founded.
Nonetheless, in order to get a real grasp of the problems of neo-realism one needs to take a step further than Keohane: its theoretical myopia and its dampening effect on human progress, perpetuates "such trouble". It goes someway in elucidating the "trouble" in world politics, but it simultaneously nurtures it. It is both an imperfect diagnosis of the problem and part of the problem itself. Neo-Realism's major conceptual ideas are therefore, both quite illuminating and totally destructive.