Through analysing political economy historically and anthropologically, Polanyi's 'The Great Transformation' has made a profound impact upon scholars' understanding of the market system. The work exposes the historical contingency of the self-regulating market and the specificity of the human trait of utility-maximisation and as such offers ample ammunition to those wishing to critique the reifying and intellectually stultifying qualities of neo-classical and now neo-liberal discourse. Moreover, it has helped widen our understanding of international political economy and it has given us a greater insight into the systemic frailties within global capitalism. These academic advances that 'The Great Transformation' has facilitated, this essay shall argue, could not have been brought about if it were not for the concept of 'embeddedness.' The concept's centrality shall be outlined through a summary of how all the major ideas put forward by the book relate to it, and its significance shall be judged according to how well these ideas have a bearing on the dynamics within the contemporary global economy.
More specifically, in relation to ascertaining the level of centrality of the concept of 'embeddedness' the essay shall examine:
In relation to illustrating its current significance, the essay shall analyse the double-movement with respect to global finance.
Having done this, it will be concluded that firstly the concept of 'embeddedness' is intrinsic to what 'The Great Transformation' offers to the scholar of IPE, and secondly, that its significance cannot be doubted insofar as it enhances our understanding of contemporary economic globalisation.
Polanyi sought to address the neo-classical discourse's naturalisation of the concept of the market economy. Rather than being a timeless arena of economic interaction, he contended that it was a socially-constructed institution ascendant only in western industrial capitalism, by identifying 3 overlapping and co-existing socio-economic systems sustained by three discrete "motivational logics" (Watson, 2005, p.47). The first is that of reciprocity which occurs in social systems in which trust is the prevailing norm between actors of equal power. Two-way barter at any particular time was not a necessity, so long as transactions of goods were roughly equal in the long-term. The second was that of redistribution which occurs in social systems in which there is a strong governing authority, able to collect and then disperse goods in a way conducive to satisfying the perceived social good. The third was the system which neo-classical economists solely focused on, that of exchange. This occurs when buyers and sellers act autonomously, bearing no obligation other than to complete a specified transaction of a particular time. Their interactions are random and governed solely by the impersonal supply-demand price mechanism, rendering society a mere "adjunct to the market." (Polanyi, 2001, p.60)
Inextricably linked with this, is Polanyi's critique of the neo-classical economists' theoretical reification of human nature. Drawing inspiration from Aristotle, Polanyi refuted claims that human beings are naturally acquisitive and utility-maximising. He argued in line with historical and anthropological findings of the time that: "Man's economy, as a rule, is submerged in his social relationships. He does not act so as to safeguard his individual interest in the possession of material goods; he acts so as to safeguard his social standing, his claims, his social assets. He values material goods only so far as they serve this end." (Polanyi, 2001, p.48) As such human beings' behavioural traits are shaped in part by the institutional and social arrangements that surround them. It is thus the specific set of socio-legal structures belonging to modern industrial capitalism which facilitate, legitimate, incentivise and therefore encourage an instrumental rationality geared towards material gain. This all led to "the economistic fallacy," the intellectual folly of conflating the empirical entity of economic relations, which could take myriad forms depending upon the cultural traditions of the society in which they were embedded, with specifically economizing behaviour.
Polanyi also launched a devastating attack upon neo-classical economists' treatment of labour, land and money as commodities. In the terms set by "The Great Transformation" commodities are defined as "objects produced for sale on the market," (Polanyi, 2001, p.75) yet patently none of the three are the product of human industry, they have in other words an existence prior to the market. "Labour is only another name for a human activity which goes with life itself... land is only another name for nature" and "money is merely a token of purchasing power which, as a rule, is not produced at all, but comes into being through the mechanism of banking or state finance." (Polanyi, 2001, p.75-6) For Polanyi the description of labour, land, and money as commodities is not only "entirely fictitious" (2001, p.76) but their treatment as such, in which all are remorselessly dealt with by the market mechanism would be devastating: "labour power cannot be shoved about, used indiscriminately, or even left unused, without affecting also the human individual who happens to be the bearer of this particular commodity... robbed of the protective covering of cultural institutions, human beings would perish from the dislocation through vice, perversion, crime, and starvation. Nature would be reduced to its elements, neighbourhoods and landscapes defiled... finally; the market administration of purchasing power would periodically liquidate business enterprise, for shortages and surfeits of money would prove as disastrous to business as floods and droughts in primitive society." (2001, p.76)
From the above reasoning, "The Great Transformation" made three hugely significant contributions to the study of international political economy. Firstly, the market economy and therefore the market society cannot emerge naturally, but are necessarily the result of a deliberate governmental policy of constructing market-oriented social norms and frameworks (in Polanyi's famous words: "laissez-faire was planned" (2001, p.147)) Secondly that the tremendous social dislocation, environmental destruction and financial instability precipitated by government's blind abidance of the "the liberal creed" and the introduction of the gold standard, rendered economic liberalism unsustainable. In one sense, this can be seen in the fact that the very institutions (the family, the community, and the society) that socialize future workers with the characteristics essential to successful production (honesty, diligence and responsibility) are corroded by the social anomie that is wrought by the market system itself. Lastly, that all of this provokes an ameliorative restraining force which seeks to re-embed the market into society. Termed the counter-movement, Gill elegantly defines it as: "an attempt, in disparate but unrelated ways, to reassert social control over the unfettered power of capital in determining the possibilities of social choice." (1995, p.65) In the period Polanyi analysed, amongst others it was initially and somewhat surprisingly the English landlords, "the enlightened reactionaries" (Polanyi, 2001, p.173-4) and then later the newly enfranchised working class who embodied this counter-movement. Nowadays the counter-movements to the "disembedded liberalism" (Munk, 2005, p.61) that have come to the fore since the 1970s are too numerous to recount. For this reason the essay shall very briefly turn to the double-movement in global finance to illustrate the importance of the concept of "embeddedness."
Like laissez-faire in the 19 th century, economic globalisation has by no means emerged naturally. In fact, states have actively provided much of the regulatory architecture for global finance by removing exchange controls, passing legislation for offshore facilities, facilitating externally based banks and in allowing non-resident ownership of bonds and equities. Like the gold-standard, liberalised finance can have a hugely destructive impact upon economies, with the most noteworthy victims being the "East Asian Tigers" who were on the receiving-end of an onslaught of speculative attacks in 1998. As a response to such pressures, the G10 central bankers, perhaps the "enlightened reactionaries" of our age, have erected a rather elaborate regulatory framework for the world's leading international finance markets. There has been counter-movements regionally, with the EC for example, establishing a "regional zone of stability" in 1979, as a way for individual national governments to retain a degree of influence over the increasingly powerful financial global markets. On a national level, far-Right groups headed by the likes of Le-Pen (in France) and Buchanan (in the USA) have called for the re-imposition of capital controls at the national level in order to restore the kind of world that existed 50 years ago, making Polanyi's remark "in order to understand fascism we must revert back to Ricardian England" (2001, p.30) seem particularly pertinent. On a sub-national level there have been hundreds of local-currency experiments around the world since the 1980s. All such schemes act as a form of protectionism, in which a unique form of exchange can only be used in a clearly defined local area with the aims being: to encourage money to remain in the community, to reduce the communities' vulnerability to speculative investment and more generally to restore a sense of social embeddedness.
In conclusion, from the above analysis it is evident that all of the main tenets promulgated by Polanyi in "The Great Transformation" stem from the crucial concept of "embeddedness." The essay started by outlining Polanyi's critique of neo-classical economist's idea of the market-system. He showed it to be divorced from human social relations, and as such revealed the idea of attaining a society governed by the market as a dangerous utopian dream. It then looked at Polanyi's thoughts on the human condition, here too he mounts a formidable attack against neo-classical economic scholarship on the grounds of the concept of "embeddedness" judging the idea of the homo economicus to be an obscure abstraction rather than a universal feature of human kind. The essay then proceeded to outline Polanyi's thoughts on "fictitious commodities," whereby he powerfully illustrates the disastrous consequences of dissembedding human-beings, nature and exchange from the social and moral realm which they inhabit. Lastly, with particular attention given to contemporary global finance, the essay demonstrated the prescience of Polanyi's conception of the double-movement, showing all such responses to unencumbered capitalism to be borne out of the desire to re-embed economics within society. Relating this all to the current context: neo-liberalism- the progeny of the neo-classicism Polanyi critiqued so devastatingly- as an academic discourse and a political project, is very much in the ascendant. Repeating its forebear's fateful theoretical errors and wreaking an unprecedented amount of social dislocation, environmental degradation and financial volatility around the world today, the concept of "embeddedness" has never been more significant.