The idea that one can establish whether the German system of vocational education and training (VET) is superior to its British counterpart rests on a number of fallacious assumptions:
Firstly, it assumes that the two systems are directly comparable, with the logical inference being that the vocational systems of both countries emerged in hermetically sealed environments, devoid of any wider social or historical context. This of course is an untenable position to hold. The German dual system rests on the firm foundations of its centuries-old guild tradition and it is sustained by Germany's manufacturing-based, export-led "coordinated market economy" (Soskice and Hall). The UK on the other hand possesses neither such a strong guild tradition nor the corporatist institutions which make the German VET system so fitting. Ours is a more "liberal market economy," (Soskice and Hall) based more on the service industry and the production of low-quality goods which requires an altogether different model of voluntary education.
Secondly, the question posits that the effects of the two countries' VET on their respective labour markets and respective economies at large are ascertainable. This necessitates the impossible task of isolating the effects of the voluntary education system from all other factors. To illustrate this point, what extent is the decline of the number of apprentices in the UK from 236,000 in 1968 to fewer than 100,000 attributable to failures in Britain's VET, or the more overarching economic structural changes Thatcher, or anything else? Or to what extent was the recession of the German economy in the late eighties and early nineties due to the inadequacies of the dual-system, or the natural slow-down in the business cycle, or the pains of unification? The fact is one cannot answer these questions with any accuracy. The relationship between vocational education - the labour market - and the economy cannot be summed up by one causal arrow pointing from left to right or right to left, there are in reality myriad causal arrows pointing in myriad directions.
Thirdly, there are a variety of client groups who want a variety of things from the vocational system. For instance, businesses may want workers to be inculcated with ideas of flexible labour practice, the workers may want to be given skills that will give them a long and stable careers and the government may be animated by wider concerns regarding economic prosperity or social inclusion. These client group interests are not always congruent and indeed sometimes they may be deemed mutually exclusive. This renders questions of "superiority" somewhat vague and fruitless, what should instead be asked is: "superior for whom?" Lastly, by asking for comparisons between the two countries the question implicitly posits that the effects of VET have been felt uniformly within the confines of their respective borders, and so one runs the risk of disregarding the disparities in outcomes inside a country. For example, as the essay shall later show, the effects of the dual system in Eastern Germany have been very different from those in Western Germany.
With these points in mind, the paper shall now proceed to analyse the effects of the vocational systems within both countries, not so much in relation to one another but according to their own individual merits and demerits. By doing this, perhaps light may be shed on areas of strengths and weaknesses within both VETs.
The dual-system of vocational education is both massive and comprehensive in that around 70% of every age cohort (16-19 year olds) in Germany passes through it, with most courses offering of a rigorous training lasting three years. It is run on a cooperative basis between private enterprisers, who offer practical apprenticeships to the trainee, and part-time vocational colleges (Berufsschale), who impart more general, supplementary knowledge. The private firms contribute a great deal towards their funding. There are two reasons for this: firstly it allows them to utilise training as a means of inculcating good work habits and developing a highly skilled work force, and secondly because of the traditional German belief that private enterprises have an obligation to help mould the youth into self-sufficient and well-adjusted individuals in the view of maintaining social cohesion.
This system has won many plaudits in the academic world, and has been copied by other countries with a varying degree of success. However over the last two decades the model has been put under strain by two discernable phenomena: the German reunification and the emergence of post-Fordism. The assimilation of the rather stagnant low skilled East German economy into the more productive, high wage West German economy had damaging repercussions for the vocational educational system in the newly unified German state. Eastern German cities were very different to Western German ones in that they did not have the same amount of flourishing middle-size companies which provided the optimum condition for the dual system to operate effectively. To compound matters, Eastern German youths found it difficult to adapt to the more western work patterns introduced and the profound changes taking place in the labour market. The result was that the VET in Germany became more costly and uneven in its effects- this can be seen in that in 1998 about 70% of the apprenticeship contracts in firms in Eastern Germany had to be subsidised by the state and that whilst 58% of Western German apprentices were kept on by their firms after completing their apprenticeship, only 46% of eastern German apprentices were given contracts.
The emergence of post-Fordist forms of production and the increasing pressures of globalisation have put into question the viability of the German dual-system. The system has become more costly for the German government as foreign firms, not bound by the same social contract as German companies feel less obliged to offer apprenticeships and funding to the youngsters. This can be seen that from 1994- 1997 the percentage of the cost of the system coming from public money rose from 48% to 52%. The increasing importance of information technology has also created profound difficulties. Firstly, because the rapid increase in demand for highly-qualified workers, has not been met with a rapid increase in supply, as most VET programmes are geared towards menial work. Secondly, because most firms in the information technology sector are small, they feel too unstable to take on apprentices for 3 years. Thirdly, because the sector is rapidly changing, many students have found that their teachers' knowledge is outdated and that the theoretical instruction is not relevant enough to their future operations.
More generally, the German apprenticeship system, with its focus on providing people with the necessary skills early on in life so they can then proceed in joining the occupational labour market, seems to be antiquated in light of the fact that rapid economic and technological we are experiencing require education to be a lifelong occupation and workers to be flexible in their work-patterns. The misfit between what is taught in the dual-system and what is required in the labour market is further exacerbated by the bureaucratic inertia embedded within the corporatist decision-making process. At a time when the obsolescence rate of knowledge and skills is ever- increasing it can sometimes take ten years for government to advance from the awareness of the need for policy change and the materialisation of that policy change. Even when reforms are made they are often half-baked because of the need to compromise between the competing interests of labour and capital. Indeed while the German governments' have tried to respond to the new demands posed by globalisation and post-Fordism, all of the policies initiatives exhibit their profound disinclination to make any major structural changes. The bitter fruits of this tentativeness over the last decade are the add-on programmes which however well-intentioned make the system more complex and confusing.
Despite all these criticisms, the German governments' approach to VET has been far more systematic and consistent than anything found in the UK. Indeed there are a large number of examples in the UK of government vocational initiatives which were devoid of long-term planning and substantial funding. The Youth Training Scheme was put together with a large degree of improvisation with the result being that the quality of the VET programmes were variable, with there often being a disconnect between what was taught in on- job learning and off- job training. The NVQs have been seen to have dubious validity, with work-based assessments overseen by the supervisor/trainer without external verification, leading to a privileging of practical skills over theoretical knowledge, an unnecessarily high rate of assessment errors and a wider abuse of the process when economic rewards are linked to high test results. The Individual Labour Accounts scheme seemed to be a worthwhile response to the pressures of post-Fordism, but it ignominiously died three years ago amidst a funding crisis and suspicions of widespread fraud. Thus, it seems evident that while the UK government can perhaps react more nimbly to the rapidly transforming global economy than its German counterpart, this is partly because of the very fact that it has not committed itself to creating any deeply embedded, highly institutionalised vocational educational system.
Nonetheless, the shortfalls of the UK's vocational education system cannot be adequately explained by the government's fairly non-committal attitude in this area of policy-making. There is a wider issue of public perception and social exclusion at hand that has been more acute in the UK. While most German's hold the dual-system in high regard and pass through it at some point of their life, Britain's VET is seen as a mere stop-gap for a minority of dejected unmotivated working class youths. The low expectations of wider society and the low aspirations of many of the working class trainees exist symbiotically- feeding off one another, resulting in high-drop out rates in courses and an unwillingness of businesses to employ those youngsters who have successfully completed their training. This can be clearly seen in the Youth Training Scheme where in many cases trainees were exploited as cheap labour and then dismissed after they finished their course if they had not already quit before this time. Thus, although there is no doubt that British VET does little to abate social inequality, social inequality undoubtedly makes British VET harder to function successfully.
In conclusion, the question is a complete nonsense as it posits that there is a definitive way of ascertaining whether one vocational system is superior to another. In reality German and British forms of vocational education are the results and to a lesser extent the causes of their own social contexts in which they find themselves. To isolate them from their contexts so as to compare them would be theoretically myopic. Germany's highly co-ordinated dual-system would be totally unsuitable for Britain's liberal market economy, and Britain's more loose and fragmented model of vocational education would be completely unfitting for the more socially inclusive Germany. Anyhow, what does seem apparent is that there is an inevitable trade-off between having a systematic and comprehensive vocational system and having an innovative and flexible one; the German system goes so far in the former direction that it is bloated and unwieldy, and its British counterpart goes so far in the other that it becomes flimsy and utterly incoherent. Therefore to meet the profound challenges of heightened global competition and post-Fordism, it is imperative for both countries to construct their vocational educational systems so they are flexible enough to cope with rapid change and comprehensive enough for to create a highly skilled work-force, with greater dexterity than hitherto evinced.