The essay will examine the main areas of policy that made up the 'classic' welfare state: health, education, housing, and the national insurance and national assistance schemes. Where appropriate these component parts of post-war social policy will be analysed by employing Marxist, Feminist, New Right and Social Democratic critiques in such a way that a fair and balanced conclusion can be reached on the qualities and shortfalls of the 'classic' welfare state.
The creation of the National Health Service made it possible for the first time in British history for any citizen regardless of class, economic circumstance or location to feel assured that if they became ill they would receive free medical care of a usually high standard. This universalism underpinning the NHS ended the demoralization felt by those working class people using services without paying a fee, and broadly ended the disenchantment felt by those middle-class tax payers who hitherto this point saw a portion of their money go away to help the sustenance of those of whom they had no affinity to. Thus Bevan was highly successful in making British society more prosperous in using the social cohesion felt by many in the immediate aftermath of the war, in order to create an institution that through its comprehensiveness, entrenched that sentiment and ended the stigma attached to utilizing a service funded through taxation.
While Social Democratic analysts would largely agree with this praise, many would question the extent at which the NHS has led to a truly egalitarian society. Indeed it has been proposed that:
The New Right tend to argue that a plurality of private sources of medical care would have been more efficient than the more monolithic, nationalized system Bevan implemented. As it is only in a competitive environment in which excellence is rewarded with profit, that producers have the incentive to offer a good quality, cheap service in sync with the consumers' ever changing needs.
However in response to this, Social Democratic analysts may argue that: 'on the demand side, decisions are made by the doctors, thus alleviating the effects of consumer ignorance... on the supply side, doctors are not as a rule paid a fee for service... removing the financial incentive to oversupply,' rendering the process more not less efficient. [Glennerster, H. (2000), 'British Social Policy']
But this reasoning in turn ignores the fact that doctors and medical consultants are not neutral agents within the NHS but have vested interests in furthering their status and have deep-seated prejudices about illness. It is perhaps indeed due to this that an inordinate amount of the NHS's resources went on reactive methods of health-care, such as surgery rather than pro-active preventative methods, such as health education for the general public or mitigation of pollution.
Feminists believe that a key weakness of the NHS is that it reinforced occupation segregation between the sexes. This can be seen in that almost invariably the dominant, high-paid and high-status jobs were given to men (such as Doctor and surgeons), whilst the subordinate, low-paid and low-status jobs were given to women. Whilst this argument holds true, one must appreciate the fact that women also benefited hugely from the NHS- alleviating the burden of giving birth and looking after sick members of the family.
It seems apparent that social democrat critiques of the Labour government's approach to education differ in the favourability of their conclusions somewhat. Many accept that the abolition of fees for secondary schools, the raising of the school leaving age to 15 and the implementation of a state funded scholarship scheme for university led to a greater equality of opportunity. Moreover they realise the Education Act also was strong in that it addressed the geographical disparity of quality of schooling, the financial weakness of the voluntary sector and the latent antagonism between voluntary and state schools.
However it also seems evident to social democratic analysts that compared to Bevan's health policy, education was 'innately conservative' [George, V. and Page, R. (1995), 'Modern Thikers on Welfare']. In terms of increasing the school leaving age and the demarcation of primary and secondary schools, Labour was merely enacting the recommendations made in the 1926 Hadow report. Moreover public schools survived and went from strength to strength after financial and political trouble in 1940; Grammar schools were now funded by the treasury; leaving less room for the more democratic multilateral schools to blossom.
People may argue that the preservation of a tripartite system of education was politically astute as it meant that people's right to decide upon their and their family's future was not impinged, but there is indeed no doubt that the education system hindered momentum to greater equality. As both private schools (with the obvious price-barrier) and Grammar schools (with the arbitrary eleven plus examination favouring children who were surrounded by more educated and articulate people) had an inbuilt-bias towards the middle class.
With 200,000 houses being destroyed in the war time, a further 250,000 rendered uninhabitable, a birth rate that was going to rise sharply, and a substantial increase in public expectations of the quality of housing, Attlee's government had their work cut out in providing the British citizens houses to live in. A popular attitude to Bevan's response is one of ambivalence. Whilst analysts criticize the Minister of Health for not making the programme more far-reaching, most accept that he was constrained immeasurably by the fiscal dictates of the treasury, the stipulations of Marshall Aid, the lack of raw materials at home, and the lack foreign currency reserves to import the materials from abroad.
It is fair to say that the government went some way in meeting the challenges posed. The Government initiated the repairing, converting and refurbishing thousands of old houses, a resourceful idea in the immediate aftermath of the war. It presided over the building of 125,000 prefabricated which were surprisingly popular and long-lasting (some are still around today despite their so-called life expectancy of ten years). And it administered four fifths of building licences to Local Councils and imposed stringent rent controls on private landlords further increasing the access to more affordable accommodation.
As hinted earlier it was the extent not the nature of Bevan's housing policy which is most criticised today and that provoked dissatisfaction at the time. Indeed the fact of the matter is that the areas that Labour proposed to construct houses upon in the New Towns Act were mere building sites at the end of Attlee's tenure, and that with the slowness of the building of council houses many people remained homeless. However a degree of sympathy can be felt when one takes into account the economic and demographic pressures the Ministry of Health was under (as outlined above), and appreciates Bevan's well-founded repudiation of short-termist, populist housing policy that the Conservative party espoused in which the quantity of building is held at such a premium that the lack of quality of the housing and the urban decay that this would precipitate is disregarded. Indeed compared to the council houses hastily built after Attlee's premiership, the 1940s designs are far more comfortable and conducive for the well being of the inhabitants and the harmony of the wider community.
The Government's unprecedented acceptance of its responsibility of ensuring the social security of its citizens 'from the cradle to the grave' is crystallized in the National Insurance Act 1946 and the National Assistance Act 1948. These programmes of course are anathema for the New Right, reputedly leading to a dependency culture in which there is no incentive to work, with the direct corollary being lack of economic dynamism. However this logic seems to be flimsy in light of the fact that 'in the 1960s and 70s the counties with the fastest growing welfare expenditure and the highest percentage of GDP committed to welfare were Japan and Germany'-the two fastest growing economies.'
On the other extreme the Marxists Gough and O'Conor view the insurance schemes merely as mechanisms employed to ensure the sustenance of capital's domination over labour. By providing the working class with such token, superficial reforms the Labour Party they argue, had diverted from its historic mission of overthrowing the capitalist system, in favour of compromising with it, and thus betrayed the people they were meant to represent. However, such reasoning merely provides clear evidence of how one's ideological predispositions can obscure one's view of empirical fact. Instead of Labour betraying the revolutionary working class by forging an alliance with the bourgeois, it seems very clear from the evidence given to the Beveridge committee that there was a consensus transcending class barriers for the idea of a 'national minimum' and 'it was this which both brought it into being and sustained it'(Timmins, N. (1996) 'The Five Giants'].
In conclusion, it seems that Marshall's thesis that the creation of the 'classic welfare state' marked the British people's attainment of social rights, on top of the political and civic rights they won centuries before it is satisfactory. Its key strength lies in the fact that it guaranteed on a comprehensive scale a basics minimum standard of living for everybody. Abel-Smiths belief that the welfare state brought more benefits for the middle class than the working class seems to be backed up by the above analysis on Labour's approach to health and education; but nonetheless there is no doubt that the needy and deprived also got a lot out of the institutionalisation of the idea of the national minimum- not least because it brought to an end of the stigma about receiving benefits.
For those who are committed to equality and social justice it is a great shame that Labour did not use their huge political capital they gained after the general election of 1945 in abolishing private school education- a key social-divider. As far as the NHS is concerned although on an ethical level, as a universal medical care provider it is unassailable, in practice too much power was given to health professionals, leading to a lack of accountability and a disproportionate focus on curing illnesses rather than pre-empting them. In terms of the feminist critique on occupational segregation, the NHS may indeed have reinforced the bias towards men in the job world, but like Social work a job in this ever expanding public service was a stepping stone for greater female economic independence in the future.