The start of this investigation will consist of a proposal of a hypothesis about the nature of the reaction of the different newspapers to Brown's speech. In the first half of the main body of this essay it will be considered whether through looking at the empirical evidence of the front page articles the hypothetical model is adequate. In the second half of the investigation the editorials of the chosen newspapers will be analysed and used in the same way. By finding inconsistencies between the initial hypothesis and the two sets of analysis it is hoped that the model can be refined or rejected, and a satisfactory conclusion be generated.
The first part of the hypothesis is based on the assumption that newspapers have two vested interests when reporting and analysing events, the primary one being economic and the secondary one being political. The economic interest dictates that newspaper journalists, under the gaze of the editor, project their core readers' political predispositions onto events, so as to colour the reports and analysis in such a way that their readers' views are reaffirmed. This of course will lead to customer satisfaction and hence business success. The secondary interest is to alter peoples' opinion, so as to change the political climate in such a way that the government will produce policy consistent with the views and desires of the proprietors, the board members, the shareholders and the editors of that newspaper.
Hence it is predicted that the Telegraph as an established conservative newspaper with an overwhelmingly conservative middle-class readership portrays the content of Brown's speech as retrograde and the tone divisive; that the Guardian as a liberal newspaper with an overwhelmingly left of centre readership portrays the content as progressive and the tone conciliatory; and that the Times and Independent, both relatively centrist newspapers, will float somewhere in between the poles and judge Brown's speech with ambivalence.
The second perhaps subsidiary part of the hypothesis states that the editorials will expound far more value-based views than that of the front page articles. This is in part due to the belief that whilst the primary function of the front page articles is to inform the reader of Gordon Brown's speech, the editorial seeks to delve deeper into comment and analysis of the speech using political principles that drive the newspaper's agenda in the most visible form. Thus while the differences in the 4 newspapers reporting in the front page articles will be tangible but insignificant, the differences between the editorials will be substantial.
An examination of the Telegraph's and the Guardian's front page justifies the first part of the model but disproves the second. In that while difference in the political slant of reporting was expected, it was not foreseen to be so blatant: whilst Jones of the Telegraph talks of 'the split widening' (24) White of the Guardian states that the speech was a 'unifying force'. Moreover whilst Jones cites Milburn's assertion that 'screaming louder and louder about our achievements in the past is not necessarily the way to get through to the public' as being indicative of a rift between Brown and Milburn (46-54) White merely dismisses Milburn as 'careless' (49) and points out that 'for the second day running Mr. Milburn endorsed Mr. Brown's stress on the centrality of the economic message' (67-70).
In examining The Independent's headline article it seems evident that the first half of the model is also erroneous and is in need of further refinement. There is no doubt that this article is the most controversial of the four, taking what Brown said out of context and too the extreme (column right of the picture) so as to justify the main thrust of its argument that that Brown's speech was a 'coded attack' or 'assault by stealth' (title and subtitle) creating a dramatic opening of divisions (67-82). That the apparent split between Brown and Blair is probably sensationalised to a greater degree by the Independent than the considerably more conservative Daily Telegraph reveals that the political orientation of a newspaper is not necessarily the overriding variable that dictates how favourable a newspaper's report will be.
An obvious contributory factor that was unaccounted for in the model was the newspaper's desire to be sensationalist for the sake of being eye-catching. While this maybe a surprisingly crude strategy for a widely well regarded newspaper like The Independent to employ, it could be attributed to the fact that as noticed by many critics, since it has adopted a tabloid format in 2002 its drive to become unique, innovative and engaging has resulted in the erosion of its intellectual and critical substance. Moreover with a change of format there was no doubt a concomitant slight change in leadership, with customers more likely to be more attracted to digestible rather than nuanced reporting.
In studying The Times headline article it is very noticeable that another variable was not considered. A newspaper's reports may not only be coloured by the implicit sympathies it has for a party, but also a political figure. This perhaps explains why the paper inaccurately depicts Blair as the towering figure of the Labour party who is trying to mollify his squabbling underlings viz. Brownites and Blairites (Title and 70-75). In reality Blair is only one of two pre-eminent figures within the upper echelons of the government- Brown is one of the most powerful Chancellor of the Exchequers in British history, having a huge amount of control over the direction of domestic policy and enjoying huge amounts of support from the backbenchers and party members.
Through examining this article it maybe fair to consider it a Blairite newspaper, or at least one in which the political editor has sympathies for Blair. This partiality to Blair maybe due to the fact that ever since he has become leader of the Labour Party in 1994 he has made great efforts in courting the Murdoch press. He has frequently visited the tycoon trying to impress him with his market friendly and pro-America 'War on Terror' speeches, and has presided over the repealing of the anti-monopoly allowing him to spread his media empire further. In return Blair has one the support from the Murdoch press most evident before the 1997 and elections but also apparent in this article.
In analysing The Independent and The Times it has become evident that there are substantial gaps in the hypothesis proposed at the beginning of the investigation. However an examination of The Guardian's and The Daily Telegraph's' respective editorials reinforces the argument that the general thrust of the hypothesis (that the nature of the analysis of an article depends greatly on the political sympathies of the paper) is correct. While the former argues that Brown's speech was one of the most 'effective ever made' (3-4), that it was an 'exposition of the continuing relevance of that (Labour's social democratic) tradition' (34-35) and praises him for his economic achievements 'mainly aimed at the working poor'(67-69); the latter depicts Brown as an 'Old Pretender' (title) who has not seemed to grasp 'the fragility of his own achievement'(47), and argues that his 'progressive consensus' rhetoric 'has more to do with consolidating his power base than with the actual concerns of hardworking families' (18-19).
In further accordance to the model, as predicted both The Times' and The Independents' editorials do not expound a view that is either highly critical or uncritical of Brown, instead ambivalence pervades both texts. Thus whilst the Times obviously sympathises with Brown's 'crusade to expand opportunities' and remarks that 'he is an unusually visionary politician' there is a strong note of caution at the end of the article: 'central planning has never delivered the faithful to the promised land'. Likewise The Independent exclaims that 'on the face of it, the Chancellor's speech could not have been more exemplary in its loyalty' (7-8), and remarks on how popular he is amongst the party and the financial world (81-82), but also ends on a note of caution: 'but is it (the continuation of the Blair-Brown partnership) for the good of the nation?'(91-92)
Having evaluated these eight texts the dissimilarity between academics' approach to the analysis of past events and that of the journalists has become very clear. While journalists often like to impress their readers by their utter yet misplaced certitude (resulting in the associated use of un-argued assertions and removal of caveats); academics realise that almost invariably the respect of their peers will be gained if one approaches an issue employing objective reason rather than platitudinous sensationalism, ensuring that a nuanced and fair conclusion is reached. In addition to this while Newspaper's were very intentionalist and personality-centred in their reportage of Brown's speech (perhaps because people and personalities are the most tangible and entertaining facet of the political world for the majority of the chattering classes), political scientists may examine the power structures and the plurality of political pressures that made Brown act the way he did.
In conclusion, analysis of the articles showed that while the hypothesis was based on sound rationale and could be seen as quite consistent with a lot of the empirical evidence examined, it was by no means water-tight. There were some important variables that were not accounted for and things that were not expected. Firstly, as shown by the headline articles of The Daily Telegraph and The Guardian the hypothesis underestimated the extent at which the reports were politicized. Secondly The Times brought to attention the fact that one has to account for political partisanship not only in terms of the Labour-Conservative divide but also in terms of the supposed 'Blair-Brown divide'. And finally The Independent had shown that a need to reaffirm most of its readers' liberal views can be outweighed by the imperative of attracting attention and provoking contention.