The Conservative governments from 1979 to 1997 all held a belief in the workings of the market that was unprecedented in the post-War era and rejected the fundamental principles that underpinned the welfare-consensus. Their repudiation of the high levels of state regulation and interference that characterised the governments before them was borne out of the conviction that social democracy had taken Britain into economic decline and that only constricted public expenditure and the further integration of markets into public life could remedy the malaise.
The main principles that informed the Conservative approach to social policy were the supposed need to: control inflation, end the dependency culture, expand property ownership, tackle bureaucratic monopolies and increase competition within the public services and lastly reassert government authority. Whilst these principles are intermeshed, and it is rather artificial to present them as discrete from one another, in the interests of clarity the essay will do so nonetheless.
The overriding economic imperative for the Thatcher government was to control inflation. This goal was hoped to be realised through the adoption of strict monetarist policies and maintenance of what was then termed 'sound public finance'. The Medium-term Financial Strategy of 1980 sought to set targets for money-supply growth and the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement implemented in the same year resulted in cuts of public expenditure and in turn of welfare provision. The most obvious manifestations of this parsimony can be found perhaps in the termination of maternity and death benefit in the Social Security Act in1986 and the freezing of child benefit a year after.
The second principle to be outlined is based upon an analysis of human nature. They argue that the optimistic notion that someone will in normal circumstances work towards a wider social good is illusory. In reality people are naturally and irredeemably self-centred and as such they will only work hard if there are sufficient rewards in doing so and sufficient costs in not doing so. Thus as the post-war welfare state dampens the rewards of success through taxation and mitigates the costs of failure through the provision of generous benefits it reduces the incentive to work hard, be enterprising and innovative.
This has two negative effects according to exponents of New Right ideology. Firstly, the classic welfare state undermines economic growth. Secondly it "saps the moral fibre of our people as a nation" (Gamble, 1994, p.23), engendering a culture of dependency in which feckless humans opportunistically utilise all the resources and facilities open to them. Through exposing people to the crucial disciplines of poverty, unemployment, illness or homelessness and through allowing them to enjoy a greater portion of the fruits of their labour people become more self-respecting and responsible and the economy becomes more dynamic.
The supposed need in increasing incentives and making people less reliant on the state was manifest for instance in the top income-tax rate of 83% being reduced to 60% in the budget of 1982 and than being further reduced to 40% in 1988, and the freezing of child-care allowance. By extension the onus to find a job was progressively being shifted upon the individual marking a rejection of the Keynesian practice of the state ensuring employment for all. This change in attitude resulted ultimately in Major's replacement of unemployment benefit with Jobseeker's allowance in 1996.
The selling off of council houses was part of the New Right's belief that mass private ownership created a more prosperous Britain and prevented a concentration of power in the hands of the few. It gave people who were wealthy enough to buy up the property a renewed sense of pride and a feeling of being in charge of their destiny. It also marked a repudiation of the whole culture that apparently pervaded council housing in which "slums, delinquency, vandalism, waste, arrears, and social polarization"(Alcock, 1996, p.34). Most importantly for the Conservatives it was politically expedient as it changed the electoral landscape in that by reducing the provision of council houses they were eroding traditional Labour strongholds, with new homeowners more ideologically inclined to vote for the incumbent government.
Another key principle of Conservative social policy was to tackle bureaucratic monopolies and impregnate social services with greater levels of competition. Reform was premised on the notion that any service would be more efficiently provided if it was free from administrative controls and political interference. Government support for inefficient producers simply distorts the price mechanism; and the traditional state provision of services creates monopolies not subject to the influence of patient's choice, resulting in the patient not getting the optimal treatment. Referring back to Keith Joseph's quote in the beginning of the essay it is simply unfeasible for government ministers or senior civil servants to be more receptive to the complex and ever-changing needs of the consumer as well as the market does. Employing this rationale, the Conservative government initiated modest reforms; permitting hospitals and other important service providers to become organizationally and financially autonomous and to be run as independent trusts. Larger GP surgeries became independent and were allocated national cash budgets rendering them 'fund-holding' practices, allowing the GP to purchase the health care patients require from the hospital trust that was offering the best value service. Moreover, optical and dental services drifted into the realm of the market.
The Conservative governments also seemed to increase the power of the consumer in the realms of education, allowing parents and governing bodies of schools to decide whether to take them out of the control of the local education Authority, and encouraged greater choice on where their children could go. They also sought to determine the content of the curriculum, so different schools' examination results could be easily comparable for parents, just as results in profit margins of businesses can be compared by shareholders. Here too lies the basic assumption that monopolistic organizations seeks to entrench producer power, and that only if it can be broken up in some way can it become more responsive to the needs of the consumer.
Finally, inherent within the social policy of the Thatcher government and later the Major government was the notion that governments cannot achieve miracles, and their consistent attempt to do so undermines their credibility. As a consequence of this they did not bring it upon themselves to achieve so-called utopian goals such as the abolition of poverty, the equalisation of educational opportunity or the improvement of the national health. This they believe would end in failure and government pandering to the demands of interest groups such as pensioners or tenants groups who call for government to promote their supposed rights, as evidenced by goings-on of the 1970s. The experience showed for the New Right that being submerged in a group politics of envy and self-interest resulted in the Government losing all power and legitimacy. It was decided that it was incumbent upon the Conservatives to restore its authority, showing ferocious resolve against the miners in 1984-5 and an unwillingness to accommodate for the desires of the new-class of public-sector professionals who benefited so much from the structure that existed by 1979. Without combating those groups, they reasoned, their vision of a free society with a free economy may never come to fruition.
In conclusion there are no doubt other salient principles that underpinned Conservative policy that deserve mentioning such as the desire to reinforce the nuclear family. However Thatcher's and Major's approach to family issues are not clear-cut and it is hard to differentiate between their convictions behind their rhetoric and their outcome of their policies on the ground. It is complex and merits a deep-level analysis that cannot be provided in an essay so constricted by the world limit.
Nevertheless what has hopefully been illustrated is the fact that the rise of Thatcherism in the 1980s and its virtual continuation in the Major years marked a fundamental embracement of market values and rejection of what had underpinned the classic welfare state. A comprehensive system of welfare that was designed to do more than relieve poverty was considered inefficient, inflexible and parasitic, "sucking the lifeblood of the more productive parts of the economy" (Powell, p.47) and weakened the British character. What the Conservative governments sought to do was remove the 'perverse incentives' of not working; identify the individual as having responsibility over their impoverishment and penetrate public services with market mechanisms. Through doing this it was hoped that the legitimacy and the authority of government be restored.