There are many towering liberal political theorists who have made invaluable insights on justice: John Locke, Friedrich von Hayek and Isaiah Berlin to name but a few. However owing to the restrictions placed on the number of words one can use in this essay, it has been decided that in the following paragraphs only an analysis of the theories of the classical liberal Robert Nozick and the welfare liberal John Rawls will be provided. These two men have been selected because they have made the most significant and indeed perhaps the most divergent contributions to the whole debate on justice within liberal theory in the last few decades.
As a conservative libertarian Nozick's conception of justice ('The Entitlement Theory') derives from the following premises: that people are entitled to the benefits derived from their own natural strengths whether they be talents for acquisitiveness or anything else; that their differential contributions creates differential entitlements; and finally that their individual rights of self-ownership should not be violated. From this he concludes that if property is gained from legitimate means of transfer (through cash payments or inheritance for example) there is no justification for state interference with the ensuing property arrangements. Logically extending this he argues: that taxation that does not seek to reinforce an individual's claim upon one's property (i.e. not geared towards state defence, policing, or the judicial process) is an immoral encroachment of the property rights of the well off; and that therefore only a minimal government should exist.
It seems likely that for those committed to the amelioration of the lives of the deprived and destitute, Nozick's vision of a just society is a repugnant and unfair one, for he gives absolute primacy to the property rights of the individual over the needs of the wider community. This justifies patently scandalous circumstances in which an individual's de Jure claims upon his own private property could incur huge suffering upon other people so as to create de Facto injustice. For instance, employing Nozick's logic American drug companies like Pfizer and GlaxoSmithKline who enjoy multi-billion dollar turnovers are justified in selling anti-retro-viral drugs at $250 for a month's dosage to people in Sub-Saharan Africa where most struggle to earn $250 in year. This is because surely according to him these companies' 'legitimate' intellectual property rights take priority over everything else including the 2.2 million poverty-stricken people who die of HIV-AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa each year, and it is not for the governments of either the underdeveloped world and the developed world to interfere. This position for most people is on a morally reprehensible.
On a more abstract level, by arguing that people should have full rights over all the fruit of their labour Nozick seems to be basing his conception of a just society on the assumption that a person's success is borne out of their own hard work and nothing more. However as Goodwin (1999, p.232) perceptively points out the wealth of a so-called 'self-made man' rests greatly on the hard work of his employee's, on the knowledge bequeathed to him by others, on the technological and social advancements attributable to others and partly on fortuitous fluctuations in the market. Thus if he is not solely responsible for what he has yielded but instead much of his success is rooted in the contributions of wider society, it seems questionable whether he should be entitled to the totality of it.
Rawls' conception of justice is apparently derived from a thought experiment in which a group of rational individuals are put behind a 'veil of ignorance' rendering them unable to determine what social or economic position they occupy. If asked to choose the principles for the design of a society that they would most like to find themselves in, Rawls argues they would all arrive at the same conclusion crystallised in the two statements below. Firstly and most importantly, that as a 'primary good', each person should have as much freedom as is compatible with freedom for all. Secondly, social and economic inequalities should be arranged in such a way that the greatest benefit goes to the least advantaged, and attached to offices and positions open to all under fair conditions of equal opportunity. This solution is often called the 'maximin solution to the problem of social justice' as it calls for the maximising of the minimum level of wealth in society.
At face-value Rawls' proposal seems to be more workable than that of Nozick's for the simple reason that his version of a 'just society' is one in which the autonomy of individuals is safeguarded and the needs of the less fortunate are recognised and in part addressed. His argument, that if the poorest are in absolute terms better off in a less equal society (due to reasons of greater productivity, cheaper commodities and the other attendant advantages of market-led economies) than they would be in a society where there was more equality, then the former would be straight-forwardly more preferable than the latter, is quite convincing.
However, it seems important to interpret poverty in relative terms if the crux of one's theory is based on the maximisation of freedom. This is because if freedom is about choice, and if choice requires money, than wealth inequalities will lead to an unfair distribution of freedom favouring the rich. Through tackling relative poverty, by redistributing wealth and thereby redistributing freedom so a small amount of it is sacrificed by the rich so everyone can enjoy a large amount of it, one seems to meet Rawls' first and most prioritised principle in a way that combating absolute poverty would not. On a more practical level it seems that relative poverty should be not discounted when considering justice. For relative poverty fosters feelings of resentment, disempowerment and envy within the minds of the poor, making them more likely to engage in crime and making the more affluent feel more insecure and threatened, and it is through reducing it that one arguably makes society more harmonious and cohesive.
A group of academics have produced a sustained and convincing critique of Rawls' Theory of Justice from a communitarian angle. Their main lines of attack is that the theory is not universally applicable despite his original claims that it was, but instead it is deeply rooted in liberal ideology, and that in being so rooted it fails to take into account the great importance of the community in the lives of the Individual. To expand upon the first part Macintyre argues that Rawls' work as a liberal theorist stands as a refinement and continuation of the work of previous thinkers, adapting it to the social circumstances he found himself in at the time of writing. If, Macintyre cleverly argues, he is not autonomous of the liberal intellectual community before him and indeed then if he is part of a 'communal matrix of enquiry' than how could he possible for him to dismiss the importance of communities in shaping the system of values of individuals within them in his theory. In juxtaposing the fact that Rawls' theory is centred on individual freedom as something universal with the fact that he is not autonomous from the 'communal matrix of enquiry' before him Macintyre makes a mockery of the Theory Of Justice, and raises questions about the soundness of the very foundations it rests on.
Walzer another communitarian concurs with Macintyre arguing that Rawls exhibits a fundamental liberal myopia in failing to comprehend or accommodate the importance of community in both determining what is just in a society and in buttressing the development. In expanding upon this, he propounds a theory called 'The Spheres of Justice' which counters that instead of their being 'no single set of primary or basic goods conceivable across all moral and material meanings' as Rawls posits, different communities apply different meanings to a particular good, and even value a good at different times. He reasons that due to this there is not one legitimate interpretation of justice, but many- according to the common culture and identity of each and every community. Thus Rawls' question in his thought experiment should not have been: what universalising principles rational individuals would choose in their design of human society? But: what would an individual choose for their community considering its shared-values and culture?
In conclusion, the two liberal theories of justice covered in this essay seem to be wholly inadequate. The primacy Nozick places upon private ownership though intellectually courageous is blatantly unsatisfactory if in circumstances the needs of majority are subordinated to the claims an individual or individuals place upon their property. While Rawls' makes an effort to humanise a system where individual freedom would still take precedence, he fails to take into account the social disharmony that would precipitate from rampant inequality no matter how much it would improve the absolute position of the poorest people. Communitarian thinkers such as Walzer and Macintyre have produced an effective rebuttal in highlighting the importance of community in weaving the fabric of one's life and showing that viewing individual autonomy as a 'human good' with unquestionable and absolute priority is erroneous and that we should instead view it as a good amongst others.