It is no doubt true that successfully challenging prevailing modes of thinking about the political world can lead to positive changes for people at 'ground-level.' For instance, Marx's analysis of the relationship between capital and labour opened many people's eyes to the injustice inherent within capitalism and provided the working class inspiration to free themselves from the shackles of exploitation, and likewise the myriad feminist interpretations of society have provided people with not only the knowledge that gross inequities between men and women exists, but also the belief that they should be eradicated. Thus assessing the contribution of all the disparate strands of feminism is important as it can allow feminists to see what their predecessors had and had not succeeded in challenging and in turn decide what would be the most efficacious direction for the movement(s) to take in the Twenty-First century.
In this essay the analysis will be confined to the effects of the discourses that are part of the feminist 'second-wave.' The analysis will focus on three areas where feminist thinking seems to have contributed to most: the debate on patriarchal order, on the delineations between the public and private, and on the relationship between sex and gender. Stemming from this examination it shall hopefully be shown that both liberal and socialist feminists have challenged conventional thinking only to a small extent because they have too often approached gender issues in their respective ideological straitjackets; that essentialist feminists have offered little new in simplistically equating sex with gender; that conversely radical feminists have made considerable contributions to the debate by placing so much emphasis on the social construction of gender; and that post- modern accounts are also invaluable in that they open political scientist's eyes to the plurality of women's experiences, and to the inherent patriarchy in language.
The concept of a patriarchy existingremains to date probably the most potent feminist challenge to the general 'liberal' assumption that freedom and equality of opportunity can be ensured by equal access to education, freedom of speech and the right to vote as so heroically fought for by the "first wave" feminists. They argue that instead of the liberal state being a neutral arbiter between conflicting interests, it is a buttress for male dominance ensuring that the privileged positions that they occupy as men are unattainable for women. Accordingly, radical feminists contest that the liberal mission to push for state-sponsored legislation conducive for the enhancement of women's position in society is inadequate as the state itself is patriarchal.
Moreover most 'second wave' feminists point out that patriarchal values are systemic not only within sate machinery but by extension pervade the culture, philosophy and religion of society on a whole, perceptible in myriad guises wherein women are treated and portrayed as subordinate and inferior to men- debilitating for the aspiring woman. These manifestations and indeed antecedents of female oppression can be seen in the practices of physical mutilation (e.g. foot-binding and circumcision) which affects at least eighty million women around the world, and pornography- a scourge that occupies 60% of the world-wide-web. On an economic level socialist feminists have shown that systems of inheritance that prevalent in nineteenth century Britain whereby property, land and money were generally bequeathed to the son, and the dowry system that exists today in some cultures reinforce women's economic dependence. However, the most fundamental and simultaneously the most subtle manifestation of patriarchy seems to be in language itself, as shown by the works of post-modern feminists in the 1980s. Most notably Helene Cixous found that western language conceptualises a polarisation of binary oppositions, whereby the term logocentrically most associated with logos or phallus is always privileged over the other (father/mother, head/heart, man/woman, speaking/listening). If one accepts Jacques Derrida's conclusion that everything our minds have access is seen to be text, this theory has absolutely profound implications: gender hierarchies are subliminally reinforced at the most basic level of the human psyche.
The second major area of classical liberal individualism that radical feminists have criticised is the demarcation between what is public and what is private, and what is thus the business of the state and what is not. While liberal theorists and indeed liberal feminists are weary of jettisoning this distinction for reasons of ensuring individual freedom and staving off tyranny, radical feminists have powerfully put forward the point that this traditional designation of a "no-go area for government" puts women at an acute disadvantage. This granting of privacy allows men to oppress and exploit their wives or girlfriends in the private sphere without fear of public redress and thus 'depoliticises' many injustices suffered by women, and more generally marginalizes their experiences and concerns as occupants of the domestic sphere. Books such as "The Female Eunuch" (1972) by the radical feminist Greer focussing upon personal, psychological and sexual aspects of female oppression and "The Power of Women and the Subversion of the Community"(1972) by the socialist feminists Costa and James championing the cause of "wages for housework" enabled people to recognise this- successfully pushing back the borders of what had been previously been considered to be political. Concurrently, domestic rape, domestic violence, the unpaid labour of housework, child-rearing, and the right to have an abortion were successfully pushed to the fore of the political debate in many western countries.
The idea that gender is socially constructed and is a concept divorced from sex; that rather than femininity being something innate to women it is instead imposed and projected upon the female sex through years of socialisation and conditioning, neatly summarised in de Beauvoir's assertion that "women are made, they are not born," was another key challenge posed by the radicals to established political opinion. Their compartmentalisation of sex and gender was based on the reasoning that while sex is the unalterable biological difference between males and females, gender refers to different roles society subscribes to men and women. The direct corollary of this was that conservative views that gender division in society was natural, that "biology is destiny" and that therefore women's subordinate position is somehow legitimate is under increasing attack. The oppressively romantic, fascist myth of the existence of the "eternal feminine" and women's generally assumed passive sexual role has thus been challenged in the western world; and the conception that human nature is essentially androgynous and that the attainment of the good-life through the achievement of genderless personhood not so risible.
Conversely socialist and liberal feminists do not attach much importance to the concept of socially constructed gender analysing women's issues merely as a subset of their respective ideologies, with the former focussing inordinately on individual merit and the latter on class divisions. Worse still, essentialist feminists deny the sex/gender division altogether, championing "womanly qualities": their innate ability to nurture, to cooperate and to intuit, positing that gender differences reflect a psycho-biological gulf between female and male attributes and sensibilities.
Post-modern feminists have perhaps expounded the most nuanced and sophisticated account on the relationship between sex and gender. Gender, they argue, is relative to the society expectations one is part of, for instance while it is common place to see women road-builders in India it is unheard of in Britain, rendering the whole idea of their existing a universal womanhood daft. Moreover 'sex' rather than being straight-forwardly determined by biology has been shown to be a problematic concept as some women dislike children, are not attracted to men and so on. Thus the biological/cultural dichotomy seems fictional rendering the terms 'man' and 'woman' as being arbitrary and the conception that there are more than two genders no longer too outlandish.
In conclusion, it is evident from the analysis that "feminism has been characterised more by internal variety in its theories and practises than by any semblance of unity." (Lent, 1998, p.212) While the non-existence of a collective feminist voice perhaps has made it hard for many people to grasp what feminism is about and what it aims to achieve, its vey plurality has been conducive for the cross-fertilization and cultivation of new and dynamic ideas with the more illuminating contributions coming from radical and post-modern feminists. Most importantly second wave feminists have compelled many political thinkers to reassess the actual fairness of liberal and democratic theory. Through applying prevailing societal beliefs about liberty to the "private" sphere and in reminding academics that equality and rights at the level of formal, legal relations are not themselves enough to ensure a kind of democracy which is inclusive of all citizens, many second wave feminists poignantly opened the question of whether traditional notions of a just society need to be reconceptualised. The radical and post-modern feminists' challenging of the reactionary and misogynistic assumptions that women are distinct from men; and their exposure of societies' deeply gendered and exclusive nature, has proved to be immensely intellectually empowering enabling us to think more critically about the status quo and more imaginatively about how politics can be transformed.