Esping-Anderson's famous work "The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism" is based on the approach to the welfare state taken by political economy and is informed by assumptions found in the work of theorists, like Titmuss and Marshall. In his classification of welfare states he chiefly concerns himself with: the extent of decommodification - the ability of a person to uphold a socially acceptable standard of living independently of the market; the system of stratification - how welfare states order social relations; and the relationship between the state, the market and to a crucially lesser extent, the family. Through analysing welfare states in this way he found that countries cluster into three distinct regime-types: the social democratic; the conservative and the liberal.
Found especially in Scandinavia, the social democratic welfare state is centred on the idea of universal social citizenship and as such facilitates a high degree of decommodification and an evening out of social inequality. The conservative welfare state is most identified with counties that lie in central Europe; like the social democratic regime-type, the state plays a prominent role in the distribution of welfare and decommodification is an important policy element. However, in contrast to the social democratic welfare state, social policy is not underpinned by the principle of solidarity nor does it try to narrow divisions in wealth. Instead it tends to reproduce social hierarchies, both in terms of class - with insurance-based benefits playing a significant role, and in terms of gender - with the family given huge importance as the primary source of social security. Lastly, the liberal welfare regime, which Esping-Anderson associates with the Anglo-American countries, is based on the premise that the free play of market forces generally leads to the optimal distribution of goods. Here the state plays a residual role, seeking to remedy only the worst effects of market failure.
The regime-type that a country's welfare state comes to resemble is in large part determined by the configuration of power found in that country. In the early phases of industrialisation the probability of social democracy prevailing was increased when the rural-economy was dominated by small, capital-intensive family farmers (as in Scandinavia), decreased when there were large pools of cheap labour (as in much of continental Europe). This was because the more labour-intensive the agricultural sector the more threatening unions and left-wing parties appeared to potential coalition partners. The ability of social democrats to succeed in forming political alliances was further enhanced in Nordic countries because of the articulacy and organisation of the farmers and further diminished in countries like Germany and Italy where the agricultural classes were by and large co-opted by conservative forces. Much later, after World War 2, winning the allegiances of the new middle classes was the political imperative for social democrats. The Scandinavian model succeeded in incorporating them into a new kind of welfare state by providing benefits tailored to their tastes, whilst Anglo-Saxon nations retained the residual welfare-state model precisely because the middle classes were not wooed from the market to the state.
"The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism" has considerable strengths. It adds a qualitative dimension to the classification of welfare states critically lacking in previous studies, it is backed up by robust empirical evidence and it enables the scholar to make more informed predictions on how welfare states will develop in the future. To paraphrase Esping-Anderson himself, his typology provides us with a general view of the forest rather than a specific focus on each tree. Nonetheless, "The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism" has been subject to hefty criticism. It ignores the peculiarities of the Southern Mediterranean welfare states (Ferrera and Liebfried) and the Antipodean welfare states (Castles and Mitchell); it doesn't pay sufficient attention to the purposes of welfare states (Bonoli); it rests on data belonging to the "golden age" of the welfare state (Powell) and even the concept of welfare regimes can be considered to be of dubious value (Kasza).
This paper will set these critiques to one side and focus instead on feminist interpretations of Esping-Anderson's landmark work. It will first explore the main feminist theoretical concerns, namely: Esping-Anderson's simplified conceptualisation of the origins and development of the welfare state; his gender-blind concepts of stratification and decommodification and his marginalisation of the family in his analysis of the state-market nexus. It will ascertain whether these theoretical limitations contaminate Esping-Anderson's empirical findings or whether his typology is in fact consistent with analyses which factor in the roles of women. Whilst arguing that feminists have exposed large conceptual holes in "The Three World's of Welfare", it shall be demonstrated that when the measures pertaining to women's relationship to the labour market are included in the research design there is not always a radical difference in the clustering of countries. The essay will end by drawing upon Pfau-Effinger's work on culture and gender arrangements. It will be concluded that while Esping-Anderson's classification of welfare states is gender-blind, such are the complexities of the power relations between men, women, the market and the welfare state, welfare-regime theory is in itself inherently gender-insensitive.
Through noting the shortcomings in Esping-Anderson's analysis of the historical development of welfare states one can better understand the systemic theoretical deficiencies within his classificatory framework as a whole. Esping-Anderson, like so many other theorists in his field erroneously views the development of the welfare state as a response purely to the rise of class politics. While class has undoubtedly been a central factor in the history of the welfare state, its inclusion in the study of social policy should not come at the expense of other crucial factors (namely gender and familial relations) being largely sidelined. Pederson's work "Family, Dependence, and the Origins of the Welfare State" (1993) which details the development of both the French and British welfare states in the first half of the twentieth century is testament to this point.
Both welfare states developed along deeply gendered lines. British labour and social policies were premised on a normative vision of the family in which men were presumed to be the principle family breadwinners, and dependence was considered the normal destiny of wives. Contrariwise, in France the family rather than the individual was identified as the bearer of social entitlements. Welfare policy was thus informed by a "parental" rather than a "male breadwinner" logic, based not on the assumption that women are necessarily dependent, nor that men have "families to keep" but on the assumption of the dependence of children alone. Both countries' welfare trajectories were determined by a complex of factors. Organisations and politicians explicitly concerning themselves with the role of women and family (such as socialists like Eleanor Rathbone and Ellen Wilkinson in Britain and the conservatively-inclined pronatalist lobby and Social Catholics in France) and organisations which were ostensibly the pure representatives of "class" (such as the androcentric trade unions in the UK and the opportunistic employer's associations in France who saw family-based benefits as a way of keeping wages down) had a huge impact on the shaping of welfare policy.
Esping-Anderson's social stratification measure is concerned solely with the manner in which social rights structure class hierarchies. Thus from a feminist perspective he is doubly-guilty: not only does he ignore how gender relations have influenced the substance of the welfare state, he pays scant regard to how the substance of the welfare states affects gender relations. Welfare states are in fact deeply implicated in shaping women's access to an independent income. For those in the labour market it can provide child services and cash transfers that reduce both the burden of women's domestic labour and the costs entailed in undertaking paid work. It can also offer maternity leave and implement equality policies. For those not engaged in the labour market social policy can provide women with an independent income through child benefits and social assistance with child-rearing responsibilities. Conversely, welfare states can also reinforce women's subordination to men by not facilitating their access to an independent income; by assigning them the status of "dependent" in the social security and tax systems or by the designation of the "couple" as the unit of assessment. Moreover, the rolling back of the care services, particularly for the elderly, sick and disabled also has profound effects on the levels of freedom women enjoy.
The concept of decommodification is constructed with male lifestyles in mind. Men spend most of their lives in the market and when they cannot they are paid a wage substitute by the state. Thus, as a measure of how much independence is conferred on male workers by the welfare state it offers the political scientist an adequate indicator of one of the component characteristics of a country's social policy. However, when applied to the lives of women the decommodification concept is inadequate. One major problem relating to female independence and three subsidiary problems will be outlined here.
The first major problem with the concept of decommodification is that most women do not work in the market arena but in the domestic sphere. This is not because they have been decommodified but rather because they are uncommodified. Most females are heavily reliant on the income of their husbands (Daly 1994) and their independence is contingent on their relationships and status within the family as much as by welfare state policies or labour market participation. For women then it might be through being commodified (ie. entering the labour market) that they make further steps towards personal autonomy (O'Connor 1993) as it gives them a "voice" to negotiate power relations and the confidence and finances to allow them to exit unsatisfactory relationships (Hobson 1990). In essence, Esping-Anderson ignores all this and his value-laden commodification-decommodification binary is not sufficient in accounting for the bewilderingly complex relationship between the welfare state and female citizenship.
The three following points closely relate to this. Firstly, because the concept of decommodification is based on formal wage labour, women can only really be included in Esping-Anderson's analysis if they are in the labour market. In the "Three Worlds of Welfare" scant attention is given to other policy variables that directly affect the domestic sphere, such as child benefits and care services. Secondly, the implicit market/state relationship, whereby the former is the commodifier and the latter the de-commodifier, is not as neat as Esping-Anderson presents it. Women are often more attracted to working in state-funded welfare services than in the commercial market which they may view as being imbued with patriarchy and ridden with pay gaps.
Lastly, there is the issue that when women and men are generally decommodified for different purposes and under different conditions. Sainsbury (1993) demonstrates that American, British and Dutch income maintenance programmes, although not the Swedish, are dominated by one sex or the other. Women are predominant amongst programmes specifically targeted at them (for example maternity and special "caring" measures) and as recipients of social assistance, while men are more likely to be claimants of insurance-based benefits. Moreover, Nelson (1990) suggests that there is a two-tiered, gendered, income-maintenance system in the USA, with insurance-based benefits considered as first-class benefits and assistance based benefits considered as second class.
While chapter 1 of the "The Three Worlds of Welfare" suggests the need to "take into account how state activities are interlocked with the market's and family's role in social provision," the text does not develop an analytical framework with which to follow this through. This has left Esping-Anderson exposed to justifiable criticism from feminist scholars for three reasons. Firstly, as is already noted, the family is one of the most important contexts for the structuring of women's lives in relation to their employment patterns, pay levels, economic well-being, capacity for independence and ultimately their power vis--vis men. Secondly it has historically been the largest provider of welfare and its importance in this regard shows no sign of decline. (Oakley 1986 & Kolberg 1991) And lastly, the family and marital status of women and to a lesser extent men play an important role in their treatment in the labour market and their eligibility to state benefits.
Both Korpi (2000) and Esping-Anderson (1999) have done studies centred on the concept of defamilisation. However, Bambra's study (2004) shall be focussed on here because her definition of defamilisation (the extent to which the welfare state undermines women's dependency on the family and facilitates women's economic independence) seems to be more relevant to the gender critique of Esping-Anderson's typology. Moreover in her research, she helpfully focuses on the same 18 OECD countries studied in "The Three Worlds of Capitalism". While there were some anomalies, most of Bambra's defamilisation scores are remarkably similar to Esping-Anderson's decommodification scores and because of this, countries appeared to group together in the same way. All of the countries in the lower band of defamilisation scores are "liberal", all of the counties belonging to the higher band of defamilisation scores are "social democratic" and most of the countries between these two bands are "conservative." The caveat is that the methodology Bambra employs is not so accommodating to feminist critiques as her definition of defamilisation; her research was based on variables exclusively pertaining only to women's relationship with the labour market. In this way she was still very much working from within Esping-Anderson's territory.
Gender-sensitive qualitative studies on the welfare state provide a mixed picture in terms of how well Esping-Anderson's classification corroborates with the trends in how women are treated in social policy. Orloff's (1992) work on the mechanisms for female poverty reduction in Sweden and Italy seems to validate Esping-Anderson's typology, because while governments of the former country tend to do so by promoting women's employment the governments of the latter generally do it by reinforcing marriage and economic dependency. Likewise Birte Siim's (1990) comparison between British and Danish policies concerning care work is consistent with Esping-Anderson's regime types. Whilst in Denmark women's dual roles as worker and mother are supported by a social and family policy that gives the state a larger role in organising and financing care for dependents, in Britain a "familist" social policy assigns primary responsibility for care work to the family, assuming this contains a breadwinner husband and a wife who has time to attend to unpaid care work.
Countering these are numerous studies which reveal major variations within Esping-Anderson's regime types. For instance, both Leira's (1992) and Borchost's (1994) examinations of public child care provision and the characteristics of women's labour force participation in the Scandinavian "social democratic" states find that the Norwegian welfare state does not conform to the "social democratic model" because unlike its neighbours it offers meagre provision for infants and toddlers and relies heavily on informal care arrangements. Moreover, the work of Ostner and Lewis (1995) points to significant differences between two welfare states most resembling the "conservative" regime-type. Whilst Germany supports stay-at-home wives and constrains women's employment in various ways, France helps mothers doing paid work with generous provisions like maternity benefits.
Pfau-Effinger's comparative work on the development of culture and welfare states in Germany, the Netherlands and Finland (2004) is important in that it reveals that whilst welfare regime theory can pick up on how women fare in different welfare states no welfare regime theory can truly be sensitive to the complexities of gender relations. She argues that gender culture is a central causal force in the development of women's employment patterns acting relatively autonomously of prevailing welfare structures. It is contested and does not conform neatly to the predominant institutions and social practices in society and thus is a source of great tension and change. This is illustrated in how, for example, whilst the cultural orientation of Dutch women changed dramatically in the 1970s as they entered part-time employment with more and more females prescribing to a "modernised male breadwinner/female part-time carer model" the welfare state continued to adhere to the housewife model. This contradiction led to transformation - by the 1980s the state reacted by becoming a pioneer as regards to gender arrangements producing policies conducive to the materialisation of a "dual breadwinner/dual care model".
Moreover, Pfau-Effinger shows how women's relationship to the labour market was not so much the result of welfare development but rooted in the gender models of the prevailing class in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The predominance of the male breadwinner model in Germany is closely linked with the cultural impact of the urban bourgeoisie at the time of its industrial revolution and conversely the more equitable relations between men and women in Finland are rooted in the countries' history of small-scale family-based farming and the prominent role women play in its public life. Thus, through showing that women's labour market behaviour is radically affected by prevailing cultural norms Pfau-Effinger reveals the assumption endemic amongst regime-theorists that women are simply the female versions of "homo oeconomicus", adapting their actions to the financial incentives offered to them by the welfare state to be unfounded.
This paper has provided a feminist critique of the main theoretical pillars of Esping-Anderson's framework for his classification of welfare states. His preoccupation with class has meant that the measures he adopts to classify welfare states are gender-blind. His understanding of the development of welfare states is limited by the fact that he pays little attention to how gender has been a significant area of contestation in social policy. The concept of social stratification overlooks the fact that women's lives within the domestic sphere have been profoundly affected by the emergence of the welfare state. The main flaw with the decommodification measure is that it posits that attachment to the labour market is the norm for all citizens when this patently isn't true for many women. Finally, the family which firstly plays a crucial role in the welfare of dependents and secondly is intimately linked to the policies of the welfare state is given a peripheral role in the study.
However, happily for Esping-Anderson the empirical evidence mounted against him is no where near as systematic as the feminist critiques of his theoretical framework. The defamilisation index employed by Bambra positively validates his classification. Nonetheless, whilst such research picks up on how women are treated by the labour market and the welfare state it does little to explore the variegated gender relations in each country. Pfau-Effinger does manage this, but in doing so her exposition discredits those feminist critics who believe that Esping-Anderson's classification would be gender-sensitive if it wasn't for his partial exclusion of women from his analytical framework. This is because she shows that gender relations aren't directly amenable to external manipulation through social policy anyway but are in fact grounded in cultural norms that exist quite independently of the welfare state.
Three conclusions can be drawn from this. Firstly, that feminist theoretical arguments against Esping-Anderson's classificatory model reveal it to be gender blind. Secondly, that whilst factoring in women or the family as units in welfare-regime analysis may help in finding out how certain welfare states treat women, feminists are severely constrained by the fact that any welfare-regime theory is severely limited in how incisive it can be in relation to the complexities of gender relations. And lastly, following closely on from this, to gain a more penetrating insight into the power relations between men, women, the market and the welfare state Esping-Anderson's feminist critics may be best advised to follow Pfau-Effinger's own example: by immersing themselves in the histories of individual countries and by putting gender and welfare policy into their social and cultural contexts. In other words, a clear focus on each tree rather than another blurry perspective of the forest may yield richer results for those aspiring to produce gender-sensitive work.