The reforms that have brought about the reconstitution of social housing necessitate a re-conceptualisation of the term itself. Up to the mid-1970s it was easy for academics to define the social rented sector. It had four distinguishing factors:
its housing was built primarily with the help of state finance
its housing was subsidised by the national government
its main administrator was either the local council or non-profit organisations operating under the aegis of the government
its rents were held below market levels.
Since then, there has been a tendency for governments to facilitate the increasing role of private business in social housing and simultaneously increase their own role in expanding other tenures, blurring the once sharp division between the "private" and "public". In such a way, factor 1) is no longer applicable because spending on social housing is now overwhelmingly financed by borrowing from capital markets. Factor 2) can no longer be considered as a necessary condition because of the increasing complexity and proliferation in subsidies that benefit homeowners and tenants and landlords in the private-rented sector. However, factor 3) can still rightly be maintained as necessary conditions because private landlords rarely put the profits they accrue back into their property; and so can factor 4), as it is self-evident that for social housing to have a "social" function it has to have a rent level lower than the asocial dictates of the market. Thus, "social housing" will be taken to be a type of tenure that is run on a non-profit basis offering a rent price lower than the market level. Significant state funding and involvement will not be considered as requisite features.
This essay will demonstrate that the role of social housing in many modern welfare states is contracting and changing by briefly examining the housing policies of 4 divergent European welfare states, the UK, the Netherlands, France and Sweden, with particular attention to what has been implemented since the mid-1970s. The essay will then go onto analyse the underlying reasons for the general trend of contraction in the social housing sector. It will emphasise in particular: the absence of the main conditions that necessitated the initial building of social housing; the allure of homeownership; the self-eroding dynamic within social housing and the widely perceived global economic pressures for fiscal prudence. The essay will finally give reasons that suggest that social housing is not completely doomed.
Unlike Sweden and the Netherlands a lot of social housing was built in the UK in the 1920s and 30s. After World War Two there was an acute shortage of both houses and money to buy houses. This made the construction of mass council housing a logical and politically popular policy. However large-scale funding for social housing soon became out of favour as a policy, with Thatcher winning power. The New Right's belief in fiscal rectitude and its utopian dream of attaining a property-owning democracy helped shape the agenda on housing policy in the years of Conservative party rule and in so doing broke the 3-decades long welfare-capitalist consensus on the social rented sector.
Despite ostensibly being against substantial state intervention the Conservative governments' ambitions could only be realised with huge amounts of social engineering. The 1980 Housing Act granted most council tenants the right to buy their council houses. In 1982 housing benefits were introduced, marking a policy shift away from investment in "bricks and mortar" in favour of rent subsidies for tenants. The Building Societies Act of 1986 deregulated the provision of housing finance for owner-occupation, bringing high street banks into the market, so that more funding was available and more households were eligible for mortgages. In 1989, the municipalities responsible for social housing were no longer able to keep the rents artificially low through transfer payments from general municipal funds. The result is that social housing as a proportion of total stock has dramatically declined from 33% in 1980 to 20% in 1998.
New Labour has continued in a similar vein to their predecessors, differentiating provision of rented housing and experimenting with the leasing of council housing to private profit-making bodies under detailed long-term contracts in their famed private-finance initiatives. Although the Blair government has lessened the extent of market autonomy in that it has extended regulations over Registered Social Landlords, it nonetheless exhibits scant desire to reverse the 30-year relative decline of social housing.
Dutch social housing is generally in relatively good condition. This is partly due to the fact that is quite new. Over 75% of its social housing was built after 1945. Further more, according to 1994 readings the Netherlands has the largest proportion of social rented housing in the Europe, amounting to 36% of the country's total stock, compared to the EU average of just 18%. Like the UK and France, the Netherlands had a grave shortage of housing in the early post-war period. The difference was that compared to the rest of Europe, Dutch governments continued building huge amounts of social housing decades after. Unlike the rest of Europe housing production in the Netherlands peaked after the 1960s. Moreover, while most Western European governments produced policies of incremental privatisation in the social sector in the 1970s, the Netherlands did not follow this approach until the 1990s.
The 1974 Housing Memorandum initiated a slight change in policy with new emphasis given to creating a mixed system of subject and object subsidies. In the early-1980s a new centre-right government wanted to wean Dutch citizens off dependency on constant state subsidization with policies aimed towards increasing home-ownership. While the outcome was not as intended (there was a collapse in the housing market and the government was compelled to increase social housing stock again) it did indicate the emergence of new currents of thought opposing the prevailing orthodoxy. However it was the Heerma memorandum, produced in 1989, which marked the decisive departure. It stressed decentralisation, deregulation, budget cuts, a gradual decrease in object subsidies, a growing emphasis on subject subsidies and a reduction in the share of social rented dwellings in new construction programmes. Dutch governments have as a result slowly retreated from the housing market and reigned back on state spending in social housing. This can be seen in the fact that no Dutch government has provided public loans to municipal housing companies since 1988.
The absence of a long-term housing policy between 1918 and 1939 made the destruction of 400,000 dwellings in the 2 nd World War particularly grave. The chronic housing shortage was further compounded by the growing demand for housing associated with France's rapid industrialisation and attendant reception of a mass of immigrants in the 1950s and 60s. In response to this problem, priority was given to a vast construction programme of social rented housing. HLMs (housing with moderate rents) organisations enjoyed generous state assistance in building and running social housing. In the 1960s, the usual form of central government financial initiatives were long-term loans (over 40 years) at lower interest rates than free markets (between 1% and 3.5%).
However, by the early 1970s the central government's approach to housing had changed. It began to favour home-ownership; encouraging the building industry to use industrial processes in order to develop cheap 1-family houses. The Barr Report of 1976 recommended a shift from object to subject studies in the view of increasing efficiency and reducing the level of state investment in housing. This was implemented in legislation a year later, with a new and more generous housing benefit (the APL) being brought into being. The APL housing benefit was a way of manipulating the demand-side; supplementing rent payments to landlords so as to ensure that poor tenants could still afford the rent increases associated with the housing rehabilitation programmes and reducing housing loans so as to encourage low-income tenants to buy up the aforementioned 1-family houses.
As elsewhere in Europe, the swing away from object subsidies in France was sharp. In 1988 object subsidies accounted for 26% of state spending in housing, in 1993 they accounted for a mere 12% while housing benefits rose steeply from 26% in 1980 to 62% of the housing expenditure in 1993. Moreover, the building of social housing dramatically dropped from 120,000 units in 1980 to 32,000 in 1993 and its share of the total housing stock had fallen from 30% at the beginning of the 1980s to 12% in the early 90s. Later in 1995 the Jupp government introduced right-to-buy measures indicating the impact of neo-liberal thinking had on housing policy. However, this was not as far-reaching as the selling off of council houses in the UK since the prospective buyers must have been occupying the property for at least 10 years.
Sweden was not on the receiving end of Nazi aerial bombardment in the 2 nd World War. As such, unlike the other 3 countries examined it did not suffer the acute housing shortages in the immediate aftermath of the conflict. Nonetheless, the state still played a central role in the housing of Swedish citizens. The first post-war government extended wartime rent control as a temporary method to restrain the profit motive and saw the final solution as bringing the bulk of all rental housing under the control of public utility. The bostadsbidraget (housing benefit) was introduced in 1947 and in the Parliamentary Bill of 1946, Social minister Gustav Moller proposed that housing companies be divided into three categories of funding: the non-profit public companies would be eligible for low-interest state finance for up to 100% of building costs, co-operative enterprises would be eligible for up to 95%, and private up to 85%. .
The state housing loans scheme, gave further power to the government, enabling authorities to specify where, when and how housing is to be built, as well as its final price, including the cost of land acquisition. The 1974 Housing Act reaffirmed the primacy of this social democratic approach, embodying a commitment to maintain society's responsibility for the provision of dwellings and an aspiration to attain tenure neutrality. In privately rented dwellings, rents had to broadly accord to use-value, so when landlords sought to obtain an increase in rent, rent tribunals could set a fair rent based on the levels of rents charged by municipal housing companies for equivalent housing. Through this process, the social housing sector assumed the role of market leader and thereby helped maintain a unitary rental system.
From the late 1980s onwards the terrain of Swedish housing began to change in line with the trends in more liberal welfare states abroad, starting with the deregulation and liberalisation of credit, which helped stimulate demand for home-ownership. However, real transformation commenced when the conservative-led coalition government of 1991-4 adopted a series of austerity packages aimed at remedying Sweden's economic malaise. General subsidies were demoted in favour of target/income-related subsidies, the special fiscal status granted to non-profit landlords was rescinded and private landlords were extricated from the obligation of basing their rents on social sector equivalents. Consequently, the number of social housing units fell from 70,000 in 1991 to 15,000 in 1995 and the tenure is reduced to having a mere market-influencing role.
The commonalities of housing policy in the 4 countries show that there are general trends regarding the role of social housing. After World War 2 the level of government intervention in housing tended to be high, mostly due to the destruction of housing but also because of economic recovery. Policies were focussed on the realisation of large-scale construction programmes. By the late 1970s (for the UK and France) and the late 1980s (for the Netherlands and Sweden) housing shortage had declined substantially, ideas about the welfare state shifted, fiscal rectitude was elevated to a near sacrosanct level and the states' grip over social housing began to loosen.
Now there is a clear tendency to restrict both general subsidies and tax benefits with the objective of reducing public expenditure and to deregulate financial and housing markets to assist the private sector to fill the gap; there is less emphasis on maintaining tenure neutrality and relatively greater emphasis on assisting poorer households and areas. To put it simply, the predominant approach in housing policy at the moment is to promote homeownership, transfer risk from the public to the private sector, to reduce object subsidies and to increase targeting. The long-term consequence of this approach is that social dwellings are becoming devoid of their former substance and play a diminishing role in housing policy.
The tightening of the eligibility criteria for social housing and the relative and sometimes absolute decline in the amount of social dwellings triggers off a self-eroding dynamic. Social housing estates start to lose the social mix so intrinsic to their vitality and they become areas of acute deprivation. They then become stigmatised and further repel aspirant working-classes and middle-classes. This residualisation is exacerbated by mono-tenurial circularity, whereby once home ownership becomes the dominant tenure arithmetically and socially, governments become less predisposed to produce policy favourable to other tenures.
Through simple extrapolation, one may conclude that the state's role in housing will soon become miniscule and that social housing is in terminal decline. However, there is much to suggest otherwise. Indeed, housing and land are both public goods; because of the longevity of the former and the scarcity of the latter and it thus seems that it is absolutely necessary that government plays a significant role in housing. Moreover, the social rented sector has still got a lot to contribute. Firstly because it seems to be a tenure much better able than home-ownership to accommodate the post-Fordist pressures of labour flexibility; and secondly because it is difficult to envisage a form of property relations in which there will not be a need to regulate contracts to help weaker parties impose certain obligations on landlords. The apparent stabilisation of the social housing sector in both France and Sweden adds empirical substance to this view.
The logic behind the above paragraph shows that the process of contraction in the role of social housing is not and, will not be, linear; and the differences in the proceedings in the 4 countries as evinced throughout the essay shows that the process of contraction is not generic. Thus, three conclusions can be drawn: firstly, that the diminution in the role of social housing is by no means inexorable. Secondly, that the recent diminution is chiefly driven by supranational economic forces coupled with a dynamic internal to housing. And lastly, however, that the rate, extent, nature and timing of these contractions are profoundly affected by the unique national politico-economic environments within which they take place.