The assumption that a gap existed between the theory and the practice in the social position of women between 1500 and 1700 is a contested one. Margaret Ezell argues that the expectations of female behaviour and duty in society did infact closely match the reality of women's experiences. Looking at contemporary literature and popular opinion, Ezell concludes that contrary to many historians who view the prescribed position as restrictive and misogynistic, both scripture and conduct books infact highlighted female capabilities and praised women as partners in life. 'Differences between men and women are merely superficial...women are as naturally capable as men of reason, wit and...government." However, feminists have criticised Ezell for her limited interpretation of the literature she looks at. They argue that advice such as '...it is not that the wife has no mind of her own, but that she deliberately alters it if necessary, to conform with her husbands,' does not counter the view that women were expected to be submissive and were considered inferior to men during this period. Even Lawrence Stone, who argues that patriarchy was at its strongest and its most widely accepted at this time, acknowledges that the role set out for women often differed markedly from the actual experiences of womanhood, due mainly to the fact that the prescribed role was simply incompatible with the realities of life, especially for the poor. Indeed, Ralph Houlbrooke argues that the '...theory was simply unworkable...' with the realities faced by contemporary women.
In this essay I am going to argue from a standpoint assuming that a gap between the theory and the practice in the social position of women in early modern England did infact exist. I will argue that this gap existed despite both male and female attempts to keep within it, due both to its unrealistic expectations compared with the actual lives women led, and the dualities and contradictions within it. I will argue that due to three broad and overlapping areas: economic and personal factors, and a contradiction within the role which expected servility but also demanded command and power, women could not live out their lives within the boundaries of their expected social positions.
The position women were to occupy in society was set out to the population through a number of mediums. Scriptural references in homilies and religious services put emphasis upon '...the procreation and religious education of children, the regulation of sexual activity, and mutual comfort and support.' A distinction was made between suitable female and male duties; 'The husband was held to be the superior partner, the wife the subordinate and inferior...her foremost duty was obedience." In the advice guides published, women were seen to be 'material and passive...weak in body...and unfitted for work or public life.' As such they were expected to remain in the private sphere, '...unquestioningly obedient to her husband, accepting husbandly reproofs meekly...bearing her husbands faults...accommodating his various moods and on any breach being the first to seek reconciliation." Satires and other anti-female publications played upon the popular images of women as sexually insatiable, nagging scolds, as well as playing upon the images of marriage as an end to freedom and fun, and a life of supporting a wife who would stop at nothing to get her own way. Whether popular opinion about women was more influenced by religion and advice guides or by satires is hard to tell, and indeed the opinion of the female role and marriage differed between men and women and according to place in the social order. It is probable that popular opinion took on board a mixture of both views as well as referring to personal experience of female figures and their behaviour. Finally, the expected social position of women was expressed by the authorities through the law; 'nowhere did the wife appear more completely subordinate to her husband than in the common law'. Women were never a homogeneous group; the law and indeed general opinion differed with different women; single, married, widowed and spinsters. However, in the eyes of the law, a woman belonged to the man in charge of her whether that was a father, brother or husband. Widows enjoyed a certain amount of freedom, however along with spinsters were so marginalised socially, for being 'master-less', and economically, with only a few poorly paid trades to work in, that they had very hard lives. Already, with this simple description of the expected social position of women it is possible to see some of the contradictions within it; for example, that women were sexually uncontrollable, yet the moral guardians of society. Susan Amussen argues that this contradiction is one of the main reasons why the wish for '...clear subordination of wives to husbands...was never fully realised.'
The gap between theory and practice in the social position of women in early modern England was certainly influenced by the economic realities they faced in their everyday lives. It was often necessary for poorer women to marry quite late; the time before marriage was spent working in service adding to the family purse. Girls had to leave home and live away from their families often giving them a taste for relative freedom, economic independence and a knowledge of their personal capabilities. Even after marriage it was often necessary for women to make economic contributions to the family; supplementing the low wages her husband was paid. Keith Wrightson argues that these female supplements to male wages were crucial to survival even if they did somewhat undermine the official female position in society. Susan Amussen points out that the gap between theory and practice actually lessened depending on the importance of the economic contributions of a wife. Some women did not need to compromise the submissive, passive role by economic contributions such as bartering at market or looking after the estate whilst a husband was absent. Although women rarely strayed in to their husbands' role once he had returned, it was essential to economic survival that they could and would perform his tasks even if this meant female and domination and authority. Men wanted their wives to be '...both subordinate and competent...and willing to accept that whatever a man did was work and whatever a woman did was her duty'. 'Women's independence and autonomy were critical to their success as wives and mothers...the contradictions between women's economic roles and their expected subordination were so severe that they posed a problem to the most carefully conforming wife.'
Women were often needed in the public sphere, and even if not playing leading roles their actions still conflicted with the domesticated submission part of the role, although perhaps fulfilling the obedience part. Diane Willen argues that pauper women were actively recruited by local authorities in to the public arena. Although the work women were doing for local authorities was an extension of their traditional domestic duties; cleaning and caring, 'it questions...the existence of separate private/public spheres in the early modern period'. Both the poor women being employed and the 'local patriarchal political authorities' employing them gained economically from this arrangement. Women could earn a small wage and authorities gained a willing, cheap labour force; both parties were forced to revise women's official social position for economic gain. Widows were also women with access to the public sphere; they could by law take over some of their husband's trades or estates upon his death. Although often poorer widows were left very economically vulnerable, some were able to maintain themselves successfully; indeed advice guides warned men against marrying widows as they tended to be 'harder to tame' having already tasted and achieved economic independence.
The second set of factors which made the social position set out for women in early modern England impossible to fulfil even if they tried, were personal factors. By this I mean factors which come about naturally as a consequence of marriage; i.e. spending a lot of time with someone, growing to know them very well and loving them. Love and caring were seen as very important aspects of a successful marriage, in particular they were seen as part of a husband's duty. However it was well documented in contemporary literature that '...more men betrayed their command through their own fondness than ever lost it through their wives rebellion'. Though caring and affection were viewed with importance; and were often an unavoidable outcome of spending lives together, measures were taken to limit the influence affection had on the social position of women. 'Convention demanded that the wife address her husband with humility and deference...even the affectionate terms love, joy, dear and duck were not appropriate in the mouth of a subordinate." However it must have been very difficult to maintain a purely master/subordinate relationship especially when feelings of love and affection existed in a marriage. Even the most obedient wife and most masterful husband must have come across occasions when such formal address would have been inappropriate.
Laura Gowing argues that the gap between theory and practice actually began during courtship, making it only natural that it continue after marriage. Gowing explains that it was sometimes necessary to deviate from the passive, submissive role of a courting woman. The double standard which existed in terms of male and female sexual morality and the importance of reputation in early modern society made courting quite a difficult process. Women had to use their intricate knowledge of the laws of courting to avoid the many traps which could leave them tied to a poor marriage match or with their reputation in tatters. Often it was impossible for a woman to remain passive during courting, especially if conjugal rights had been granted to a man after the promise of marriage, or pushy parents were disdainful of certain suitors. Often with a little bit of courage and forcefulness, men could be made to keep promises, and by scrutinising the exact wording used in the making of a marriage contract they could be escaped. 'Women could still exercise their power of evasion and refusal...language...gave women the opportunity to broaden the largely passive part allotted to them in the process of courtship.'
Other personal factors made the female social position hard to follow strictly; in many cases women's personal capabilities and desires surpassed the prescribed role. Often individual character and temperament sat at odds with the boundaries set out; after all, not all wives were inferior to their husbands and not all husbands' wanted/needed submissive wives. Simple practicalities such as very little age difference between partners, made the expected master/servant relationship, hard to fulfil; a woman with equal or more life experience than her husband could be hard to commandeer. Finally, women's roles and identities within society were not a constant thing, they were much less fixed than men's; as they were already malleable, it was relatively easy to simply revise these identities and social positions further.
The final aspect which made it impossible for women to live wholly within their official social position, were the areas of society over which women had complete power and control; morality, reputation and of course the domestic sphere. In marriage and out of it women were to control the sexual activity of themselves and their spouses; adultery was seen as dangerous, putting the established social order in jeopardy, and even too much sex between husband and wife was viewed negatively. Women's control over reputation gave them a certain amount of power over both other women and men; as Samuel Pepys diary shows '...when his wife caught him with their maid...he at once recognised the political significance of the event'. Women could wield the reputation card to expand their limited role and position in society. Gossiping was another largely female activity allowing them to channel pressure on those they felt were morally lacking whether for bastardy, cuckolding or wife beating. Women were called upon to ensure that their men folk were satisfactorily carrying out their duties and this gave them a certain amount of power. For example, if men were neglecting their religious duties as head of the household, a wife could 'take-over' this part of his role even if he was in objection to this. This expectation of wives by religious authorities severely compromised the obedient social position they otherwise instructed her to take.
The domestic sphere, often seen as the sight of women's inequality, was infact the one area of society over which women had a lot of control. Rule over servants and the running of a complex household were just some of the tasks women were expected to perform. Other tasks included care and religious education of children as well as total authority in the field of pregnancy and childbirth; 'lay ins' gave women an all female space in which to recover after childbirth. Women were also expected to give their husbands sound business advice and make decisions within the domestic sphere. The fact that these tasks could not be performed without being domineering, active and authoritarian was why a necessary gap existed between theory and practice in the social position of women.
To conclude, I have tried to show that even men and women attempting to keep within their official social positions found it an impossible task. I have looked at some of the factors that made this impossible; including the economic realities which meant women's roles had to overlap with men's and forced them beyond the passive, submissive boundaries of their role. There were also personal factors, such as the natural familiarity which grows as a result of married life which made strict adherence to the master, subservient relationship between couples hard to maintain strictly. Finally, there were areas of society in which women held most if not all power, these areas meant that women by necessity had authority which contradicted the submissive position intended for them, as well as giving women power which they could use to renegotiate their limited position.
Susan Amussen argues that the attempts of women to remain faithful to their prescribed social position, but failure due to the impractical, unrealistic nature of the position, is shown by women's emphasis on the sexual conduct part of the role; the part that was actually achievable. Faced with the impossibility of the obedience part, women placed greater importance on strict sexual conduct. Where possible women were willing to adhere to their prescribed social positions; helping to maintain the social order so important to early modern society. As Bernard Capp argues; women did not directly challenge the system, rather they worked within it, finding compromises to suit their economic, and personal realities. They also accommodated the features such as commanding, and decision making which went against their prescribed temperament but which were necessary for the domestic success also expected of them. The gap between theory and practice in the social position of women in early modern England should be explained in terms of its impractical economic nature and its contradictory and unrealistic expectations.