The customer margin needs to be determined in order to achieve a successful launch and at the same time generate a positive Net Present Value.
The proposed customer margin will be Low (10%) for the Starter Kit, High (18%) for the Refill Pads and Mid (12%) for the Refill Solutions.
The new project has a Net Present Value (NPV) of 338,533.
The payback period is 2 years and 7 months.
The changes of any factors that may change over the life of the project needs to be taken into account.
The SWOT analysis of the project is carried out to determine if this new project is in line with existing portfolio of the company.
Competitors' reactions and the consequences need to be considered before this new project is to be decided.
P&G has developed a new product 'Powermop' and is considering to launch it. This is to compete with a competitor's new product which was recently launched and affected the business of P&G. This new product 'Powermop' will enable P&G to expand and diversify its existing product range under the Flash market. It will also expand the customer base to include new-to-market customers. A financial appraisal has been carried out and the results of the appraisal are given below.
The current customer margins given to the customers are 10% for all three categories (Starter Kit, Refill Wipes and Solutions). Major customers contacted regarding the sale of this new product are hoping for a better margin. Taking this into account, the recommended customer margin is Low (10%) for the Starter Kit, High (18%) for the Refill Pads and Mid (12%) for the Refill Solutions. The category average will be 13.3% for Powermop. This is higher than the 10% currently given to the customers by P&G and also higher than the customer margins given by our competitors. Mop and Go only offers on average 10% for their existing product and FlooroBeam, who gained a large market share recently by launching a new product, is offering on average 13% to the customers. If P&G offers 13.3% for the new product 'Powermop', this is likely to attract customers and their willingness to sell the new product in their stores. This customer margin of 13.3% is going to generate a positive NPV and also similar payback period to a lower customer margin of 11.3%. Therefore, given that this higher customer margin of 13.3% will make the customers happier and in return, build good relationships between P&G with the customers, the customer margin of 13.3% is highly recommended.
This high customer margin can also be seen as a form of barrier to entry into the new product market. Knowing that the competitors will react and launch a similar product in the future, a high customer margin will more or less discourage them. This is because if the size of the research and development department or the company is small, the cost of launching the new product will be higher and it will be difficult to offer the customers a similar customer margin. Offering a similar customer margin as high as that of P&G will generate a loss for the company. If a lower customer margin is offered, the customers might be unhappy to take it and sell in their stores.
The project has been appraised using two techniques : Payback and Net Present Value (NPV).
Payback is the amount of time it takes for the proceeds from an investment to recover the original cash outlay required by the investment. Net Present Value (NPV) is the present value of the net cash inflows less the project's initial investment outlay.
The cost of the capital is assumed to be 7% and the project life is 3 years.
The appraisal shows that this new project has a NPV of  338,533. The payback period is 2 years and 7 months. The details of calculations are included in Appendix.
The results show that this project appears to be worthwhile. However in this appraisal, the impact of inflation has not been taken into account. If all cash flows are affected by the same rate of inflation, then the impact can be ignored. Another effect that has been ignored is taxation. Ignoring tax is likely to overstate the NPV of the project because taxation affects the cash flow in terms of capital allowance and tax charge.
This project is assumed to have a life of 3 years. Within these 3 years, the market growth may be different from the projected 5% for each year. This might be because consumers are not aware of the existence of such product in the market or they are not confident with this new product because of lack of advertisement and promotion. If the growth is slower, the sales of 'Powermop' will be affected and might lead to a negative NPV.
The assumption that competitors will react in the same trend as previous times might be wrong. Competitors might have acquired the technology necessary to develop similar products earlier than expected. If Mop and Go reacts in 6 months' time and FlooroBeam in 1 year's time, P&G might lose all the growth in the new market 1 year after the launch of 'Powermop'.
There is also possibility that new players will enter the market thus creating greater competition. P&G must be aware of such competitor who has the ability to divert consumers.
The introduction of similar products into the market by competitors after P&G has launched this new product 'Powermop' will undoubtedly have an effect on the company sales of 'Powermop'. From past experiences, Mop and Go will come up with a similar product one year after P&G has launched a product. However, this competing product has an inferior quality. If this is the same for this new project, customers might not be easily attracted away from 'Powermop'. FlooroBeam reacted after two years in the first instance. The product they came up with was of better quality. If this happens again, P&G would lose end-consumers.
Competitors might also attack by offering a lower price to end consumers and higher customer margins to retail customers. P&G is currently offering a high customer margin of 13.3% to retail customers. The actions of competitors might force P&G to lower its price in order to avoid losing end consumers. Raising customer margin to a level higher than 13.3% is possible if it is necessary to compete with competitors. P&G will still have a positive NPV but the payback period is longer and the profit from the new project is also lesser.
In order to avoid the competitors coming up with a better quality product and taking away end consumers, the research and development department should continue to research 'Powermop' on an ongoing basis and constantly improve this product so that consumers will stay loyal to the brand.
P&G should also have more aggressive promotion campaigns to attract end consumer and also to increase awareness of the products. This will help to capture all the new customers in the first year when no competitor has entered the market.
After taking various factors into consideration, the recommended customer margins are able to generate a positive NPV and it is worthwhile to undertake this project.
The proposed customer margins are according to the projected project life and growth of the new market. If there are changes to any other factors, the project needs to be evaluated again in the future. Further calculations are then required to determine a new customer margin.
The SWOT analysis provided a detailed overview regarding the strengths of the company and other things that the company needs to be aware of such as the weaknesses and threats.
This project has not taken into account the effects of inflation and taxation. A higher cost of capital should also be evaluated in case the projects falls outside the normal risk portfolio of the company.
This project should be carried out if it is consistent with the company's overall objectives and strategies.