In this essay I will attempt to address the question of how institutions affect economic performance. The discussion will also try to explain why institutions are so hard to change, and whether or not economic development is possible without institutional change. I will do this by looking at the historical evolution of institutions and markets, and use this to see how the economic development through history has occurred.
First of all, it is important to know what institutions are. As defined by North, 'Institutions are the humanly devised constraints that structure political, economic and social interaction. They consist of both informal constraints (sanctions, taboos, customs, traditions, and codes of conduct), and formal rules (constitutions, laws, property rights)." Institutions exist primarily to reduce uncertainty and transaction costs and create some kind of order in exchange. Exchange can be interpreted in many ways throughout history, with the early beginning of the simple hunting and gathering society, to the longer distance trade and finally exchange has evolved into our modern, well-developed markets connected worldwide.
There has been a massive development in how exchange takes place. In the early hunting and gathering societies exchange had low transaction costs and exchange only occurred within the small villages. There were no formal constraints, but 'the treat of violence is a continuous force for preserving order because of its implications for other members of society." This was a much uncomplicated society, where exchange was limited to a few commodities and actors. But as trade developed and expanded into long distance trade, the exchange and trading suddenly became more complicated and the possibilities for conflict grew. The exchange of commodities took place at temporary gathering places or more permanent towns, and more resources had to be dedicated to measurement and enforcement. This implied that the transaction costs grew significantly. Another setback in this appearance of trade is the Fundamental Problem of Exchange (FPOE), which Greif explains by using game theory. In short, the FPOE explains the uncertainty in exchange; how can the actors be assured that the other side of an exchange will fulfil their contractual obligations? This is mainly due to the lack of institutional framework that can ensure that all sides of the trade are properly executed. But the favourable institutional framework had not been developed at this early stage.
In neo-classical theory economic performance is, to a large extent, explained by factors such as voluntary exchange and technological innovation. While the importance of institutions is acknowledged, they are usually assumed to be perfect or at least fixed. For instance, the transaction costs of an exchange are often assumed to be zero (perfect institutions enable the transaction to take place at no cost). Opportunities to exchange contribute to economic efficiency in a number of ways, for instance by the gains from natural comparative advantage and the division of labour which brings about specialization, learning by doing, and technological innovation. However, this theory depends on an institutional framework which, in the real world, evolves through time. Institutions are therefore important in explaining long-term economic change. Neo-classical determinants of economic development depend on institutions. For example, in North's model, technological innovation is a dependent, rather than an independent, variable. Since institutions are not the same in all countries and all institutions are not equally helpful in enabling exchange and innovation, the divergence in economic performance between wealthy and poor countries can, to a large extent, be explained by the differences in the institutional evolvements of the countries. For an underdeveloped country, without good institutions, it might be necessary to go through a process of institutional change in order to enable development.
But this might not be easily done. Many underdeveloped countries have failed to copy the institutional framework of rich and well-developed countries. As the institutional framework not only consists of formal but also informal rules, it is often very hard and protracted to change the institutional framework in an economy. A country may try to implement the constitutions, the laws and the property rights of another country in to its own economy and society, but they often fail to see the anticipated and much sought after economic development. This is mainly because the informal 'rules of the game' are very difficult to change overnight, and might not be possible to change at all. To change the laws and constitutions can be accomplished without great trouble, but to change the informal codes of behaviour and conduct is extremely difficult and takes time. This is the nature of the human beings in a society, and it is the way people interact with each other and 'play the game'. Certainly this is not something that easily can be transformed. A good illustration of the intuition may be the corruption in underdeveloped countries. This is a well-known and widespread phenomenon, and contributes to the poor economic development in these countries. But even if one of these countries decide to change its formal institutional framework to enhance its economic performance, it is unlikely that the corruption would suddenly come to an end. The officials and leaders of the country have no incentive to end the corruption, as long as they can gain from the corruption. It is very unlikely that they all see the good purpose of ending corruption and want to contribute to the economic growth of the country. The problem of free-riders will also occur here, and make the institutional change even slower.
But an underdeveloped country must go through a process of institutional change in order to develop. Institutions are the main determinants of long-term economic change and can be seen as independent variables in an economic context. Good institutions are, therefore, required for a country to develop. A process of change is necessary because institutions, as discussed above, evolve through time. Even political revolutions only alter parts of the institutional structure, and the new institutions are not necessarily favourable for economic development. When stable institutions that secure property rights are established, gains can be obtained from exchange, investment, and innovation. This is not only applicable to endogenous developments; incentives for foreign investment (in the developing country) and trade are also enhanced by stability and secure property rights. Thus, a process of favourable institutional change must take place in an underdeveloped country before it can see the economic growth.
Institutions are crucial for economic development because activities that lead to development depend on them. Uncertainty implies large costs and the possibility of losing through the fundamental problem of exchange. Hence the stability of institutions is important because it mitigates the uncertainty involved in activities such as transacting and investing. Secure property rights, for example, are essential in enabling productive activities. Exchange will not take place without institutional constraints that make it sufficiently likely that the contractual obligations will be fulfilled. Arbitrary property rights can effectively function as disincentives to investment. Similarly, technological innovation is less likely to occur if intellectual property is not protected. Moreover, the political institutional environment must permit a significant generation of trials (i.e. entrepreneurial experimentation to solve problems) to enable innovation of all sorts. This can lead to economic development and greater economic performance, and not necessarily accompanied by an institutional change. If the informal rules are such that they enable economic development through the existing institutional framework, economic development for some countries can be achieved without any significant institutional change. For developed countries technological changes can lead to greater economic performance, the institutional framework being the same. But of course, if there are large technological improvements and innovations, this may itself create institutional changes. This is what happened when the telegram was invented, which totally changed the way of communicating. It made it possible to communicate with countries all over the world much more efficiently.
So, to sum things up, institutions indeed affect economic performance, and do so through various and numerous traditions and institutions in the society we live in. It may be tempting to copy a country's institutional framework and expect to copy their economic performance as well, but it turns out that this is rather difficult. For the institutions to function in the way that they contribute to greater economic performance, a country must also experience institutional change in the sense of the informal rules and codes of conduct. But this, unfortunately, is often prolonged and makes economic development difficult for the already backward countries. However, if the favourable institutional framework already exists, and the informal rules have evolved and fit the current framework, it may be possible to experience economic development without institutional change.