This essay discusses the consumer behaviour. Factors that influence consumption will be analysed firstly, following by comparison of current income with expected future income, with the help of empirical data. In addition, the different responses to expectation and current income on consumption will be examined with respect to certain groups. A conclusion will then be drawn.
Consumption behaviour depends on disposable income Y d, i.e. income minus tax. The higher the disposable income, the higher the level of consumption. In addition, the level of financial wealth such as accumulative savings in the bank, the value of stocks and bonds owned, as well as housing wealth, play an important role in consumer's behaviour. The sum of financial wealth and housing wealth is defined as nonhuman wealth. In contrast, the sum of disposable income is called as human wealth. Therefore, the total wealth, which is the summation of human and nonhuman wealth, determines the consumption function.
Assume that consumers maximize their consumption utility subject to a budget constraint that is total wealth. Over a lifetime, we will spend all of our total wealth on goods and services. Hence, the lifetime from year 0 to year N, consumption will equal to the sum of lifetime disposable income, and initial wealth, less intended inheritance for the next generation. The equation is written as:  C t = Yt + (W o - W n). Thus the average of consumption each year during the lifetime will be calculated as total consumption divided by the number of years N. The sum of lifetime disposable income Yt is the result of current disposable income which is known, plus expected future after-tax labour income. The implication of the equation is that consumption today is not only determined by how much we earn today, but also how much we expect to have later. If the implication was the correct, should we spend an amount that excesses the current disposable income, simply because of expectation?
Before comparing current income with expectations of future income, it is worthy examining how expectations affect consumption. There are two ways. Directly, expectations affect consumer decisions through human wealth, such as future income. If consumers expect that the economy will do well, expected future income will rise, leading to higher consumption today. Besides, the indirect way is via nonhuman wealth, such as stocks' value, bonds and housing. If consumers expect the values of these assets to rise, they will increase consumption now. Let's look at the data of average house prices from 1968 to 1989 in the UK which is shown in Figure (1). House prices increased significantly over the period, with a upward slopping trend, despite some fluctuations during 70s and the early 80s. From the diagram, we can see that a housing boom occurred with a dramatic rise in house prices during the late 80s. Interestingly, the late 80s was characterized by rapid growth of consumer expenditure that the growth rate of consumption was even greater than the growth in real personal income. This is illustrated in Figure (2). The message is that the traditional models of consumption that consumptions depend on current disposable income seem no longer able to explain the full picture of consumer behaviour.
Source: Figure (1) and (2) are from Alan Carruth and Andrew Henley's "Spending, Saving and the Housing Market" 
Economic Review, 8(1), September 1990
Is current income more important than expected future income? If expectations are of greater importance, people will surely intend to borrow a huge amount of money for today's living, according to the forward looking models. However, what happens in the reality is another story. The reasons are the followings. First of all, there are liquidity constraints that you are unable to borrow that large amount of money. Banks feel reluctant to give you a loan which is a lot more than your current income. This probably is the most obvious restriction preventing you from consumption based on expectation. Secondly, consumers personally may not be willing to spend more than they earn. This is because people are afraid of running into debts that they are unable to repay they back. In other words, the fears of the risks involved are greater than the possible utility gained from consumption. Another reason is that people may not consider wealth, but only consider disposable income as a function of consumption. In this case, consumption will depend on current income, which is very relevant with many households' consumption decisions: a less forward looking way. Put in other words, the real world restricts the effects of expectations on consumption behaviour, and the current income plays a very vital role in determination of spending activities, simply because it is the best signal and real evidence that satisfies consumers themselves and other third parties such as banks to make decisions.
The question we are going to ask is to what extend the expectations affect consumptions, and apparently to what extend the current disposable income matters. It depends on the participants referred to. Some consumers with a low paid wage tend to have more difficulty to get a loan, are very likely to make consumption decisions based on their current income, even though they expect a fantastic future. In contrast, people with higher paid salaries and wealthier can get access to credits easier, and the future expectation may play a greater part in their consumption as well as current income. Another interesting group is retirees. Those who retire have zero current income, but live on accumulative wealth such as savings and pensions. In this case, expectations have greater importance.
In conclusion, both wealth and current income affect consumption, but to different extend. Expectations seem to be less realistic, whereas current incomes can give the best signal and they are available immediately. These characteristics allow current income to have substantial influence on consumer behaviour in general. Different groups may have different reaction to expectations and current income on consumption decisions.