This essay will concentrate on discussing the notion of "Malthusian Trap" with the relation of economic growth. The principle of "Malthusian Trap" will be discussed, following by an investigation on its validity nowadays. A conclusion will then be drawn that Malthus's fears do not necessarily turn true in the modern world.
Malthus's model investigated the relationship between population growth and economic growth. According to Malthus, population grow in geometric progression, for example, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64......because of "unchanging attraction between sexes". So population doubles each generation. On the other hand, output grows in arithmetic progression, for example, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6..... , largely due to diminishing returns to input factors. In other words, the more labour employed holding other input factors constant, output will increase but at a diminishing rate.
An example can be used to clarify the theory. Assume that in a country, there are 5 million populations with a level of output satisfying the population. According to Malthus's model, when population grows to 10 million in 100 years, total output will increase twice. In two centuries, population will be 20 million, whereas output level will be only available to 15 million people. It means that 5 million people will have to suffer starvation as the output level is too low to meet the rapid increasing demand. The problem will be enlarged as time passes. The rate of output grow is slower than population grow. Consequently, output per head falls as population increases.
Population can change as a result of comparative changes of birth rate and death rate. When birth rate is greater than death rate, population will increase. Initially Malthus introduced two checks that could stop population growing rapidly. They are positive checks and preventive checks respectively. Examples of positive checks are war, diseases and famine; while preventive checks are related with reducing fertility such as contraception. Lately, the term "moral restraint" was asserted by Malthus to reduce the birth rate, such as delayed marriage, celibacy and sexual abstinence.
There is a positive link between output growth and population growth. The higher the output, the larger the population will be. This is because the rise in income increases birth rate and at the same time reduces the death rate. As mentioned above that output tends to increase at a slower rate than population, per capita income falls. This is known as the "Malthusian Trap". In Anderson's "Explaining long-term economic change" (1991), "the Malthusian trap exists when any increase in income per head is swamped by an increase in population, the result being that income per head falls back to its previous subsistence level". This can be shown graphically.
Figure (1) shows that the effects of increase in real wage. The initial rise in real wage for example as a result of discovering a new land, will increase birth rate to B' as well as reducing death rate to D'. In the short run, the economy is not in equilibrium. The rise of population will bring the level of income per head to the subsistent level with the same level of real wage W* but a larger population N' in the long run. Thus, income per capita is lowered than it used to be.
Therefore, scarcity of resources resulted from population growth is inevitable. In Malthus's Essay on the Principle of Population (1798), he said that:
We can see that Malthus was pessimistic about the consequences of population growth on economic growth. Output per head will fall inescapably as population raises.
However, we need to question the extend to which Malthus was correct. Is it necessarily true that population growth will always bring negative effect on income per head? Is it possible to break out the "Malthusian Trap"? If so, how can we break it?
Malthus's model was based on several assumptions, which might not be confirmed by the reality. First of all, population will only grow in a geometric progression if it is unchecked. In other words, when the population is checked, it is not necessary that it increases in this fashion. What Malthus failed to recognize was the effectiveness of "moral restraint". Instead, he argued that "moral restraint" had little significance to stop population growth. What is happening nowadays is that population growth is effectively controlled through "moral restraint". So it is growing at a rate which is not as fast as Malthus assumed.
Figure (2). Production possibility frontiersGood YGood XA second assumption that Malthus held is that production was a function of labour and resources such as land. This production function could be very convincing 2 or 3 centuries ago when technology was much less developed and less used in production. Over a long time period, technology is changing and becoming more and more intensively and extensively employed in production. The use of capital such as robots and computers can lead to a rise of total production holding other input constant. Thus, productivity rises, leading output increases at a much faster rate than ever before.
Thirdly, the reason why Malthus believed that output grew only arithmetically was due to diminishing returns. It was probably very likely that diminishing returns would set in in a two-factors model of production as Malthus suggested, i.e. Q = F ( L, R). If the production function is more complicated than Malthus suggested, we need to question whether diminishing returns is the barrier to prevent output from increasing substantially. Indeed, output is not only a function of labour and resources, but also a function of capital, technical progress and human resources. The use of capital increases productivity significantly as discussed above. In addition, technical progress is seen as the "engine of growth" by Schumpeter. Particularly macro inventions such as steam engine and computers are very door-opening as they can be applied to a very wide range of productions, which can lead to a large increase in total output as well as productivity. They can eliminate the dissatisfying effect of diminishing returns. This is because the macro inventions help shift the aggregate production possibility frontier upwards continuously, which is illustrated in Figure (2). Thus macro inventions can lead to sustainable economic growth over time. A significant example is the economic growth during the Industry Revolution in Great Britain. During that period, Great Britain enjoyed sustained growth of per capita income and population. However, it can be argued that macro inventions are so unpredictable that growth maybe fluctuates. Between macro inventions, there are some micro invention known as "gap filling improvements", however, it is more likely that they will run into diminishing returns. Besides, human capital plays a vital role in production. Education may require individuals to forgo current earnings as opportunity cost in the short run; but in the long run, a skilful labour force can increase productivity and efficiency, which can lead to an increase in output. Although diminishing returns are still possible to set in, updated trainings are often provided as a populous means to improve the quality of services delivered by employees nowadays, in order to reduce the diminishing effects on production. Also, along with physical capital accumulation, it can facilitate technical progress over time. Therefore, there are many efforts paid to reduce the effect of decreasing returns. Output can increase a lot faster than Malthus suggests. If the rise in output is sufficiently large, the response of increasing population may not necessarily lead to a fall in income per head.
Finally the argument that there was an inverse relationship between population pressure and output put forwards by Malthus should be discussed. Malthus failed to recognize that population pressure can reinforce the economic growth. On the other hand, Boserup (1965; 1981) looked at the positive contributions of population growth. Population growth can increase productivity by making labour intensive projects such as irrigation systems and transport constructions feasible, which is greatly helpful for trading as transport of goods becomes possible and cheaper and markets can be widened. Trading benefits firms and also can increase total output because of comparative advantages; while consumers can benefit as they have more choices to purchase.
Economics is about scarcity. In Malthus's Essay on the Principle of Population (1798), he wrote that "The power of population is indefinitely greater than the power in the earth to produce subsistence for man". Over time, the world's population had doubled from 3 billion in less than 50 years, and it is projected to reach 9 billion in another 50 years (Population Division, 1999). The traditional Malthusian fears have been expressed, concerning the world's productivity to provide the necessities for the growing mankind. Nevertheless, the concern is understandable as the population is growing too fast to believe that output per person is sufficient. So in the long run, the huge amount of humans in the world will exhaust the resources, ending in falling of living standards. The pessimistic ending is believed to be inevitable by the Malthusians.
In another 50 years, will we have to be poorer? The answer can be "yes". The increasing population pressure can act as a stress to accelerate the economic growth because it becomes such an urgent to provide sufficient levels of goods and services. Technology is at an upwards trend to ensure the rise of productivity. Humans are always learning to make more from less through the history. The DNA techniques offer a realistic hope to raise agricultural yields to feed the growing populations, even though genetic modified food is not populous now. But it is a signal that technology progress can solve the problems of scarcity.
Over all, Malthus assumed that the unchanging human instinct would lead to increase in population at a geometric ratio, whilst output would only grow in an arithmetic ratio due to diminishing marginal returns. The effect of positive checks and preventive checks would help bring the divergence of population growth and output growth back to the subsistent equilibrium. In the long run, living standards were believed to fall as per capita income decreases.
However, there are possible ways to break out the "Malthusian Trap". Capital accumulation can raise productivity significantly even though diminishing returns are likely to set in. However, if it is along with human capital investment, productivity and efficiency can be increased, and also help facilitate technology progress. Technology progress plays a vital role in production as it is the hope to increase output per head dramatically. Therefore, it is not necessary to be as pessimistic as Malthus suggested. Humans create problems, at the same time we will find solutions. Though out the human history, human's ability to innovate has made it possible to better supply the necessities to more population. Hence, living standards can be increased even the world becomes more populated. The importance is how humans manage the economy actively, such as how to modernize the institution frameworks and how to encourage technical progress more significantly and effectively, rather than pessimistically blaming the growing population.