A tough industrial dispute happened at Heathrow Airport in August this year raised a wide range of arguments and comments on the industrial conflicts in Britain, in particular, on the impact of law. The main bodies involved in this dispute included Gate Gourmet (GG), British Airway (BA) and the Transport and General Workers' Union (TGWU).
Gate Gourmet is one of the world's largest catering companies that provide in-flight foods. Facing great financial crisis these years, GG had been negotiating with the TGWU on a restructuring plan including workforce redundancy, which was voted against by 98% of the union membership in July 2005. Thereafter, GG offered mediation, which was due to on 12 August. However, on 10 August, several hundred GG employees took an unballoted strike action as a protest against company's hiring of 130 seasonal workers on lower pay, which was interpreted as a sign of the company's view of threatening or replacing the current staff. The employees held a sit-in at canteen, and carried out picketing. As a result, approximately 670 employees were dismissed. (Approved Judgment, 2005)
That was a start rather than an end. On the next day, around 1,000 ground staff of British Airway at Heathrow went out on strike in sympathy to support the dismissed workers of Gate Gourmet. This resulted in the cancellation of more than 700 flights and affected up to 70,000 passengers at one of the busiest times of the year, causing a loss of GBP 40 million for BA. (Guardian [online], 2005)
The Gate Gourmet dispute was regarded to be 'one of the most acrimonious in the recent history of British industrial relations' (Arrowsmith, 2005). The company accused part of its workforce and their union of staging the 'illegal, unballoted official union-supported event', and won a High Court injunction to limit the number of pickets outside its Heathrow South operation as well as an injunction against the TGWU and 17 named individuals (Gate Gourmet [online], 2005). On the other hand, the sacked employees have accused the company of 'provoking a confrontation by bringing in cheaper seasonal workers at Heathrow' (Tran, 2005), and the union in turn accused the company of 'provoking the strike in order to dismiss workers without compensation, including union activists' (Arrowsmith, 2005).
Under Britain's current labour law, protections for employees are very limited. Some important defects of UK law, which are repeatedly condemned under international laws, are exposed in this case. Trade Union Congress (TUC) and TGWU therefore urge the Government to make amendments in the law to avoid repetition of such case. However, the government is apparently unwilling to consider the significant changes in the legislation as demanded. (TUC [online], 2005)
In this essay, I'm going to evaluate the case for reform of Britain's law on industrial actions, especially in terms of the right of strike and the right of secondary action, which are two of the key issues in the Gate Gourmet dispute. The insufficient right of strike in Britain is embodied, as I see it, in three aspects: narrow definition of 'trade dispute', complicated procedure of balloting, and lack of protection from dismissal, which will be analysed respectively in detail in the first part of this essay. The next section will focus on the effectiveness of secondary action. Some other issues which deserve notice will be mentioned in the following part, though not be detailedly discussed. The conclusion will provide a brief summary and comment of the matters raised in this essay.
The right to strike, a fundamental industrial action, is a civil liberty and human right. Nevertheless, 'There has never been a positive right to strike in Britain' (McIlroy, 1999: 523). According to the observation of different supervisory bodies, Britain is in breach of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions, the European Social Charter, International Human Rights Treaties, in terms of the protection of right to strike.
Under Britain's law, anyone who calls for or organises a strike or other industrial actions would be liable to legal proceedings unless they were given certain protection, which is provided as 'statutory immunity'. However, this protection is hard to obtain due to a number of strict regulations on the definition and procedure of taking industrial action.
In order to be protected by the statutory immunity, the industrial action must first meet the requirement of being a 'trade dispute'. The law provides a detailed explanation of what constitutes a 'trade dispute'. In general, two main conditions must be satisfied.
For one thing, the dispute must only between workers and their own employer. This means it is impossible for unions to take effective action towards the 'real employer' who has the power to make decisions that are capable of satisfactorily resolving the core issues of dispute, but towards the subsidiary companies or associated companies who are 'technically the employer of the workers concerned' (ILO Committee of Experts, 1989, cited in IER, 2004: 15). This also restricts sympathy action taken to support a dispute by those who are not directly involved but in pursuit of their social and economic interests.
For another, the dispute must be 'wholly or mainly about employment related matters such as their pay and conditions, jobs, allocation of work, discipline, negotiating machinery or trade union membership' (DTI, 2005: 14). According to ILO Committee of Experts, formerly the dispute was permitted to have sufficient connection with specified matters. The current provision appears to deny protection to disputes where unions and their members have mixed motives, for example political or social objectives. The Committee also considered that it would often be very difficult for unions to determine in advance whether the dispute was merely related to the limited purposes, as situation might change during the course of conduct. (IER, 2004)
The narrowed definition of 'trade dispute' imposes excessive limitations upon the exercise of the right to strike. Thus it has been regularly expressed by the supervisory bodies that the definition should be broaden so as to make workers be able to take industrial action to 'promote and protect their social and economic interests', and be able to lawfully take action 'against the de facto employer as well as the de jure employer'(IER, 2004: 51).
It is also a condition of immunity that before taking a strike or other industrial action a trade union must first obtain the support of its members through a properly conducted ballot, and must provide at least seven days' notice to an employer of official industrial action to be taken against him. (DTI, 2005)
The provisions on balloting in the 1980's were simple and left unions with a degree of autonomy. But the law changed soon without much evidence of rationality, prescribing a series of requirements which must be satisfied as to apply for immunity.
The regulations include areas as follows:
At present time, under Britain's labour law, any employee takes part in a strike or other industrial actions may be in breach of employment contract, under which circumstance, his/her employer are entitled to dismiss him/her.
It is true that there is protection against dismissal for employees' taking part in a strike. But this only applies 'in the case of a lawful strike, a term which is narrowly defined in a way which is in breach of UN, ILO and Council of Europe of standards' (Prentis, 2004, cited IER, 2004: 17). Besides, even if the action is lawful and being protected, the validity of the protection only lasts for a period of 12 weeks, which was lengthened from 8 weeks by the Employment Relations Act 2004. This little improvement is far from enough, because employers are still permitted, after 12 weeks of industrial action, to dismiss strikers for breach of contract even when the statutory requirements of balloting and notice periods are met.
In most European countries the constitution provides the right to strike and a lawful strike does not break an employment contract, but merely suspends it. It is therefore unlawful to sack a worker on a lawful strike and the courts will prevent it. However, UK has never satisfactorily complied with the international legal obligations. The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in its 1997 Report addressed that the common law approach of UK only recognized the freedom to strike, but 'the concept that strike action constitutes a fundamental breach of contract justifying dismissal, is not consistent with protection of the right to strike'(IER, 2004: 3). Woodley (2004, cited IER, 2004: 7), General Secretary of TGWU, also commented that, 'If this were the law here there would be no need for complex unfair dismissal rules to protect strikers'.
In the second place, an employee who is dismissed by his employer while taking industrial action may lose his right to claim unfair dismissal. The law simply denies protection for the right of employees in such case. In addition, DTI (2005:39) has drawn attention to the fact that 'the courts have interpreted this legislation as applying to any industrial action - whether or not it involves breach, or interference with, the performance of the employee's contract of employment'. This may provide due pretext for employers to dispense with their workforce during the course of industrial action.
Further, there is no protection against dismissal for workers who take part in unofficial industrial action. An employee who is dismissed for taking 'unofficial' industrial action will not generally be able to claim unfair dismissal, regardless of whether the employer has committed discrimination by selective dismissal or re-engagement. (DTI, 2005)
What's more, the common law does not provide a rule whereby those workers could obtain reinstatement in their employment.
Hereby, several committees had called for reforms according to the International Standards, the Right to Strike and Protection of the Individual, regarding the problems stated above:
Participation in a strike should not be a breach of contract by the workers concerned and should not be grounds for dismissal.
The protection against dismissal should apply to the duration of the dispute (not confined to 12 weeks).
There should be protection against dismissal for workers taking unofficial industrial action.
Anyone dismissed for or during taking strike should be entitled to return to work at the end of the strike.
(IER, 2004)
The right to strike is one of the essential means available to workers and their organisations for the promotion and protection of their economic and social interests. Therefore, the restrictions relating to the objectives of a strike and to the methods used should be sufficiently reasonable as not to put excessive limitation in practice of the right to strike.
Secondary action, which is also called as 'sympathy' action or 'solidarity' action, is an 'industrial action by workers whose employer is not a party to the trade dispute to which the action relates' (DTI, 2005: 31). Wherever there is more than one employer in dispute with his workers, the dispute between each employer and his workers has to be treated as a separate dispute. As in the case of Gate Gourmet dispute, the conflict between GG and its employees is 'primary' action, while the walkout token by the employees of BA is secondary action.
In the 1990 Employment Act, immunity for all secondary action was removed. Hence it is now illegal to call for, organise or act secondary action. This big change appears to make it virtually impossible for workers and unions lawfully to engage in any form of boycott activity against parties not directly involved in a given dispute.
The law effectively prevents workers and unions from taking action against the real employer hided behind. Taking advantage of this restriction, employers are able to avoid the adverse effects of disputes by tactically transferring work to associated employers or restructuring their businesses 'in order to make primary action secondary' (IER, 2004: 20). British Airway, in this respect, would be a good illustrator. BA used to make all in-flight meals itself until sold the business to Gate Gourmet in 1997, so historically the GG workers were part of BA's workforce. This irresponsible contracting-out aimed solely at cutting labour costs was bound to stir up strife. Yet BA had been attempting to impose massive cuts on the contractor - GG, which pushed GG further to the edge of survival crisis. As a result, GG had to introduce the staff reduction as one of the strategies to remain competitiveness, which finally led to the drastic dispute. Thus it can be seen BA actually is the real employer who has the responsibility and capability to solve the conflict.
Besides, the absence of secondary action may have a negative effect on primary industrial action. For example, if in a primary dispute a union has failed to reach agreement with an employer by means of strike, secondary action can mean that another union backs up and brings pressure to bear on the employer concerned. In the Gate Gourmet dispute, both groups of workers (GG and BA) belong to the same union-TGWU. The striking BA staff went out on strike to express support, hoping that their action would exert pressure on BA to intervene in the dispute, which did come true and urged Gate Gourmet to efficiently find agreement.
It shows that secondary action can help the industrial action be more pertinently held and has positive effect on solving the dispute. Therefore, trade unions workers should be able lawfully to take secondary industrial action in relation to matters that affect them.
Apart from the points listed above, there are still some other issues which deserve further discussion and research, such as
A trade union could be subject to heavy fines and damage to funds for authorising unlawful industrial action. Out of regard for financial reason, a union will probably not make such a strike official or, if the strike commences, the union will have to repudiate it in order to escape liability. Consequently, the strike employees in pursuit of their interests will be defined as 'unofficial', and the employees will therefore receive no protection in industrial tribunals if they are dismissed. This regulation is obviously attempt to 'sectionalise, isolate, deactivate and, thus, weaken industrial action' (McIlroy, 1999: 524).
A trade union can be restrained by injunction from organising unlawful industrial action. An injunction was approved to be directed at TGWU by the High Court only based on the 'facts' presented by the claimant- Gate Gourmet.
The striking employees are restricted by a number of prescriptions on the site, scale and manner of picketing, which make their action easily offend the law.
There is no provision that stops an employer from replacing workers in dispute, which gives the employer excuse not taking the dismissed workers back.
From what has been analysed above, the inconsequence and disadvantages of the current legislation on Britain's industrial actions can be clearly sensed in the captious disposition of the law on the definition of a trade dispute, the extremely cumbersome machinery involved in the conduct of ballots, the difficulties to obtain protection from dismissal, and the absence of the right for secondary action.
It is too evident that Britain's labour law is in favour of the employers, which is somewhat ironic as the Labour party is supposed to represent the interests of the labour, while it virtually restricts the fundamental union purpose and forms of industrial action. The government may argue that these regulations are intended to prevent damaging and disruptive influence induced by industrial action, which may cripple the services, cause chaos in public, threaten the health and safety of people, and cost the company great economic loss as well as the intangible reputation. It may be the government's underlying responsibility to create a sound atmosphere assuring the stable and positive development of the society and economy. However, it is unacceptable for the government to protect the development of the society and economy by depriving or destroying their people's social and economic interests and rights.
Accordingly, reform has to be brought into effect to make Britain's law correspond with the regulations acknowledged by the international obligations.