What is world economy? Simply speaking, it should be a combination of nation economies which are originally based on individual nation states. Then what is nation state? Basically, nation state refers to a national government, who has a unified administration on politics, economy, law and culture within the borders of a defined territory.
However, the connotation of world economy is in fact much broader than a simple summation of nation economies, as it has been undergoing a profound transformation. One of the most popular terms used to characterise the world economy in current times is economic 'globalization', which means an internationally integrated market, within which businesses are operated as if national borders did not exist. As Ohmae (2000: 207) put it, 'in terms of real flows of economic activity, nation states have already lost their role as meaningful units of participation in the global economy of today's borderless world'. Therefore, a serious issue that globalization has resulted in the decline of nation state power has aroused worldwide concerns.
People hold different opinions towards the level of influence globalization on the power of nation states. These can generally be separated into two main groups: one is strong globalization thesis, which regards 'nation states have become little more than bit actors', with Ohmae as the representative; the other is weak globalization thesis, which sees 'globalization as a process driven by states', and 'in many cases, served to strengthen and certainly to increase the significance of state intervention for economic performance' (Hay, 2005: 236).
This essay will probe into the question whether nation states have virtually 'become little more than bit actors' in the world economy under the pressure of globalization. In the following sections, three disputable arguments are picked to discuss their influence on state capacity, while demonstrating the corresponding responses from nation states. These three aspects are capital mobility, multinational corporations (MNCs) and transnational corporations (TNCs), and international organisations.
One of the most distinctive features of economic globalization is the unrestricted global mobility of capital, with foreign direct investment (FDI) and international portfolio investment (IPI) contributing to the largest portion of flow. FDI usually refers to long-term investment, such as 'buying shares in foreign companies, building plants abroad, and merging with foreign firms' (Campbell, 2003: 238). While IPI is 'more liquid and potentially volatile' (Campbell, 2003: 239), which invests in equities, bonds, currencies, and the like.
The massive increase of capital mobility is spurred by two factors. One is the creation and prevalence of information and communication technologies, which facilitate a rapid monetary flow around the world. The other is the simplification or repeal of capital controls and other financial regulatory hurdles in many industrialized countries during the 1970s and 1980s. (Kenworthy, 1997)
Capitals would essentially seek for themselves the highest rate of return on their investment. Thus there is an assumption that, when capital is as mobile as it is today in the free global market, capital prefers flowing to places where the costs are the lowest, whatever they are tax cost, labour cost, or any other regulatory costs. As a result, in order to create a competitive business investment environment to attract inward foreign investors, nation states would tend to change from high-taxation regimes to low-taxation regimes, from welfare states to residual states, from highly regulated labour markets to flexible labour markets, from strict environmental regulations to lax environmental standards, and from high union density to low union density (Hay, 2005). In regard of this, strong globalists regard nation states have lost their economic dominance as they are forced to adapt to the integrated global market.
That may be so in theory or assumption, but are they true in practice? By looking into taxation and labour market these two elements of economy, the paragraphs below are going to prove nation states are not simply following the trend of global convergence as described above, but have power to choose and control their own developing direction.
Since 1970s, MNCs began to flourish and dominate in the press. It is often said that MNCs are the principal driving force in the process of globalization in the world economy. Drucker (1997: 167) described the MNC as 'a national company with foreign subsidiaries', which are 'clones of the parent company'.
Along with the expanding global market and the increasing offshore fund, there is an uptrend for MNCs shift to TNCs. TNC, according to the definition from UNCTD (2004), is 'an enterprise that controls assets of other entities in economies other than its home economy'. For TNCs, the world is the only economic unit.
Form many strong globalists' view, the growing up of MNCs and TNCs is embodiment of the nation states' losing power. For one thing, they regard MNCs and TNCs as separate, independent economic forces, for as much as the corporations can freely operate their business activities between different countries around the world without the control of national governments. What's more, these giant corporations can exert power over states to grant favourable business conditions, such as tax treatment, trade protection, in respect that they have great amount of money to lobby and even corrupt politicians in many countries. As Ohmae (1995: 207) revealed, 'Elected political leaders gain and keep power by giving voters what they want, and what they want rarely entails a substantial decrease in the benefits, services, or subsidies handed out by the state'.
It may be true that some big companies do have political influence, but that dose not necessarily mean they have got the upper hand over the nation states. As a matter of fact, the prosperity of MNCs and TNCs is largely a consequence of the growth of nation states. No matter how far their arms can reach, MNCs and TNCs are still rooted in a nation state where they depend on the state's institutions, policies, and infrastructures. And their domestic state can support their activities abroad. Therefore, TNCs or MNCs are actually 'much more closely associated with their "home" state than is commonly supposed' (Fulcher, 2000: 531).
Nation state can be a great facilitator or co-operator for the globalization strategies of national companies and MNCs. Take Singaporean economy as an example. It is the Singaporean government who takes the initiative to push their local firms to be MNCs, and TNCs afterwards. By making government - business visits, the Singaporean government developed corporate business relations with some south-east Asian countries, such as China, Malaysia, Indonesia, and created industrial parks throughout the region. The government is also able to 'provide corporate actors abroad with the developmental infrastructure, inducements, and government-business relations similar to those enjoyed at home' (Weiss, 1997: 22). Besides, in order to promote the prosperity of local firms and MNCs, and move them offshore, the state can even offer great financial support for entering joint ventures, technology partnerships, or any other investment forms. (Weiss, 1997)
On the other hand, nation state's potency on MNCs or TNCs can also be seen in the matter of capital exit. Once attracted to and entered a particular economy, the MNC or TNC would be more or less monitored by or confined to the local government. Especially when capital is invested in physical infrastructure, plants, and machinery, like FDI, it would not be as easily and freely to exit as they did in entry. Consequently, as Hay (2005: 241) put it, 'their exit options become seriously depleted' lying on the state which they have plunged into.
The realities presented above are hard to square with the image of states withering away in the face of 'powerful' transnational forces. In spite of a more integrated world economy, state capacity for affecting MNCs and TNCs is alive.
International organisations, such as United Nations (UN), World Trade Organisation (WTO), are playing more and more significant role in the international platform, with regard to political, economic, and environmental issues at the world level. Is the development of international organisations a sign of the demise of state autonomy? The answer is no.
For one thing, the emergence of international organisations was proceeded from nation states' common will. In the busy and complex environment of world economy, there are certain needs for moral, legal, and economic rules that are widely accepted and abided by the nation states. Central to this demand, in Drucker's words (1997: 169), is 'the development of international law and supranational organizations that can make and enforce rules for the global economy'. Consequently, alliances began to take place primarily at regional lever, and later at international level, between nation states.
For another, international organisations in fact enhance nation states' capacities. Cooperation can sometimes be more effective than competition. In order to seek adaptation to new challenges, nation states forge or strengthen partnerships with other power actors. This can be done by making regional or international agreements through the corresponding organisations. One of the manifestations is the proliferation of the EU, APEC and NAFTA. Then states are able to use those agreements as a means of pursuing domestic economic goals. Therefore, as Weiss (1997: 24) put it, 'far from relinquishing their distinctive goals and identity, states are increasingly using collaborative power arrangements to create more real control over their economies'.
In addition, international organisations are also 'responsible for establishing the sovereignty of the nation state'. The global extension of international organisations 'diffused the basic principles of the nation state, provided a protective shell for the weaker states, and stimulated national consciousness'. (Fulcher, 2000:540)
From what have been discussed above, it can be seen clearly that no sufficient evidence uphold the strong globalization thesis, which deems the nation state's capacity and autonomy have been significantly eroded by virtue of globalization. It is true that globalization has brought the nation states a series of problems, which they might have never had the capacity to deal with and thus have to ravel themselves out. This actually provides nation states a good opportunity to exercise and undergird their capacity to regulate economy. The diverse policies show that national governments are 'not only constrained by external economic forces, they also organize them, ride them and manipulate them' (Fulcher, 2000: 532).
Capital may be more mobile than it was, but it is still attached to particular nation states, where the governments are able to enhance their competitiveness to attract foreign investors by pushing or adjusting targeted incentives, as well as explore overseas investment opportunities for national companies. Apart from that, nation states are able to collectively regulate economic matters through regional and international organisations. As the 2005 Pre-Budget Report comments, the government's strategies for economic development in the global environment are: 'maintaining macroeconomic stability to help businesses and individuals plan for the future; and implementing microeconomic reforms to remove the barriers that prevent markets from functioning efficiently'.
To sum up, 'global economic integration has increased but nation states have themselves played and continue to play a key role in this process' (Fulcher, 2000: 532). It should be recognised that nation states' strengths lie in their flexibility and adaptability, and slot themselves into the global structures.