Throughout the 1980s and the 1990s, terms such as 'total quality management (TQM)', 'communication', 'autonomy', 'empowerment', 'teamworking' spread all over the management literature. All of these terms are closely related to the concept of employee involvement (EI), which is popular in the practice of human resource management.
Employee involvement, was defined by Lawler (1986, cited in Fenton-O'Creevy, 2001: 25) as 'a combination of processes which increase the power of employees, enhance the use of appropriate reward and performance measurement systems to align the interests of individuals with organisational goals, improve communication (both vertically and laterally) and increase performance feedback'.
Employee involvement is a general term used to cover various forms of managerial strategies in communication, participation and representation (IRRR 96). Forms of EI can be classified as 'direct' and 'indirect'. Direct employee involvement (DEI) means 'employees are in some way directly involved in their immediate place of work', whereas indirect employee involvement (IEI) is where 'some notion of a representative structure is involved' (Eurofound), such as works councils and collective bargaining. In other words, communication and participation belong to DEI, which is the main focus of this essay.
Last two decades have witnessed the growing interests for DEI in all organisations in UK, together with the apparent decline of IEI (Marchington and Wilkinson, 2000). According to the 1998 Workplace Employee Relations Survey (WERS 98), where 16 most frequently discussed employee involvement techniques were listed with the proportion of being operated by workplaces, over half of workplaces applied formal teamwork (65%), team briefing (61%), while staff attitude survey, problem-solving groups and regular meeting accounted for 45%, 42% and 37% respectively.
Besides, it is also common for several separate forms of EI to exist in one organisation, and the larger the organisation is, the more types it applies. As demonstrated in the WERS 98, a third of the workplaces investigated had 3 or 4 schemes of EI working at the same time, whilst 37 percent having 5 to 7 techniques and one fifth with 8 or even more.
This essay will first analyse the general causes of the increasing practice of DEI. In the second part, emphasis will be laid on two of the most typical and popular forms of direct employee involvement: communication and teamworking. What are the motives of applying, and how far have they met the objectives are the key issues to be discussed. The last part will be a brief conclusion with some implications and suggestions.
The motives of the increasing application of direct employee involvement derive from both external environment and inner demand, which, however, are correlated to each other closely.
To begin with, the economic pressure from the competitive market is definitely a catalyst for the emergence and prevalence of DEI. For organisations in service sector, such as supermarkets and banks, the quality of customer care has become a crucial source of competitive advantage, given the similar prices, quality and diversity of products. While the manufacturing sector usually emphasizes efficiency of production as well as quality in the product market. No matter to the improvement of customer service or production, Ackers et al (1992: 278) regarded DEI as 'a nakedly functional means to this end'. For instance, communication like team briefings can help increase employees' understanding of the organisation and goals of the business; while TQM schemes such as quality training programme, quality action teams can improve employees' business awareness and inspire their talents, whereby push the transmission of business performance targets.
In the second place, DEI is 'established very much at management's discretion' (Marchington, 2001: 234), to be more specific, human resource management. In Ramsay's words (cited in Ackers et al, 1992: 272), 'managements have been attracted to the idea of participation when their control over labour has been perceived to be under pressure in some way'. It is generally believed that there are some positive relationship between job satisfaction and job performance. As Walton (1985, cited in Marchington and Wilkinson, 2000: 399) revealed, 'workers respond best- and most creatively- not when they are tightly controlled by management, placed in narrowly defined jobs, and treated like an unwelcome necessity, but instead when they are given broader responsibilities, encouraged to contribute, and helped to take satisfaction from their work', which is exactly the connotation of DEI. According to the survey reported in IRRR 96 (6), the frozen food manufacturer Schwans states its aim of applying DEI is to 'develop a culture where employees choose to be involved in the achievement of the company mission'.
Thirdly, some existent problems in labour market, such as short of labour in certain area and high employee turnover rates are also impetuses behind the DEI programmes (Ackers et al, 1992). For one thing, these problems will largely hinder the development of an organisation's competitiveness, as the quality and quantity of human resource directly affect the quality of customer service and production efficiency. For another, frequent recruitment and retention of suitable employees will cost the organisation more expenditure. Therefore, to maintain stable and effective labour force is a significant task for all kinds of organisations. In this regard, DEI is supposed to be a rational way of fulfillment, as it can engender employees a greater commitment to, and identification with the organisation and tasks by enabling them to participate in and influence the process of decision-making. (IRRR 96)
In addition, it could be simply a 'faddish participation' (Ackers et al, 1992: 280) for any type of organisations to follow the latest management fashion. To apply DEI may build an image of keeping up with the competition and modernization.
Furthermore, government policies have been encouraging enterprise by setting the scene for wider innovation and experiment in management approaches. On the other hand, DEI is also carried out to meet the legal requirements from the European Works Council Directive, Information and Consultation Directive (Sisson, 2002).
Last but not least, the weakened national trade union power also contributes to the well-off operation of various techniques of DEI.
To sum up, the main motives for the rising application of DEI are the potential benefits that pointed out by ACAS: improved efficiency; improved quality and competitiveness; increased job satisfaction and motivation; and the encouragement of cooperation and the improvement of industrial relations. (IRRR 96)
However, to what extent have these expectations being met by the practice in reality? In the following section, two main forms of direct employee involvement will be analysed to answer this question. Communications and teamworking are picked out because they were the most extensive across the whole sample as revealed in the report of WERS 98.
Communication usually refers to downward communications, in which information or orders cascade along the managerial hierarchy- from managers to employees. This is the most dilute form of DEI, with the principal purpose to 'inform and "educate" staff so that they are more likely to accept management plans' (Marchington, 2001: 235), and further to provide employees with 'the opportunity to contribute to decisions made at workplace level, and ultimately (in theory at least) enhance their commitment to their employer' (Marchington et al, 1994: 2)
According to IRRR 96, all organisations involved in the survey used at least one of the following types of employee communication: company journal or newspaper, employee reports, team briefings, video presentations, and attitude surveys. To be more detailed, company journals were found in 92% of the organisations surveyed, followed by team briefings (86%) and email communications (82%). (IRS 1999, cited in Marchington, 2001)
On the one hand, these techniques would reach certain positive effects as anticipated. Basing on a survey results from IRRR 96, under the question that 'is communication better since the introduction of EI', 40% of organisations confirmed 'much better', and all the rest of 60% considered 'slightly better'.
To illustrate, team briefings are considered as a very effective method by personnel professionals. Basically, team briefings are designed to 'keep employees informed about what is happening in their organisation while promoting employee involvement and teamwroking' (IRRR 96: 8). Issues discussed during team briefings include day-to-day departmental news, operational instructions, organisation structure and performance, commercial and financial matters, human factors and so on. (IRS 2002) Team briefings were being used in a number of different ways: as a means of listening to employee concerns (half of respondents to the survey); as a means of consultation (50%); as a means for gathering employee ideas and suggestions (4 in 10), and as a means of solving problems at a local level (one third). These organisations also reported different achievements by making use of team briefings, such as strengthening of team involvement, increase in employees' business awareness, and improvement in staff communication. (IRRR 96)
Additionally, take employee reports as another example, two-third of the organisations who were using it as a method of communicating financial performance (70% of all surveyed), suggested an increasing awareness of the potential value of financial information in improving employees' commitment to organisational goals. (IRRR 96)
On the other hand, however, the forms listed above are sometimes viewed as nothing more than some mechanisms to convey information about a particular issue in managerial actions and intentions (for example, announcement of overtime tasks, reform of remuneration system, or update of pension schemes), not so much involve employees in decision making as claimed. As Marchington (2001: 243) pointed out, 'employees- in general- are dubious about styles of leadership which merely inform them about the decisions after they have been taken'. Whereas what employees really want is the opportunity to 'find out why (certain) decisions have been made, plus the potential to influence those which are felt to be within their own domain and about which they feel able to contribute ideas'. Thus, the important precursor to fuller employee involvement lies in more extensive and open communications. (Marchington and Wilkinson, 2000)
Besides, although these forms of DEI have widespread support in principle, a number of problems can appear in practice. For instance, line managers are unable to, or even worse- unwilling to communicate effectively, the information lack relevance or not being transmitted timely, and trade unions regard these communication forms as devices to undermine or marginalize their role. (Marchington and Wilkinson, 2000)
It is apparent from WERS that teamworking has been practicing widely both in large and small organisations, where '65 per cent of managers reported that most employees at the workplace worked in formally designated teams' (WERS 98:11).
Before going into the urges for and outcomes from the practice of teamworking, some pertinent terms and their relationships need to be defined and clarified. Teamworking is one of the key principles (others include 'customer focus' and 'continuous improvement') of TQM (Rees, 1999), which is one of the most significant techniques of participation- another main category of direct employee involvement (IRRR 96).
TQM became fashionable in the 1980s and reached a peak of popularity in the mid 1990s. Its original initiative is to stimulate individual employees to take an active role in delivering high quality goods and services so as to prosper a customer oriented culture. (Glover, 2000)
In terms of the hard or soft model of TQM, teamworking can be split into two stems: task-based teamworking and problem-solving teamworking. Task-based teamworking is considered to be 'hard' since its nature ties up to the organisation of production. In response to functional flexibility, tasks and work routines are designed to give non-managerial employees greater autonomy and discretion over how their own work is organised, thereby to secure employee flexibility and generate organisational commitment. On the other hand, being the soft element of TQM, problem-solving teams have no necessary relationship with the nature of task work at all, but are instead voluntary groups initiated by management, which attempts to explode employees' latent potential and involve them in a large scope of decision-making. (Rees, 1999)
Potentially, teamworking represents the most far-reaching form of DEI, in respect of the 'centrality to work processes and the level and scope of subject matter which may be controlled by employees' (Marchington, 2001: 236). Nevertheless, the common concern lies in the real effects of teamworking?
From the perspective of employers, teamworking are 'sometimes viewed as making an important contribution to the achievement of competitive advantage' (Marchington, 2001: 236). According to a White Paper from the Government in 1994 (cited in IRRR 96), an automotive components factory achieved a 30% increase in productivity as a result of the establishment of self-managed teams, while an electrical goods factory made a annual saving of 2 million through the introduction of teamworking.
When decision-making opportunities are substantially facilitated in teamwork, productivity and efficiency can be largely improved. Team members who are confident and trusted upon their previous experience, knowledge and training, are 'the best people to make the day-to-day decisions as they are closest to the work and are aware of the best way a particular task should be tackled' (Greasley et al., 2005: 8). On the contrary, if employees are forced to accept inappropriate decisions made by managers, they may deliberately operate more slowly to imply that they were correct, especially when the managers have no practical experience in a specific area and are not aware of the detail of the work.
Teamworking can also reduce lots of operational expenditure when the teams are developed to a high degree of autonomy, where works can be done 'without direct supervision, recruiting and disciplining fellow team members, and organizing work allocation and even methods' (Marchington, 2001: 236).
Besides, teamworking is an important means to promote functional flexibility. In order to accomplish the task of a team, team members are encouraged to extend their abilities and take more responsibilities.
Most importantly, teamworking can enhance job satisfaction, motivation, organisational loyalty and commitment. A number of studies (Marchington, 2001: 245) have indicated that employees who are involved in teamworking 'tend to be more satisfied and motivated than those who are working under more traditional regimes'. Even if it is suggested that teamworking may involves harder work, employees indicated that they are able to release their emotional strain as they feel more involved in the fulfillment of organisational goals, which is more satisfying than repeatedly undertaking boring jobs like robots.
On the other hand, as for employees who are engaged in teamworkings, they generally welcome such schemes. According to Rees' study (1999), there are different kinds of benefits enjoyed by employees.
For one thing, a fairly strong sense of teamwork was reported by a large proportion of employees (50%), and a cooperating and supportive atmosphere was said to exist within a team. 69% employees mentioned that they would always receive help from other members of their team when problems arise with a job. Words such as 'that's not my job' could hardly be heard since teamwork had been introduced. In a word, most employees have built a concept of teamwork, seeing their team as a whole, within which everyone is willing to offer help and contribute.
For another, employees also reported that they had acquired new skills and responsibilities as a result of working in teams. This often happens in the case of task-based teamworking. Being assigned a task, the workgroup is given the opportunity and authority to take charge of the whole job, thus all team members are encouraged or expected to extend the range and type of responsibilities undertaken at work.
Nevertheless, there are some opposite attitudes towards teamworking at the same time. Firstly, with regard to the view that teamworking boosts responsibilities, a considerable number of respondents reckoned that teamworking actually 'had either had "no effect" or had led to a decrease in the variety of tasks in their job, their level of responsibility and their level of job satisfaction (Rees, 1999: 5)'.
Secondly, though a majority felt they had a great deal of influence over the pace at their work, how they deal with the task at hand, and when they can take a break, such kind of influence was insignificant compared to the discretion on certain other issues, such as the setting of the output targets, the schedule of the tasks, the allocation of work between team members and the rotation of team member between jobs. This reveals the fact that employees lack the real authority and autonomy in their teams.
Thirdly, teamworking is regarded as 'management by stress' (Marchington and Wilkinson, 2000: 408) or a 'constrained process' (Rees, 1999: 3), as the greater employee autonomy and discretion educed by teamworking are inevitably accompanied with an intensification of job and increased surveillance. Teamworking, to some extent, represents a shift of control 'from externally imposed directive control to internally imposed self-control' (Rees, 1999: 12).
Lastly, as Marchington and Wilkinson (2000: 407) pointed out, 'actions which appear to empower employees may actually be disempowering'. With higher levels of accountability and responsibility, employees 'can be more easily blamed when things go wrong'. As a result, employees may subconsciously tend to avoid assuming more responsibilities.
From what have been presented above, it is evident that various types of direct employee involvement techniques are pervasive among organisations in UK.
As Marchington (2001: 234) put it, DEI is 'redolent of employer initiatives', aiming to support the achievement of management's goals, 'either directly in relation to performance improvements and competitive advantage, or indirectly through higher levels of employee commitment, satisfaction and identification with their employer'.
Generally speaking, most organisations believe their objectives of DEI strategy are being realized, and have measured the effectiveness through attitude surveys or by improved business performance. According to the survey carried out by IRRR in 1996, 68%of those responding said quality had increased, while more or less the half reported employee job satisfaction, commitment and profitability had increased.
Nevertheless, no matter which form of DEI being applied, there are inevitably some negative effects from both employers and employees' eyes. For instance, the authority offered in both communication and teamworking are not substantial or sufficient, and DEI sometimes is viewed as reorganisation of control and pressures (Geary and Dobbins, 2001).
In a word, the combination of DEI and HRM practices has beneficial outcomes for organisations and employees, with large space for improvement.