Leader, which can be found in every group and organization, large or small, is commonly regarded as a basic but important position. As defined by Fiedler (1995, cited in Arnold et al., 2005: 482), a leader is a 'person who is appointed, elected, or informally chosen to direct and co-ordinate the work of others in a group'. So much for the leader, leadership can be considered to be 'the personal qualities, behaviours, styles and decisions adopted by the leader' (Arnold et al., 2005: 482), or 'the ability to influence a group toward the achievement of goals' (Robbins, 2005:156).
It has been accepted as a truism that effective leadership is essential to business. Part of the reason it has become so important in recent decades is that leadership can be understood as one dimension of management, which is change-oriented. The business world has become more competitive and more volatile as a result of the faster changes in international market, science and technology, regulations, demography of work force, and so on. As Kotter (1990: 104) indicated, 'more change always demands more leadership'. Thus, in order to survive and compete advantageously in this continuously changing environment, organisations have been trying to seek and develop effective leadership, and leaders who can challenge the present conditions, adapt to the changes, and even create a better future are highly demanded.
Currently the most influential approach to leadership is transformational leadership, which implies that leaders of this type can transform 'the status quo and drive change within their organizations' (Newcomb, 2005). This concept was raised early by Burns in 1978 (cited in Bass at el, 1987a:8), regarding transformational leader as 'one who motivates followers to work for transcendental goals and for higher-level self-actualizing needs', rather than just 'working through simple exchange relationships with his/her followers' as transactional leader. To be more detailed, as Howell and Avolio (1993: 891) put it, 'leaders described as transformational concentrate their efforts on longer term goals; place value and emphasis on developing a vision and inspiring followers to pursue the vision; change or align systems to accommodate their vision rather than work within existing systems; and coach followers to take on greater responsibility for their own development, as well as the development of others'.
According to Bass at el. (1987b) transformational leadership has three key components: (1) charisma, or idealized influence, (2) individualized consideration, and (3) intellectual stimulation.
Charisma: the leaders identify and articulate a vision and sense of mission, set personal model, communicate high expectations, inspire extra efforts, instill pride and share glory, show great determination, gain respect and trust.
Individualized Consideration: the leaders treat each follower on his or her own merits, coach, and help followers to grow and develop through delegation of projects.
What have been introduced above are mainly theories developed by scholars. Then what are the effects of transformational leadership in practice? Is it really so beneficial as 'indispensable' for organizational effectiveness? Or to what extent can it be viewed as 'unnecessary' and even potentially 'a dangerous curse'? These are the questions to be discussed in this essay.
The first part will analyse the positive aspects of transformational leadership in terms of motivation, job satisfaction and job performance. The second section will look into the negative impacts from the three components of transformational leadership while introducing a concept of 'pseudo-transformational leader' (Bass and Steidlmeier, 1999). In the last part, conclusion will be reached by balancing these two opposite sides of the argument.
Organizational effectiveness is a very broad concept, which refers to anything that can conduce to the achievement or transcendence of organizational goals. One of the most influential stimulatives of organizational effectiveness is human resource competitiveness, which can be weighed by many indicators, such as motivation, job satisfaction, and job performance.
According to Bass (1990), most studies using the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire (MLQ), which is designed to evaluate the leaders' effectiveness through the responses from their colleagues, supervisors, and followers, have found that 'transformational leadership is positively related to indicators of leadership effectiveness such as subordinate satisfaction, motivation, and performance' (Bass, 1998, cited in Yukl, 1999). Therefore, transformational leadership can be seen as an effective leadership, which, in Bresnen's (1995: 497) words, 'is regarded as being crucial to overall organizational success'.
Nevertheless, some people argue that transformational leadership is unnecessary as transactional leadership can be effective enough to deal with problems. This may be true to some firms functioning only in a market with stable technology, workforce, and environment. Under such circumstances, the need for leadership may be cut down or eliminated, as it may 'move along quite well with managers who simply promise and deliver rewards to employees for carrying out assignments' (Bass, 1990: 30).
More seriously, transformational leadership is even deemed as 'a dangerous curse'. In the following part, the potential disadvantages of transformational leadership will be presented with regard to charisma, individualized consideration, and intellectual stimulation respectively.
Leadership is 'a shared process of enhancing the collective and individual capacity of people to accomplish their work roles effectively' (Yukl, 1999: 7), and transformational leadership has been viewed as a key determinant of organizational effectiveness.
It has been proven by an increasing body of research that there are impressive correlations between transformational leadership and motivation, high performance and satisfaction among followers. Simply put, people working for charismatic leaders are motivated to exert extra work effort and, as they admire and trust their leader, express greater satisfaction. (Robbins, 2005)
On the other hand, true as it is, transformational leadership can have some detrimental consequences for organization, though most of which are made by pseudo-transformational leaders.
With consideration to all of the aspects argued above, it is rational to acknowledge transformational leadership's positive impacts on organizational effectiveness, while also keep open-eyed on the latent danger from transformational leadership.