Your Honour, the lawyers for the defence have put forward their closing statement in the case of Sigmund Freud verses the subject of Psychology and the arguments they used were very persuasive, in particular the idea that Freud's work was rejected due to its shocking content, which when properly considered really does describe the true formation of personality. Now it is the turn of the prosecution to show you that to accept Freud's work in Psychology, under any other topic than the history of the discipline, is to accept ideas which are simply not true. Freud's work was not rejected because it shocked and offended but because it is an example of an unstable theory built on even more unstable evidence.
The defence have proposed that Freud was an influential thinker who developed a revolutionary theory for the time. This is simply not true, Freud refused to let any of his research assistants question any part of his theory, especially the central driving force of sexual motivations in conjunction with the Libido theory (as cited in R.E Fancer, 1996). We have heard testimony form Carl Gustav Jung who stated that in 1914 he felt he had to break away from Freud due to his intense drive to relate personality to sexual desire. Freud also refused to accept any other criticisms of his work which means he is not the scientific figure many people like to think. To be scientific by definition must mean that you are open to new ideas, or else how would new theories be developed? By refusing to listen to opposing points of view, and surrounding himself with only the people who agreed with him, Freud was creating a cult like status for psychoanalysis as opposed to a scientific discipline (as cited in S Joseph, 2001).
Freud has been challenged on a personal level as well as a theoretical level with claims that he is more of a showman than a psychologist yet the defence have claimed this does not matter, especially as he influenced so many people. Indeed words he coined such as 'id, ego, and libido' have all seeped into popular vocabulary, and in turn entered literature, so much so that it is possible to analyse books form a psychoanalytic point of view. The case for the prosecution of Freud would like to state that this is wrong. Psychoanalytic critics analyse literature using the Oedipus complex and the Psychosexual Stages to explain people's underlying basic drives (as cited in J Joye, 1993). Many psychologists now simply reject these descriptions of unconscious conflict, quite simply for the fact that there is no empirical evidence. Consider the testimony of patients such as Anna 'O' and Wolf Man who Freud claimed to have cured using techniques based on these theories. Both patients have stated that symptoms still persisted even after treatment. Sergei Pankejeff also known as Wolf Man reported that he still suffered mentally, he could never realise his own talents and invited in disasters (as cited in P Gay, 1989). If the Oedipus Complex and Psychosexual Stages were true sources of anxiety then treatment based on them should be successful, yet the evidence shows otherwise.
Ross C. Murfin as a Psychoanalytic Critic was called forward by the defence and testified that because Freud's language is so wrapped up in our culture authors cannot help by but include it in their books. Does this make Freud a valuable psychologist and in turn creditable though? The prosecution would like to propose that this is a hugely problematic situation for Freud, he is responsible for introducing terms into popular culture that have no scientific basis and so this is not something he should be credited for. This discredits Psychology for the masses who believe the discipline is simply concerned with what appear perverse sexual desires.
Murfin also stated that he analyses literature using the same techniques Freud used for dream interpretation. Novels are like dreams he said, and need interpretation as they involve distortion, condensation and displacement (as cited in J Joye, 1993). Freud's well know book The Interpretation of Dreams (1900) only briefly analysed around six dreams which he then generalised to the population as a whole. Freud has received credit for what he called the latent and manifest content of dreams, but could it not be that life is so complicated the only thing the brain can do is dream using symbolic representation. These symbols are not the true manifestations of our unconscious ideas but merely the human brain organising a complex world into a simpler format (as cited in Gleitman et al, 1999). If Freud's theory of dream interpretation can be discredited than why is it still used to analyse literature? Surely this again should not be something he is credited for.
Freud's theory should not be used in popular culture let alone in psychology. For a Psychological theory to be accepted it must have supporting evidence and the criticisms the prosecution have listed do not show this to be the case with Psychoanalysis. The defence team may argue that Freud's theory was relevant to people living at the time when he was working. Yet the prosecution would challenge this, and state that not only is Freud's work not relevant now, but it was not even relevant to people at the time. Freud only studied middle to upper class man and women aged 20 to 44 years old in Vienna. This seems extraordinary when you realise that he makes conclusions about children without systematically testing his theory on them.
Jeffery Masson was called forward by the prosecution in reference to his views on Freud's Seduction Theory. Masson stated that Freud's original idea that later personality disorders were due to sexual abuse, is actually mainly true for the people living at the time. Masson stated that between 1858 and 1869 11,576 cases of rape were reported in Paris, where Freud was working at the time. 9125 of the reported cases were forms of child abuse. So this was not a completely peculiar view for Freud to have. Yet he later rejected this theory and claimed that people had unconsciously had difficulties in resolving the Electra or Oedipus complex and the abuse they reported was actually a manifestation of this unconscious problem. Freud, despite all evidence proving child abuse decided to reject the evidence (as cited in J Masson, 1992).
The Electra complex is also another example of a section of Freud's theory which is very culturally biased. Freud proposed that as girls, women had envied their father's penis leading them to want to have sexual intercourse with him in order to have a baby which would act as a penis substitute. Is it not more likely that women living at that time would be more envious of the power, independence and social status that came with being male? (As cited in E.E. Smith et al, 2003). How can the defence represent a theory which is both gender biased and attached to a very small period in time?
Not only is Freud's theory rejected from a cultural perspective but it fails to be falsified as well. The prosecution called forward Sir Karl Popper (1959) to give his theory of falsification; he stated that a hypothesis should be formulated in a way that is capable of refutation, so that it can be shown to be false. This principle should be used in all Psychological experiments to gain credibility, but it is not employed by Freud. (As cited in ). He never proved that his theory may be false; it is almost faith like to accept psychoanalysis because you need to take 'leap' or hold a strong belief in order to accept his ideas. For most people this 'leap' just does not appear acceptable because the ideas Freud presented seem to have no bearing on what people think or feel. Supporters of Freud have claimed that not being able to scientifically test Freud's theory does not make it incorrect, because to say that his work falls short of scientific standards is to misunderstand him and his work. But surly if Freud theory is to be considered in Psychological terms, which is a scientific discipline, then it must fulfil all scientific criteria.
There are parts of Fraud's theory which have been out rightly rejected on scientific terms, such as the case of Emma Eckstein who when called to testify told of the horrible pain she was subjected to at the hands of Freud. Freud proposed that masturbation causes changes in the nervous system such as sensitivity of the nasal 'genital spots', which when removed will result in normal sexual behaviour. Emma's nose was operated on resulting in massive haemorrhaging which Freud said was due to her subconscious desire for him! (As cited in J Masson, 1992). This idea shows just how bizarre some of Freud's work was and even if it seemed plausible to him at the time, we have now proven it to be false. Freud's theory again cannot be generalised to today's culture where masturbation in most societies is not considered harmful.
Members of the jury the prosecution have presented their case and now it is for you to decide if Sigmund Freud's theory of Psychoanalysis should be studied in Psychology. This argument clearly shows that not only is Freud's work mere speculation but it has worryingly infiltrated into popular culture. We have not accepted some of Freud's radical ideas as operations on the nasal 'genital spots' to cure sexual problems, so why should we give the rest of his theory more respect than it deserves? Freud was an influential thinker who brought together many popular theories at the time he was working; this made his work available to the masses and this he should be credited for. It remains clear that his work should not be considered under any other title than its historical significance to Psychology.