The developmental section of Psychology is one which gains more attention from the general public than other areas because the issue of child rearing techniques is a constant topic of discussion (as cited in A. Gopnik et al.). Parents obviously want to know how they should be raising their children, which is the main question driving developmental psychologists. Sigmund Freud proposed that children need their parents to fulfil their basic needs such as hunger and thirst as they are unable to do so, and this is the only role the caregivers play. Children, Freud claimed, act the way they do in order to get adults to help them survive, a theory known as Cupboard Love. The reason a child shows terror when it's mother leaves the room according to the Cupboard Love theory is because the child realises if the caregiver leaves there will be no one around to feed it (as cited in Gleitman et al.). Many parents and developmental psychologists have completely disagreed with this position and instead have come to believe that the parent and child bond or attachment is a vital part of child development which influences the later life of the child, and is a deeper connection then Freud's idea of a surface fulfilment of basic requirements. If this idea of attachment is correct then a new set of questions is raised, which include what sort of attachment should a parent and child have, how much or how little love and nurturing does the child require, and what happens if for some reason the child does not receive the right level of attachment? How serious is it when a child does not receive the correct parental attachment, is it possible that a lack of attachment can explain later adult behaviour such as delinquency? Mary Ainsworth tried to answer these questions, plus current research including a recent paper by Scaramella et al. have added further support for the importance of parental attachment.
To show the occurrence of attachment children and parents were tested using something called the strange situation developed by Mary Ainsworth (1978). The child's main caregiver and the child are placed in a room and a sequence of events occurs where the caregiver leaves, the child gets to interact with a stranger and cope with being left by themselves before the parent returns. This allows the experimenter to observe how the child and parent interact, for example if the child cries when the parent leaves or if they are willing to return to the parent when they come back into the room. Ainsworth observed that babies could be classified or grouped as a particular type, either securely attached, anxiously resistant and anxious avoidantly attached. Later a forth group was added called insecure-disorganised. Obviously the 'desired' child would be one that is securely attached as this is the group who seek out interaction with their parents and appear well bonded, luckily about 66% of babies fall into this category. Avoidant babies account for about 12% of children, and they avoid interaction with the caregiver especially during their reunion. Resistant babies are different in that they will go to the caregiver during the reunion but soothing them is difficult with a mixture of resistance and babies wanting contact. This group accounts for 20% of babies. The last group, insecure-disorganised only include 2% of children with babies not being able to handle the stress of separation and exhibiting disorganised behaviour (as cited in E.E Smith et al.).
Ainsworth discovered that certain styles of parenting resulted in the different types of attachment, so parents that were responsive and supportive produced securely attached children, rejecting parents had resistant children, and the avoidantly attached children had inconsistent parents. The last group, insecure-disorganised either had inconsistent parents or sadly abusive parents. This research challenged the Cupboard Love theory because children could no longer be seen as driven by an underlying universal force, instead the environment the child lived in was proven to directly influence their behaviour, how they acted towards their parents for example. The obvious question to address after this discovery was that if the parent and child attachment can affect immediate behaviour could it also be that this attachment affects later behaviour? For example a child that during adolescence exhibits delinquent behaviour may be doing so because they were not securely attached to their main caregiver.
A dramatic example of the effects of complete lack of attachment, or deprivation was conducted by Harlow and Harlow (1969), who took newborn rhesus monkeys away from their mothers and placed them with artificial wire monkeys. These monkeys when older were re-introduced to others and showed bizarre adult actions such as aggressive behaviour and incorrect sexual responses. Although it is extremely difficult to generalise this experiment to explain human development the results do suggest that lack of an attachment does affect later behaviour (as cited in E.E Smith et al.).
Scaramella, Conger, Spoth and Simions looked at delinquent behaviour in their 2002 paper; addressing the question of delinquency in terms of parental interaction and later anti-social behaviour. They studied children in Iowa and their parents using a series of techniques including interviews, video-recorded family discussions and questionnaires. This study is important because it tried to incorporate all the responses noted of faults found with previous studies of this nature in order to provide more reliable and consistent results, for example a large number of participants were tested (667 in group one and 451 in group two as well as the parents families) plus multiple sources of information were used, with many experimenters conducting the research (as cited in Scaramella et al.). The final results showed just how much influence the parent and child relationship has on delinquent behaviour. The researchers concluded that the Social Contextual Model of delinquency proved the best fit for the results they found, this describes how parenting which lacks nurturance and active involvement with the child, overtime increased the risk of antisocial behaviour which predicted delinquency. The low levels of parenting experienced by these children led to antisocial behaviour from the children which in turn led to even more of a decrease in involved parenting, so a vicious cycle is formed.
The role of peer associations was also discussed in this study and it was found that deviant peer afflictions did predict later delinquency but not immediate anti-social behaviour. Most importantly parents affect their children's behaviour by directly influencing, shaping and structuring their social environments. For example a parent chooses where their child will go to school, where they live and to an extent the friends they have, or at least the people they have the opportunity to be friends with. It was found that nurturing-involved parenting directly predicted a decline in both anti-social behaviour and deviant peer associations. Parents who are uninvolved fail to restrain both deviant behaviour and an association with deviant peers. So problematic parenting can start a chain of events which when started is very difficult to stop. This study is also influential because unlike others it considered the role of gender and delinquent behaviour where as previous research has been biased towards masculine delinquency. The researchers found that male and female children exhibit the same behaviour patterns and parental involvement is equally important for both genders (as cited in Scaramella et al.).
This study both links to and extends the work of Ainsworth, because it shows how parenting styles do influence adolescent behaviour. The parents who exhibited the same parental styles as those in Ainsworth's experiment who had securely attached children did not produce a relationship with their children which induced delinquency. Parents also structured their children's environment so that they did not mix with deviant peers. The opposite of this, parents who did not match the securely attached parental type produced delinquent children and had little regard for their peer relations. Current research is providing more of an experimental proof for the link between parenting and child behaviour, and so not only fails to challenge Ainsworth's work but adds depth to it. This has implications for later adult delinquent behaviour which may result in imprisonment, as a main factor causing the delinquent behaviour may well be the relationship the adult experienced as a child with their parent.
There are problems with the conclusion drawn by Scaramella et al. and linking it to Ainsworth's research, the most immediate being that no record was taken of exactly what type of attachment each child had with their parent in the Scaramella et al. study, it may be enough to say that a parent who is involved with their child also has a secure attachment but there is no empirical proof of this. The child and parent relationship was never tested using the strange situation technique. If further research was to be conducted this extra dimension should be included in order to conclusively prove the link that early parental styles affect later behaviour.
Within the disciple of psychology Ainsworth's research and the Scaramella et al. paper contribute to the ongoing debate of nature or nurture, whether people act the way they do because of their genes or their environment. This research shows just how important environmental factors are in development, a child may have a genetic disposition towards delinquent behaviour, but the occurrence of an anti-social behaviour is dramatically increased if the parenting style is incorrect, and the child is allowed to mix with deviant peers.