Dividing development into distinct stages has occurred in many areas of psychology, but most frequently in cognitive development of children and adolescents. There has always been disagreement as to whether development should be categorised in stages or whether it is a constantly moving process which never stops. Flavell (1977) suggested that stages in development must show distinct, qualitative changes rather than differences in quantitative ability. He also noted that transition between stages must incur several simultaneous changes in many areas of cognition, and that these transitions should be rapid rather than gradual. Some psychologists have tried to suggest that development is an accumulation of small qualitative changes over time, causing smooth, continuous improvement, called linear dynamics, (Harris & Butterworth, 2002), however most parents and teachers will agree that children's development does feature many sudden periods of growth.
There have been a number of stage models of cognitive development in recent psychology, which tend to agree on many points, such as the number of stages and the types of changes, suggesting that each has some merit. Freud famously described stages of development in children, including oral, anal, phallic, oedipal, latency and genital activity, (Harris & Butterworth, 2002), although these were never given much credit as Freud was seen to overemphasise sexual thoughts in young children. Vygotsky focused more on learning as a result of social interaction, but stated that cognitive development was limited to a certain range at any given time. His ordered stages of development included affiliation, play, learning, peer and work and have had some impact on the teaching of infant children, where the 'play' stage has encouraged more play centred learning in the classroom, (Donaldson, 1987). Other similar stage theories , such as that of Jerome Bruner, (Flavell, 1977), differ from these as they are not age dependent or invariant, and include fewer stages, in the case of Bruner, the enactive stage where knowledge is primarily in the form of motor responses, the iconic stage where knowledge is stored as visual images, and the symbolic stage where knowledge is stored as words or symbols. Bruner's stages have had less impact in the classroom, but his iconic stage has encouraged the use of pictures and diagrams in learning. A more recent stage theory, that of William Perry (1970), concentrates on the development of college students (17-21) and has been used throughout the USA in teaching many subjects. It includes nine points of development, from basic duality (one), through relativism (point five), towards commitment (nine).
Without doubt the most famous of the stage models is Jean Piaget's model of cognitive development, where childhood is divided into four stages based on age, which reflect the differing cognitive abilities of children at different ages. Whilst he recognised that transition could be at different times for each child, he outlined the nature of learning in each stage, (Boden, 1994). Firstly the sensori-motor stage, from birth to two years, shows cognition restricted to simple reflexes but quickly increases as learning through play occurs, (Sutherland, 1992). His ideas of imitation and learning through experience have influenced the way parents interact with their infants and can be seen in most playgroups and homes. However Piaget has been criticised for underestimating the cognitive ability of babies, which is understandable given the lack of imaging techniques that were available to him. Secondly, the pre-operational stage (two - seven) shows developments such as language and object permanence. During the concrete operations stage (seven - eleven), children show increased abilities in logical concepts such as conservation and reversibility, and during the final formal operations stage (eleven onwards), which some adults never reach, using many different operations simultaneously can be seen. Children think logically and mathematically and work systematically through solutions, (Papert, 1999).
In many ways Piaget's four stages have dramatically changed the form of education today, from school structure to curriculum. His ideas of the ability of children has influenced what is taught to children, for example division would not be taught to a five year old as Piaget says they lack the concept of reversibility, (Dricoll, 2000). In the pre-conceptual stage children cannot focus on more than one task at once, therefore a teacher will usually move children explicitly from one task to another, whereas a seven year old might be expected to listen and work at the same time. The general idea of stages can be seen used in a great many areas in life. Firstly in terminology; children are often categorised according to age, e.g. toddlers, infants, teenagers and adolescents. Secondly stages are used in commercial products including medicines, clothing and toys, where a toy might be labelled for seven to eleven year olds. Most importantly these stages are used in the schooling system, where children of the same age are taught the same material and classes are formed according to age, then grouped into infants, juniors or seniors. This system has worked well for many years and children can be seen to progress much as Piaget implied, however a fault of stage theories can be that children should be grouped according to ability not age, as some children are being taught at an inappropriate level and many are being slowed in their learning by one or two members of the class who think or behave at a lower level.
Criticisms of stage models of cognitive development are frequent and difficult to overcome in general. Clearly there must always be some oversimplification of structurally distinct stages, even if fifty stages were used. The nature of development is extremely complex and difficult to record, as a child's mind is so malleable. Children are unique in every way, and for every pair that develops at a similar rate there will be another who doesn't 'fit' the trend. Children or their parents should not be made to feel abnormal if cognitive development doesn't follow an exact formula. An equally important disadvantage is that stage models are often inaccurate or simply wrong. A huge amount of research since Piaget's theory has found that most children can perform functions such as object-permanence well ahead of the prescribed timescale and others find that pre-operational children are less egocentric than Piaget believed, (Donaldson, 1987). Furthermore the extent of individual differences means that children of similar ages may vary widely across the stages. Flavell (1977) said that children should notice several changes simultaneously, but in reality this rarely happens. A child can acquire skills at any time and in varying order. It is inaccurate to say that at age seven a child will develop conservation, as many have demonstrated conservation of number years before conservation of weight, (MacConnell & Daehler, 2004). Even the foundations of stage models can be criticised to the same extent. Piaget was said to have little or no evidence for much of his theory, as his tasks set for children were often too difficult for the age and very confusing to perform. He used limited numbers, often theorising from just his own children, and showed an absence of control groups or statistical analysis. It is possible that today Piaget would find very different conclusions and formulate different stages, and in this way stage models can be described as almost entirely subjective. Even if all stage models correlated and described the same skill levels at the same ages, which does not happen, they would still constitute a narrowed form of cognitive enquiry. Most cognitive models completely ignore the social, cultural, educational and motivational background of the child, which all have a profound effect on cognitive development. Lawrence Kohlberg (1963) formulated an entire stage theory based solely on moral development of children, and the same could be done for family background, quality of education or place of birth, as cognitive development cannot rely simply on biological development, as Piaget thought.
Despite the great number of disadvantages to stage models which have reduced their favour over the last twenty years, it cannot be denied that they have influenced our understanding of cognitive development hugely. Many studies of a cross section of western cultures have found that an average rate of development does fit roughly into Piaget's four stages, although with a number of sub-stages, (Bowden, 1994). The idea of stages of development is held by many and still used in the education system as a simple way to fairly divide children. Piaget's and other stage models can be used as a marker for children's development, to suggest where a child of a specific age should be cognitively, and to highlight any possible learning difficulties at an early age, allowing appropriate teaching. Whilst other theories, such as those of connectivity or information processing, might account for the high level of complexity in cognition, they are often thought to be too complicated for use by parents and teachers and less implementable. In the field of development theories a conflict will always arise between parsimony (looking for one general model rather than many different ones) and accuracy (the general model may fail to do justice to the complexity of cognitive development. It must be said that the stage models given so far do oversimplify development and ignore other influences, but perhaps in the future a practical stage theory may be developed which takes into account all we know about physical and neural development in the brain and tries to incorporate the observable changes in skills, education, culture and environment.