Rene Descartes (1596-1650) was not just a Psychologist; he also developed influential Philosophical theories and contributed to the fields of mathematics and Geometry. His theory of Psychology focuses on the mind and its relationship with the body, a problem that had been worrying philosophers since the Pre-Socratics in Ancient Greece. He put forward a theory to try and resolve these issues.
When considering one particular psychologists impact on the discipline it is important to also consider when they were working. Psychology in comparison to other scientific disciplines is relatively new. The history of psychology therefore consists of many views, discussions and arguments between both scientists and philosophers. It is possible to think of the history of psychology as a conversation over time which is still evolving today. So to fully appreciate Descartes influence you must look at how he influenced the people working with and after him.
Descartes built his theories on the work of Aristotle (384 - 322 bc) and developed a theory of understanding of the mind which was both rational with an empirical side, yet he asserted a belief in dualism, views which appear to contradict each other. Many of his theories have been proven to be incorrect yet the impact his work had in Psychology was great because he influenced many people from many different sides of Psychology.
Descartes began by doubting everything to see if there was anything that he could not doubt, as this would be the truth. Eventually he concluded that "I think therefore I am", meaning that the only thing he could not doubt was the fact that he had the capacity to doubt. This for Descartes instilled in him the idea that human's have a soul or mind and therefore a capacity to think. This in turn allowed God's existence and gave rise to a true world of senses interacting with the body. He went onto say that the soul is separate from the body, it is perfect and a 'higher' psychological process, the body regulates 'lower' functions. These two views seem to contradict each other because on one hand Descartes is implying that we have a mechanistic body which operates like a machine. Yet we also have a soul which allows us to think rationally and logically. He is trying to answer the fundamental questions of where knowledge comes from. These contradictions should not be dismissed as they influenced other Psychologists.
Nicholas Malebrance's (1638 - 1715) work was heavily influenced by Descartes. He tried to resolve the problem of mind and body interaction by saying that if we move a finger, it is actually God moving our finger for us because God controls everything we do. This has big implications, as does Descartes theory for the debate of freewill and determinism. Malebrance's theory states that we are not free and in fact controlled by an outside force who is God. Descartes mechanistic theory takes a different stance.
The mechanistic side of Descartes theory describes animals as machines which are controlled by the nervous system, so unlike occasionalism the body is controlled from within, but you still do not have freewill to exert power over your bodily functions. The nerves, Descartes claimed are hollow pipes through which 'animal sprits' flow which he described as 'being like a wind or very fine flame' and convey messages from the ventricles in the brain to the muscles (Fancher. Pioneers of Psychology). The nerves also contain threads which can be mechanistically pulled by a motion to produce a reflex. The human body separate from the mind also works in this fashion and can also be compared to a machine.
By building on the basis of Descartes theory scientists such as Franz Josef Gall (1758-1828) developed the modern day version of neuron science. He carried on Descartes work of comparing the human and animal brain, a theory which has been carried on by a multitude of scientists to create the view of the brain and its functions as we see them today. However, if it was not for Descartes and his impact this view may have been very different.
Descartes, by comparing the body to a machine was in fact also introducing the foundations of Cognitive Psychology. Julian Offray de La Mettrie (1709-1751) wrote a book called 'L'homme Machine' and asserted a view in vitalism which states that humans are a dynamic machine and an integral part of living nature. This view was built on and changed by both behavioural and cognitive psychologists to develop the idea of the brain being like a computer. This is the dominant view in Psychology, and due to Descartes work.
In complete contrast to the idea of a human being the same as a computer is Dynamic Psychology is a system of psychology that emphasises the interaction between different motives, emotions and drives, was developed by Sigmund Freud (1856 - 1939) and takes the stance that the driving force behind all actions were basic 'animal' instincts, such as sexual lust. This idea was developed in part from Descartes ideas on the soul; he stated that there was a 'battle' existing between both the body and the soul. When human's exhibited anger or other seemingly irrational characteristics he claimed this was the result of the body dominating the soul. The ideal was to have the body and soul unite. Where as behaviourists would say that we have no control over our 'mechanical' bodies, Dynamic psychologists assert the opposite to be true, yet both were influenced by Descartes.
It has been argued that Descartes' ideas made no impact to advancement to the field of Psychology as they were similar to Aristotle's and therefore had little to no influence on the debate of the mind. He may have had slightly more of a biological basis, but not as much as he could have done had he been a biologist. Fulton (1926) even went as far to say that 'knowledge of structure must precede a study of function' or that you should know information in depth about the field you are studying. It could be said that Descartes failed to understand discoveries which were made before him, anticipate any which were to come or in fact make any himself, after all his work was disproved within two decades of his life. For example he chose to ignore the recent scientific discovery that the heart was similar to a pump.
This does seem like an unfair criticism when you realise that Descartes' work did influence the work of people like Helmholtz (1821 - 1894) and Sechenov (1829 - 1905) who studied the brain, and Sechenov went onto write a very detailed psychological theory with a biological basis as was possible for his time. Descartes was also the founder of the reflex theory, which he made not have described completely accurately, but the idea was still there and still used today. So even if Descartes work was not in itself a development for Psychology the people who followed and based their work on his and did contribute, would not have done so if his theory had not been written.
Descartes also had an impact on the Empirical school of thought which appears to be strange as he used a rationalist method as a basis to his theory. However, unlike Plato (428 - 347bc) he does not condemn the senses. Descartes asserted that facts and senses were of little value until ordered properly by reason; facts are not meant to be ends unto themselves but a way to finding truths. Empiricists such as Locke (1632 - 1704) tried to develop scientific facts or truths in the best possible way he could. Unlike Descartes he argued that certainty was unobtainable and you never get 'true' truths. This school of thought developed into the field of scientific theory used today, so by direct reflection of Descartes work the empirical field developed its methods, another example of how Descartes work has been used.
If you take Descartes theory alone then it does appear floored and to not make an impact on the development and understanding of the mind. Descartes contrasting theory with two very different premises has influenced the work of other scientists and Psychologists, from Freud and his Dynamic Psychology to Behaviourists and the view that we are nothing more than machines. It does not matter that what he said was not necessarily true, after all he did claim the pineal gland was used to interact between the mind and body, and that the nerves were hollow fibres. Things science has now proven to be false. However, by putting forward a theory which others have claimed to be incorrect he has had people challenge his views and in turn add to the conversation of Psychology. The impact Descartes work had was huge, it may not have been in the way he wanted as people have developed the field of psychology by arguing against him, but his influence is neither the less there. Anyone who believes his work has no influence should look at almost any aspect of psychology, in which it would be possible to find parts of Descartes work in some form. All this from a man who was shy, troubled and a recluse.