Historically intelligence tests have been used to identify children who need extra attention within a class; however, this process has always been surrounded by controversy, (Furnham, 2000). In the 1960s Black children in America were segregated from their white classmates on the basis of lower intelligence test scores. Some parents of these children took the education authorities to court to prevent their children being labelled as 'retarded' (Fancher, 1985). This raised the question of whether it is correct to test intelligence, if the outcome produces more harm than good. In fact some states in America prohibited the testing of Black children to avoid legal battles (Fancher, 1985). When considering if it is correct to test children it is important to realise that there actually is no one definition of intelligence making it extremely difficult to devise an intelligence test. Supposing a valid and reliable test was devised the benefits for using Intelligence tests seem to be outweighed by negative outcomes. Would there be a benefit to the Black children in the USA to be labelled as retarded for example if nothing could be done to increase their intelligence test score? To label a Black child as retarded and then not be able to help improve the child's performance would be hugely detrimental.
The word Intelligence has been used to describe many things; from a single trait of measurable g, to a multi-layered combination of abilities (Siegler et al, 2003). To talk about a child's intelligence just in terms of one measurement of g does seem misguided because this factor has been shown to only account for 40 to 50 per cent of the recorded variance, (Deary, 2003). Perhaps to talk about children's intelligence as Gardner does, with multiple layers is closer to the truth. These layers consist of abilities such as 'Verbal and Linguistic intelligence' which would classically be accounted for by g, and 'Musical and Interpersonal Intelligence' which are not normally considered (Furnham, 2000). However, this is not the only multi-layer theory of intelligence, 'Sternberg's Triarchic Theory' purposes only three levels of intelligence, 'Analytic', 'Creative' and 'Practical', (Bee, 2000). It seems un-worthwhile to test a child's intelligence if the definition has not been stabilised and agreed upon because different tests will be testing different aspects of intelligence. A test which focuses on Gardner's theory may produce a high level of intelligence for a child skilled in interpersonal intelligence, but the same child may score much lower on a test solely focused at uncovering their level of g.
It has been shown that the definition does not only differ between intelligence experts, but also between lay-people and the experts (Furnham, 2000). Studies have shown that lay-people tend to view intelligence as involving logic, spatial and verbal abilities, where as this may only be part of what a particular intelligence test is focusing on. These lay conceptions of intelligence have been shown to be more male normative, in that they are abilities males tend to perform better in (Furnham, 2000). This is a surprising result because the average parson is often exposed to many different intelligence tests, especially with the invention of the internet. Books have even been published which teach parents how to rate their children's levels of intelligence, (Furnham, 2000)
It does not seem hugely worthwhile to test a child's intelligence if the parents of a female child believe the result to reflect their child's 'logical' ability for example, when actually the test focuses more on 'Interpersonal' and 'Musical' intelligence. If experts are also not testing what the general population believes to be intelligence, perhaps tests are not actually looking for the correct features of intellectual ability.
Another reason that it is hard to decide on what a child's intelligence test is actually measuring, and therefore how worthwhile it is, is the ability for extraneous variables to affect the result. Block et al (1976) states that a child's intelligence test result could be affected by anything from the room temperature, through to the competitive or fearful presence of others. It is very easy for a child to become distracted during a test meaning they do not perform to the best of their ability. For these reasons a worthwhile intelligence test cannot just be administered once and the result found claimed to be the true intelligence rating. The score produced is no more than an indication of how the child performed on that particular day, at the particular time and under the particular conditions faced.
Despite methodological problems and the dispute over the definition of intelligence Ceci (1996) claims people benefit hugely from knowing their own intelligence score. If people have a high intelligence scores they will also have a sense of pride, self-esteem and a basis of comparison with others (Ceci, 1996). Siegler (2003) again states an advantage of intelligence tests as the level of comparison available with others. By using the normal distribution or bell curve as a measure it is possible to compare children of different ages. This makes it worthwhile to test for intelligence as it gives children, their parents and teachers a mark or level at which to place their children and rate their intellectual development accordingly, (Fancher, 1985).
However, Block et al (1978) warns of the dangers of comparisons between children's scores on intelligence tests, to label a child with a low intelligence score is similar to stamping them with a 'permanent sense of inferiority'. Ceci (1996) mentions that intelligence scores allow for a feeling of self-pride, yet this really is only for the smallest group of children involved within the test, who score the highest marks. Ultimately to label a child with a low intelligence score is not worthwhile both to the individual and to the community as a whole; the child may well have the feeling of permanent predestination affecting how they see themselves within their community, because intelligence scores can appear to be 'set in stone' (Block et al, 1978). What use would it be to tell a child they will never have a similar intelligence score to their peers, when they have no capacity to alter it, as part of they score is purely down to their genetics?
Research has claimed that intelligence scores are actually relatively unchangeable, as some aspects of childhood intellectual functioning show stability through to adulthood. Arthur R Jensen is famously quoted as saying that educational programs designed to help children with low intelligence scores were doomed to fail because they could never change the 'enormously important genetic causes of low intelligence'. (Fancher, 1985) Jensen claimed that ethnic minorities have lower intelligence ability, so black children would benefit more from a fair appraisal of their intelligence and should not have optimistic wishes for their future, (Fancher, 1985).
A study using mid-twin, mid-parent analysis seems to support Jensen's claim, by showing that some aspects of cognitive ability lay the foundation for later cognitive functioning, (Benson et al 1993). These results may be useful for society and the government as they indicate from an early age which children are most likely to achieve little or no qualifications, become teen mothers or criminals, and are more venerable to depression (Feinstein and Bynner, 2004). These studies highlight the role genetics plays in intelligence tests. This is really interesting research form society's perspective, yet it does not benefit the individual child with a low intelligence score because this child can not change the genetic component of their intelligence. From a governmental perspective it would be worthwhile to test intelligence to see which are the most vulnerable areas in society, yet ultimately if genetics was the only factor involved the test results would be useless to the individual.
Luckily it appears that intelligence scores are not only determined by genetics and environmental factors play a role too. A longitudinal study conducted on children in Dunedin showed that 10 per cent of children had changes in the intelligence score of up to 15 points over a two year period. 13 per cent of children had major changes in scores over longer periods, (Bee, 2000). Intelligence tests are worthwhile if the results they produce can be improved upon. A child's intelligence is certainly influenced by their genes, but this has been shown to account for 50 per cent of intelligence test score variation. The child is also influenced by peers, friends and family in their immediate community, through to the influences of the wider environment, (Siegler et al, 2003).
The 'Head Start' programs designed to help children with lower intelligence levels seem to show that intervention programs do work, so in contrast to Jensen's stance intelligence levels can be altered. Operation 'Head Start' was introduced in the USA when black and white integration took place, to help alleviate the levels of poverty facing children from minority backgrounds, (Fancher, 1985).
Lee et al (1988), conducted a longitudinal study into the effectiveness of 'Head start' and concluded that children did make significant cognitive improvements, the researchers suggested the reason these children may not have caught up completely with the intelligence levels of their peers was due to the selection process of the program and the short amount of time children were enrolled, and not the child's genetic predestination to a lower intelligence level. The average four and a half year old child, who sends four hours, five days a week at an intervention program, is there for 120 hours. However, this is actually only four per cent of their total waking time since they were born, (Howe, 1998).
Despite the results of the Lee et al study (1988) providing evidence of a changeable intelligence through intervention programs, the use of these programs is still a debated topic. Furnham, (2000) cites a research program involving 50 intelligence world experts, who concluded that genetics plays a larger role than the environment in intelligence. Howe (1998) cites the work of Murry who claimed that 'we do not know how to raise the intelligence levels of youngsters because intelligence is stable and resists efforts to alter it.'
However, if intelligence tests are to be proven worthwhile it makes sense to adopt the stance that an intelligence level can be improved upon. It seems fundamentally wrong to allow children to believe they can never achieve the same levels of intelligence as their peers, because of their genetic limitations. Block et al (1978) warns of these problems by claiming tests can be turned into an 'engine of cruelty in the hands of the blundering or prejudiced'.
Low intelligence scores are in some cases connected with other environmental factors such as housing conditions and parenting style (Lee et al, 1988). To deny a child help through an intervention program because of their genetic limitations, when this program may also elevate other environmental pressures, seems unfair. If Jensen's theory encourages people to ignore environmental components of intelligence there is a possibility that intelligence tests could be abused, and children may go without help. If this was ever the case intelligence tests would not just be un-worthwhile, but damaging to children (Block et al 1978).
Intelligence tests have the capacity to be hugely worthwhile if used fairly and without abuse. The immediate benefits of intelligence tests are mainly directed towards those children who achieve the highest marks, and those who are not as clever are labelled as such. Through intelligence testing intervention programs are formed, which enable children to feel they can work to achieve a higher level of intelligence test performance. However, until a firm definition of intelligence is produced, which also fits with the lay person's description, intelligence tests can only go so far in to being worthwhile. Yet it is worth considering that a universal definition of intelligence may never be reached, because different cultures see different aspects as being important, in that same way that intelligence experts and lay people have different opinions. It may be that the best definition of intelligence to use is one tied closely with the countries cultural beliefs, and this will be when intelligence tests become really worthwhile.