Duality in reasoning is the claim that humans have two distinct separate reasoning styles, a concept proposed by Sloman (1996), and Stanovich and West (2000). Both papers present a different perspective of reasoning which in turn leads to a difference in the interaction between the systems presented, viewing the interaction differently influences the implications this produces for everyday life. Sloman (1996) proposes that humans have two systems of reasoning because ultimately it feels as if humans do; one reasoning system is driven by rules and the other associations. Stanovich and West (2000) claim that human development has evolved a rule based 'evolutionary' reasoning as well as a second rational reasoning style. Stanovich and West's (2000) paper does provide a clearer and more intuitive argument, yet both Sloman (1996) and Stanovich and West's (2000) theories raise problems which mean that a complete acceptance of duality in reasoning cannot be obtained from these theories alone.
A study conducted by Osherson and colleagues showed people use different parts of the brain for inductive and deductive reasoning, inductive reasoning is when conclusions are generalised from one premise to another, and deductive reasoning is when certain conclusions are necessarily reached because particular premises have been processed. (Eysenck and Keane, 1995). Induction and deduction are linked by Slomon (1996) to the two process active in his theory of reasoning. The Osherson study tested participants with reasoning tasks whilst administering a PET scan, revealing areas of the right hemisphere where involved with deductive reasoning, whilst areas of the left hemisphere and frontal cortex were active during inductive reasoning tasks, (Smith et. al., 2003). This study supports the claim that there are two systems of reasoning which carry out different functions; as separate parts of the brain appear to work for different types of reasoning tasks.
Both Stanovich and West (2000) and Sloman (1996) present a 'system one' style of reasoning which is similar in both cases, with both papers presenting a large body of evidence to support their stance. This evidence suggests that a rule based system is in place, for example Sloman (1996) claims that humans have a system of rules which can be used to solve problems, such as modus ponens, so when a person is presented with one stimulus an exact response will follow each time, if P then Q for example. When participants had to judge the validity of arguments their 'error rate, speed of response, or both were proportional to the number of rules needed to determine the arguments validity' (Sloman, 1996).
Stanovich and West's (2000) 'system one' uses the same automatic rules as Sloman's, yet as well as evidence provided for the existence of a 'system one', they produce a reason for this system to be in place. This reason is that humans have evolved with a these rules as a survival mechanism. This evolutionary explanation appears to give a good grounding for the need of these rules, because human survival would appear to greatly benefit from having a quick reasoning process in place, which prevented danger and so aided the continuation of the genes. However, the main problem Stanovich and West (2000) face with their proposal of an evolutionary theory is the problem all Evolutionary Psychologist face, how can an evolutionary theory be proven when it is impossible to test humans in a less evolved state?
Stanovich and West (2000) recognise the challenge faced by evolutionary Psychology when describing why humans need two systems of reasoning, they state the humans who were 'able to bring more relevant information to bear on the puzzles of life probably dealt with the world better than competitors and thus ... contributed more of its genes to future generations'. It is the word 'probably' which raises questions as to the validity of this theory because, to make conclusions about human ancestors, then apply them to modern day humans, brings with it a large amount of risk as to just how correct any predictions can be. It is almost like Stanovich and West (2000) proposed a theory and then fitted their evolutionary ideas to it, so they discovered that humans used rule based reasoning, postulated on why this could be, and decided it must be to in some way aid human development.
The 'system two' style of reasoning proposed by Sloman (1996) again differs from Stanovich and West's (2000) description. Sloman's (1996) argument for two systems actually seems floored because he claims that humans have this second reasoning system because it feels as if they do. Sloman (1996) proposes that humans feel what is termed as Criterion S, which is when you believe two things are true of only one thing at one time. Take the famous ambiguous figure which can either be viewed as two faces or a vase. Say someone looks at it and can only see two faces, so they are sure this is all there is, yet when they are informed there is another picture they can identify the vase. Sloman (1996) proposed, people may answer a reasoning problem in the same way, first using their rule based system and then switching to the association based system. Sloman (1996) states that 'the fact the mind is being pulled in two directions at once suggests two pulling forces', yet is this really enough evidence to claim there are two systems of reasoning? Could it not be that there is only one system of reasoning which is able to generate outputs before the complete process has taken place? Might it be possible that a 'system one' type of reasoning has the capacity to generate a quick response before a detailed analysis of the problem has occurred. To say humans feel as if there are two reasoning systems is a good base to begin research to discover these processes, but is not enough evidence as it stands to propose duality within reasoning.
Stanovich and West's (2000) try to ground their proposed 'system two' in the same way they explain there 'system one', using human developmental history, this version of a 'system two' rationality does however, provide a more intuitive explanation in comparison to Sloman's (1996) theory. Stanovich and West claim that humans have a system of associative reasoning because as explained by Dennet the human brain is made up of four minds. The Darwinian and Skinnerian minds are akin to rule based reasoning because they are 'ready to sacrifice the vehicle if it will aid genetic fitness', and so govern the evolutional rule based system of reasoning. The Popperian and Gregorian minds operate on a 'do what you think is best' principle, and so are controlling the 'system two' rational reasoning style. (Stanovich and West, 2000). The inclusion of Popperian and Gregorian minds within humans is what Stanovich and West (2000) propose distinguishes us from other animals, as humans have the ability reason beyond the level needed for genetic survival, hence the need for a 'system two' reasoning. The claim that a dual process of reasoning is what elevates humans on a cognitive level above other species is really interesting, because compared to other animals it does appear humans do have a higher level of reasoning.
One of the main differences between the two theories of reasoning duality is how each author views the interaction between the proposed 'system one' and 'system two' processes. To prove there are two reasoning systems the interaction between the two would have to result in two distinctly different outcomes, or 'the two systems must strongly cue different responses', (Stanovich and West, 2000). Sloman (1996) claims that both systems try to respond to reasoning problems, but the rule based system has the capability to suppress the associative system. This rule based repression does not always work because the associative system is fast and efficient, and so can precede system one. Sloman (1996) sees humans as ultimately being rule based, interestingly the opposite view is taken by Stanovich and West (2000) who claim that system two has the ability to override system one, and this happens most in individuals of higher cognitive ability. Stanovich and West (2000) do not claim one system is better than the other only that they have different purposes.
If the background to both stances is considered that Stanovich and West's (2000) claims do hold more weight, as they asserted a reason for both systems to have adapted the way it appears they have, an evolutional rule based system and an individually focused associative system. To look at reasoning interaction as Stanovich and West (2000) propose does add more weight to the claim that there are two systems of reasoning, however, both theories disagree on exactly which reasoning system overrides which. Neither theory can successfully claim their view of reasoning duality, as the other theory's existence contradicts the evidence each produces, to support the interaction between the two systems.
If it could be shown that people reason in two different ways in everyday situations, this evidence would greatly support a two fold theory of reasoning. Stanovich and West (2000) again propose the clearest everyday example of the two distinct reasoning systems in action, by showing ways advertisers use reasoning to sell products. The current advertisement for the English national lottery uses the catch phrase 'it could be you', to entice people to buy a ticket. Stanovich and West (2000) claim this type of advertisement is directed towards 'system one', rule driven heuristics or short cut procedures. Heuristics are easy to apply and normally produce the correct outcome; however, this is not the case all of the time. (Smith et. al., 2003). In this case the heuristic cannot be overruled by 'system two', so the consumer is drawn in to buying a ticket. In the same way advertisements which have a sexual content are very successful, for example a British car advertisement depicting a women removing all her clothes before entering a vehicle, was so popular and mesmerising, people forgot what the make of car was! (Clay, 2002) Stanovich and West's (2000) theory claims these advertisements work because they appeal to an evolutionary 'system one' heuristic which cannot be overruled by 'system two'.
Sloman's (1996) take on the nature of consumerism is that people appear to repeatedly buy products they have always brought, as opposed to switching to a cheaper option, because the brand name has stronger associations which override the weaker rule driven principles. This discrepancy between the two theories explanations of everyday life means neither theory can prove both reasoning systems are in place, as stated in the two papers. Stanovich and West (2000) and Slomon's (1996) claims appear to both be highly intuitive and an accurate description of consumer habits, this makes rejecting one theory for the other an extremely difficult task.
To accept that humans have two systems of reasoning means an acceptance of humans being either more 'rule' focused, or more 'creatively' focused, according to these two theories. To accept Slomon's (1996) theory means humans have to be viewed as trying to use rules to reason with, and limit the associations used. Sloman (1996) states that 'even when a person is attempting to be rule governed, associative responses encroach on judgement', so is suggesting people want to be rule governed, but sometimes cannot be. Stanovich and West (2000) see their 'system two' as overriding 'system one' and producing a more creative outcome in those individuals with a higher cognitive ability. All evidence appears to suggest that there are two systems of reasoning but the two theories discussed differ on which reasoning type is better, to gain a clear description of reasoning duality it needs to be decided first if humans are more rule based, creatively clever or in fact an equal mixture of both, then a reasoning theory should be developed around this evidence.