Studies have shown that the amount of REM sleep increases after learning something new, and that deprivation of REM sleep reduces the capacity to learn (Rosenzweig, 1999). However, conflicting results show that the type of learning influences whether it is REM sleep alone that aids the learning, or whether other stages also play a role. For example, more recent studies suggest that stage two sleep plays a role in motor learning. Other studies have even given conflicting results about how the effects of implicit and explicit learning relate to the role of REM sleep. Ultimately methodological problems with studies investigating sleep and learning, mean it is not completely clear which different stages of sleep aid different types of learning. The relationship between REM sleep and learning has been demonstrated in a variety of different studies. There are five stages of sleep, four of these stages are classified as non-REM or slow-wave sleep, (Rosenzweig, 1999). The fifth stage is known as REM or Paradoxical sleep, during which the heart-rate increases and rapid-eye movements occur. It has been postulated that learning and sleep stages are related because; during REM sleep the brain's electrical activity reflects that of a wakeful person (Green, 2001).
In a review of the animal literature, Carlyle Smith (1984) concluded that the majority of studies show a relationship between REM and the learning process, and that there are certain 'windows' during which REM must take place in order to fully aid the learning process. Some studies discussed produced evidence which does not support this theory, but this is likely to be due to methodological limitations. If the experimental method involved REM sleep deprivation, the deprivation may not have been at the appropriate time, or resulted in too much stress. A technique often used in order to prevent animals reaching REM sleep is the "swimming pool" method, in which they must cling to poles in order to avoid falling into water. The stress caused may over-ride the effect of sleep on learning.
Although animal studies have provided a starting point for research involving humans, animal research alone can only tell us a limited amount about the relationship between stages of sleep and types of learning, as the difference between what animals can learn and what humans can learn is so great. For example, animal research would tell us very little about verbal learning.Maquet et al (2000) conducted a study which went some way towards explaining the relationship between REM sleep and learning in humans. In this study, PET scans measured the cerebral blood flow of participants, whilst they performed a serial reaction time task or while they were asleep, after performing the task. The study showed the cerebral regions of the occipital and pre-motor cortices were activated during the task, and during REM sleep. The increased synaptic activity of these areas during REM sleep seems to strengthen new connections and consolidate memory traces. It has also been suggested that REM sleep aids learning by weakening irrelevant synapses, which would decrease the efficiency of the cerebral cortex if they were not weakened (Crick and Mitchison, 1983, as cited in Rosenzweig et al, 1999). Maquet et al use a between subjects design for their study, which meant that the PET scans of two different groups were compared under different conditions. So differences in the brain activity between the members of the two groups may have confounded the results. However, the experimenters took this flaw into account when conducting a similar study. This time the same participants were scanned, while they learnt how to complete a visuo-motor task and when they were re-tested, three days later. When participants were re-tested, the areas of the brain active in participants who had been deprived of sleep after the learning were different to the areas of the brain active in participants who had not been deprived of sleep. This series of studies provides strong support for REM sleep aiding the learning of a visuo-motor skill, as there is physical evidence of the biological processes involved.
Studies using sleep deprivation may have results confounded by the differing levels of arousal in the groups. Participants who have been deprived of sleep may show a decreased level of performance simply because they are tired, rather than because of being deprived of the positive effects of REM sleep. However, Maquet et al's study avoided this problem by allowing the sleep deprived participants and the control participants two nights of normal sleep before re-testing, adding more weight to their conclusion of REM sleep involvement with learning.Although the overall finding of Maquet et al's study seems to be that REM aids learning, other studies show that the effects of REM sleep on learning are more complex. The effects of REM sleep may depend on what kind of learning takes place.
Learning how to perform skilled actions is procedural, whereas learning that something is the case is declarative (Eysenck and Keane, 2001). Smith and Smith (2003) conducted two experiments; in experiment one, participants completed cognitive procedural and declarative tasks, and then drank alcohol, either that night, or two nights later. Eight days later they were re-tested. The results showed that performance on the procedural task, but not the declarative task was impaired as a result of the consumption of alcohol. This was the case, regardless of whether the alcohol was consumed the same day as learning or two days later, suggesting that the effect of REM sleep on the learning of procedural tasks is not limited to immediately after the learning has taken place. Experiment two looked at the disruption to REM sleep caused by alcohol consumption, and the effect of this disruption on cognitive procedural learning, and motor procedural learning. The results showed that both kinds of procedural task were impaired.
Smith and Smith's study gives a fuller picture of the relationship between declarative and procedural learning, and the stages of sleep required. Using ethanol digestion to disrupt sleep is also ecologically valid, a part of the methodological consideration often overlooked by similar experiments in this area.Robertson et al's (2004) study can be criticised for lacking ecological validity in its methodology, they tested participants awareness of what is being learnt and its influence the effects of REM sleep. Participants learnt a sequence of finger movements during a serial reaction time task, a method often employed by experimenters, but not often used in everyday situations. Participants learnt the sequence either intentionally, having been told how a change in the colour of the visual cues related to the sequence, or unintentionally, with the visual cues all the same colour. The Participants in the explicit, intentional learning condition only showed improvement when they had slept before they were re-tested. Yet participants in the implicit, unintentional learning condition showed improvement whether the period between testing and re-testing included sleep or not.
Other studies have challenged the work of Robertsonal. Smith's (1995) research in the same area; found that participants in an explicit learning condition showed no impairment following sleep deprivation. Whereas participants in an implicit learning condition did show impairment if they had experienced either total sleep deprivation, or deprivation of the last two periods of REM sleep, but not if their non-REM sleep had been disturbed. Further still, Laureys et al (2002) suggested sleep aided both types of learning, REM aided implicit learning, and non-REM sleep aided explicit learning.It has been suggested that the conflicting results are due to problems with the definitions of implicit and explicit learning; Smith's article describes explicit, declarative learning, versus implicit, procedural knowledge, whereas the implicit and explicit skills in Robertson et al's study could both be seen as procedural. In Smith's study, the explicit tasks were different to the implicit tasks, whereas in Robertson et al's study the same task was used in both conditions, with slight variations. This discrepancy needs to be researched further in order for the findings of the studies to be understood fully.Research has shown that it is not only REM sleep which is involved with learning, stage two sleep may be involved, particularly with the learning of motor skills. Smith, 1994 (as cited in Aubery et al, 1999), found that participants who had been deprived of REM showed no impairment in their performance of pursuit motor tasks, whereas participants who had been totally deprived of sleep showed a significant impairment. This suggests that slow-wave sleep aids motor learning and REM sleep is not involved in this process.
Plihal and Born, 1997 (cited in Aubrey et al, 1999) defend the stance that REM sleep is necessary for learning motor procedural tasks. Aubrey et al (1999) demonstrated that REM sleep is only necessary for motor tasks when the motor task is complex and involves additional cognitive learning, as was the case in Plihal and Born's study. Aubrey et al compared the effects of REM and non-REM sleep deprivation on participants who had either learnt a mirror tracing task, or a simple tracing task, and found that REM sleep deprivation only impaired the performance on the mirror tracing task. However, methodological problems with this study may have affected the results. Participants in the normal sleep condition were allowed to sleep at home, where as those in the disrupted sleep condition remained in the laboratory.Another distinction between types of learning that affect sleep, is between verbal, spatial and numerical learning. The findings of a study by Peigneux et al (2004) suggest that spatial learning is aided by slow wave sleep, rather than REM sleep. Peigneux et al measured the cerebral blood flow of participants in three conditions, either while they used virtual reality to learn the route of a town, while they slept after having completed the task or while sleeping, without having learnt the task. The results showed that the hippocampul activity during slow wave sleep of those who had completed the task reflected the hippocampul activity shown during training. The memory traces seem to be re-activated and strengthened during slow wave sleep. Unfortunately this study does not specify during which of the four stages of slow wave sleep this process takes place, or whether it is all four. Again this study was a between subjects design. When comparing the brain activity of two different groups of participants, particularly when there are so few people in each group, there may be differences between the members of the groups that are not related to the manipulation of variables.Perhaps the relationship between the stage of sleep and the type learning is mediated by the areas of the brain used for the relevant type of learning, and the areas of the brain active during that stage of sleep. Maquet (2000), as mentioned earlier, showed that the same areas of the brain were active during training at a serial reaction time task as during REM sleep. Some animal studies show increases in enzymatic activity, neuron size and dendrite branching as a result of exposure to enriched environments (Smith, 1984). These sorts of neurological activities may occur more in specific areas of the brain during specific stages of sleep. Ramm and Frost, 1983 (cited in Smith, 1984), found that in the brains of rats, the limbic system and hypothalamic core showed high metabolism during slow wave sleep and the cortex, extra-pyramidal system and parts of the hippocampus showed high metabolism during REM sleep. However, this is again an experiment conducted on animals, so the results can only be translated so far to humans. At the moment there is a partially complete picture of the relationship between stages of sleep and types of learning. Evidence suggests that sleep aids learning, but only some of the pieces of the jigsaw seem to be currently in place. Studies need to be conducted into the function of stages of sleep rather than focusing on REM. There is a wealth of information available about the effects of deprivation of REM on learning, but relatively little about any of the other stages, and often the four slow wave stages are referred to collectively. There are a number of methodological issues that need to be addressed to ensure valid results are yielded. Understandably, the majority of the studies involving sleep recording or deprivation have relatively small samples of participants, as finding willing participants is difficult and costly. However, the smaller the sample size, the easier it is for results to be confounded by individual differences. In addition to this, some studies have a real lack of ecological validity. Some aspects of how different stages of sleep aid different types of learning have been uncovered, but there is still a long way to go before we understand this relationship fully.