Susan Blackmore's Meme Machine increases awareness of memetics by proposing answers to some of life's most puzzling questions, such as who am I, why do humans have large brains, and is alien abduction real? A meme according to Blackmore is anything passed on by imitation; a recipe for soup is as much of a meme as a symphony composed by Beethoven, because both can be imitated by others. At a surface level a memetic theory of human development seems to produce neat answers to unsolved questions, yet Gabora (1998) establishes that some readers may feel this is counter-intuitive to human reasoning, because meme's have not and cannot be defined; they are un-testable as a theory. Blackmore further uses these un-testable memes to attack religious teachings and wage a scholarly battle against people who claim to have a belief in a 'self', the reader is left with a theory that does nothing to help with everyday problems and so cannot be transferred further than the page on which it is written.
Memes according to Blackmore are things which can be imitated only, and she identifies things which are not memetic in their development, for example perceptual experience, memory, learning, exploration, food preferences, communication and social relations. This basic level of definition initially raises two problems, stated by Gabora (1998). Firstly Blackmore proposes that the reason humans are unique in their development compared to other species, is that we can imitate others. Yet whist The Meme Machine was being published an article by Byrne and Russon (1998) produced contradictory evidence that animals do appear to have some capacity for imitation. This evidence questions the basis of memetic theory, and it is an area which needs to be explored further in order to prove or disprove the foundations of memetics.
The second immediate challenge; is that Blackmore seems to have developed a theory around imitation without having the correct factual evidence to support her work. Blackmore identifies an increase in tool development during human evolution and this was also the time she proposed that imitation increased. However, as Gabora (1998) states an increase in imitation should be preceded by mass variation, with many different tools in existence. When people learn to imitate their copy the best examples and so reduce variation, this should be the evidence Blackmore wanted. However, Gabora (1998) favours the explanation of creativity as the bottleneck to culture, imitation is hidden within a species until there enough creative variation for it to be utilised. This foundational problem again detracts from Blackmore's theory.
Blackmore does address some faults which were levelled at her early memetic work; these are the inability to identify the unit of a meme, the difficulty of understanding the copying and storing mechanisms, and lastly the lack of standardised terminology. Blackmore states these are not problematic as they do not stop speculation of memetic functioning, the reader is informed that evolution did not always have the genetic component to fully explain natural selection. In the same way memes do not need full identification before theories can be produced. Rose (1998) however, states that there are varying definitions between memetic scholars and that 'without some firm definition the word 'meme' becomes almost meaningless.' Runciman (1999) adds weight to this argument by saying that to refer to memetic information without identification is confusing and defeatist. Blackmore is right to state that the complete meme description cannot yet be reached and theorising on the subject should be completed beforehand, yet she then begins to explain the intricacies of human nature. This head-long gallop, as Runciman (1999) describes it, is much too fast and un-testable to produce a respectable theory, after all Charles Darwin closely examined the natural environment before proposing his Theory of Natural Selection, Blackmore appears to have missed this crucial step.
Despite problems with memetics Blackmore states that religions are memeplexes, consisting of many memes that have joined together and formed groups in order to safeguard their well being, increasing replication. A cult which encourages its members to give their possessions to the leader, before committing suicide, has within it the meme for giving away what you own, combined with the meme for killing yourself. That is if these two processes are a single meme and not a combination of memeplexes themselves. The two memes guarantee they will have more of an influence on people because each one has the 'support' of the other.
It is apparent from reading Blackmore's ideas on religion that the concept of holding a religious belief above scientific proof is something she cannot fully comprehend. Blackmore states that science which looks for a testable truth is at its best more useful than an un-testable religious belief, which by definition you can not prove. Blackmore's dislike of religion causes a problem for memetic theory as she uses an objective scientific theory to try to prove an un-testable subjective hypothesis, to counter another view point. If memetics is correct Blackmore must have her own 'dislike religion' memes which influence her work as much as a creationist would have a 'dislike science' meme, so these memes according to their definition must be in a sort of flux, as they can die out, join onto other memes to form memeplexes, or pass onto someone else and be transformed. Scientific research is conducted methodically to produce precise definitions and reliable conclusions, yet Blackmore's own supposed scientific research has not produced anything which resembles a clear and unchanging definition instead it has produced something unspecified. To be scientific memes must be consistent, yet they do not appear to be so.
Blackmore claims religions are popular as they give tidy answers to life's most difficult questions allowing people to experience a lack of responsibility. Is this not just what memetic theory does? The 'Church of Virus' a memetic religion on the internet demonstrates the hypocrisy of Blackmore's argument, it states that to live by memes is to live a 'truly meaningful life without resorting to mystical delusions'. Where as some people are happy to follow existing religions, people who are not excepting of the explanations given can join Blackmore and feel they are getting answers through memetics. The last chapter of The Meme Machine describes that 'the answer is to have faith in a memetic view; to accept the selection of genes and memes will determine the action', This sounds incredibly similar to religious doctrine stating that you should trust in the unknown, whether that is a god or memes. Both memetics and religious theory exist, it does not make one better than the other, at the moment neither can be disproved.
Memetics not only takes on a religious type format, but unlike other religions it leaves the reader at a loss when faced with everyday dilemmas (Midgley, 2001). Blackmore identifies ultimate memeplexes, which she refers to as the selfplex. A selfplex is a meme which most people have, the idea that every person has a self which allows a certain level of consciousness, freewill and creativity. Blackmore dismisses the feeling of 'self' by explaining it as grouped memes, which 'discovered' that if a meme is passed on via imitation, and the teacher is seen by the pupil as associating the meme with their self-concept, imitation is much more likely to occur. If a teacher was instructing someone on the virtues of cricket, they would do well to encourage imitation by describing how much they personally loved the game. Imitation may occur now because the pupil has learnt how cricket fits in with the teacher's self concept. Blackmore would explain this process by claiming the memes in the teacher's head are constructed to allow them to feel they personally like cricket, and the pupil imitates these memes because they are fooled by the apparent appearance of another 'self' to follow. Dawkin's (1989) originally claimed that it is possible to rebel from the grip of memetics, yet there would be a chance that rebellious feelings were just other rebellious memes. Blackmore takes this stance one step further, not only can we not rebel we actually cannot even think we want to rebel.
The idea of a selfplex appears immediately contradictory to the foundation of memetics as stated previously, Blackmore says that memes are not perceptual experience, memory or other types of learning for example, yet the book concludes by claiming there is no 'I' and people live their lives as a lie without realising the power memes hold over them. What happened to all these other non - memetic things? Blackmore appears to have dismissed her previous ideas in favour of a reductionist view of human behaviour, (Gabora, 1998).
Rose (1998) expresses how memes attempt to replace the 'self' with an algorithm of culture in the same way as Darwin and his successors have replaced God with an algorithm, but does this make the reducionist method correct? Blackmore may argue that a reductionist approach is the correct way to address human behaviour, dividing the self up into memes you are following a pattern others have chosen by trying to find the smallest constituent and explaining them first. (Midgley 1998) But can humans be seen in such a way? When arguing against the idea of a 'self' Blackmore seems to take the stance that people see consciousness as Descartes did, the 'self' and body are separate entities and what science and philosophy need to do is work out the connection between the two, or except that there is not one (Blackmore, 2001). Both Midgley (1998) and Gabora (1998) propose a different way of addressing the 'self', and that is to see it as a whole not a collection of little parts. Gabora says that to see the self as memes is the same as seeing a chair as a collection as sticks, you need to see a chair as a chair and a person as a person. This view may explain why some experiments appear to show that the feeling consciousness comes after the cause of the action, where as it would be expected to be the other way round (Blackmore, 2001). The source of action and the feeling of consciousness are all tied up together and can only be fully understood when the whole person is studied, it may be impossible to learn anything about the person by only studying action or consciousness and they should be addressed together.
Blackmore challenges the idea that a person is a whole because you cannot find evidence of a 'self' within a person; she quotes Patricia Churchland who says looking for 'self' is the same as looking for 'pixie dust in the synapses'. The reader could surly question how 'pixie dust' of the 'self' is any different to the 'pixie dust' of memes. If there is no 'self' to be found in the brain, where are the memes? What do memes look like and in what areas can they be found? The answer to both the 'self' and the selfplex is that neither have enough psychological or philosophical evidence to favour one over the other, yet because some people feel like they have a 'self', at this point in history this feels like a more useful theory in terms of practical applications.
What is the answer; can memetics successfully be introduced into scientific disciplines and in turn everyday life? At this embryonic stage in development memes should not be given anywhere near as much explanatory power as Blackmore allows. The Meme Machine can be considered like a work of art, to stand far away and regard it from a distance means it looks wonderful, but closer inspection revels faults, imperfections and inconsistencies. However, the publication of Blackmore's work can only be a good thing because it brings the problems of both philosophy and psychology into the public domain. If Gabora (1998) is correct to think that most readers will find memes 'counter-intuitive' the reader will then begin to question belief's in aspects including religion and consciousness, allowing them entry into the continuing debates of philosophy and psychology.