The National Office of Statistics calculated in 1994 there were 38,159 reported cases of depression in the British population; rising to 64,101 by 1998. James (1997) has estimated also that for every one person fulfilling the DSM requirements for depression another two or three people are borderline cases. What could have made these figures rise so dramatically and in such a small space of time? Despite evidence for a genetic predisposition, a depressive 'gene' cannot explain the huge increase in depression. Could it be that the capitalist democracy of Great Britain is structured in a way that is conducive to depressive illnesses? This may well be the case, British people are exposed to many different forms of advertisement which eventually decrease levels of well being, because people cannot afford all of the products they are told they must buy; Depression results in faulty thoughts produced by this process. British health care institutions are not set up to deal with the numbers of people reporting depressive symptoms which means many people will not receive adequate care, creating a constant level of depression amongst certain groups. However, some research has suggested though that one way to prevent depression is to take part in religious activates such as prayer.
Easterlin, R.A. (1995) claimed people asses their levels of wellbeing according to the levels of those around them, so if standards of living increase so do peoples subjective norms. This is confirmed by a Japanese study in 1958 and 1987; during this period the average income increased five fold and with it there increased the sales of washing machines, refrigerators, televisions and cars, from one per cent of every household owning these types of goods, to sixty per cent. Yet no improvement of well being was recorded. The findings of this study can be transferred to Britain, through multiple Media Sources people are constantly bombarded with adverts, telling them that to buy a product which will make them happier, after buying the product and a new advert is released informing the consumer that everyone now owns something better. The average level of well being for this person decreases and in order to raise it they believe the must conform and buy the new product. Happiness through material wealth is supported by the government who in pre-election campaigns promise to increase wages in order to make people happier. Tony Blair's 2001 election speech told voters how Labour was pursuing 'economic prosperity', and with this 'living standards were rising' (Guardian Unlimited).
People are presented with a distorted world view through multiple media sources, which encourage consumerism. James (1997) describes how American television dramas, which have become much more readily available in Britain, depict three-quarters of characters as male, mostly single, middle class in there 20s to 30s. 40% of characters are employed in a professional or managerial position. Television programs also provide a greater number of real life people to compare the self against. Accompanying programmes are advertisements claiming if buy their product you could have the life depicted in one of these programmes. These ideas may not work when presented once but over time, starting in childhood, the British public are told this is how they should live. Unfortunately the growth of mass media is all part of the British desire to have freedom of choice, there is a thin line between the amounts of freedom a society demands and the rates of depression this freedom induces. To be free to buy any product brings with it higher risks of depression (James, 1997).
Not only adults who are susceptible to advertisements, Martin, N., & Lyddy, F. (2001) showed that children in Sweden who watched television containing the most advertisements, regardless of age wanted more of the advertised items than children that did not watch much television. In Sweden advertisers are not even allowed to directly advertise to children! A similar study in Britain again found that watching a greater amount of television directly corresponded to requesting more presents, this time children requested more branded names such as 'Barbie' as opposed to 'doll'.
The cognitive model Proposed by Aaron T. Beck in Seligman, M.E.P., Walker, E.F., & Rosenhan, D.L. (2001), states that depression is caused by incorrect negative thoughts. People have faulty logic errors; this could be induced by adverts which tell you that you need a certain product to be happy. Beck proposed that depressive people suffer from 'Selective Abstraction' which means they ignore the most important features of an event, so depressive people may well ignore the fact that they have things in their lives which they should feel are important and beneficial, yet all they focus on is the next unobtainable item they are told they should buy. The faulty thought process moves from a negative view of yourself, to a negative view of your environment and lastly to a negative view of the future, so you feel you are useless as you cannot afford to buy a product, the environment becomes threatening and punishes you for your failure, which means the future will look bleak because nothing is likely to change.
It is worrying to speculate as to the effect the media has upon children. It is known that the brain is not yet fully developed at birth and new neural pathways are being constructed as environmental stimulation increases. Negative 'Selective Abstraction' could be programmed early on, meaning it may well be harder to treat these children if they grow up into depressive adults, because negative thinking cannot be controlled or prevented as it is a lasting feature of the brain's mechanism.
A depression inducing society would benefit from having the correct health facilities to treat depressed people, yet the British National Health Service does not seem to treat the rising number of cases effectively. If patients were to receive the correct treatment it would not only benefit them but also improve social and economic functioning as there would be reduced absenteeism and accordingly an increased amount of taxable earnings, decreased levels of alcohol consumption, more full time employment and a reduce dependence on the welfare system. (Maj, M., & Sartoriuns, N., (2002)). In recent years there has been an increase in the awareness of depression, with the publication of books such as Prozac Nation; Young and Depressed in America by Elizabeth Wurtzel, and the glamorising of therapeutic treatments through television shows such as 'Ally McBeal'. More people realise depression can be treated and this may be one reason the figures for depression have risen.
The first place someone is likely to go for treatment is their General Practitioner. If depression is diagnosed in the Birmingham area people currently have to wait six months after a referral, before they are seen by a cognitive therapist. Some people are still very wary of receiving treatment, a 21 year old male for example remarked that he believed he suffered from depression but did not want a cognitive therapist to 'change his thoughts' (Personal Communication). The only thing general practitioners really have the power to do, other than give advice, is prescribe people anti-depressant tablets. In 1991 the Office of National Statistics calculated there were nine million prescriptions for anti-depressants; by 2004 this figure had risen to 24 million.
To constantly be given a drug may create a feeling of personal helplessness. The cognitive model of depression puts forward the 'Learned Helplessness' idea presented by Seligman, M.E.P., Walker, E.F., & Rosenhan, D.L. (2001), which states that given an inescapable event people will become passive later on when presented with a method of escape. An experiment was conducted on dogs who were administered electric shocks in an inescapable environment. At first they tried to get away, but eventually the dogs laid down to accept the shocks, interestingly when given a way out the dogs still would not accept it. This study could be related to humans because if a person feels they are part of an inescapable event such as feeling depressed, they are administered drugs which reduce the effects of depression but not the cause, if offered therapy as a way out of their depressive state people are either reluctant to take it or do not believe it would work because they and now in a state of learned helplessness. People believe they cannot escape their illness so they will not even try. This links to the DSM criteria for depression which states that patients may feel 'a lack of interest' and 'diminished concentration', as shown in Blackburn, I.V., & Twaddle, V. A, (1996).
Despite a growing awareness of depression there still remains a certain level of social stigma around being diagnosed with this disorder, so the rise in figures for depression cannot solely be due to an increase in reported cases. A recent train journey was delayed because a woman was trying to commit suicide, passengers were heard to make comments such as 'I wish she would just hurry up and jump' and 'this kind of thing costs the tax payer so much money'. This woman could have been suffering from a depressive disorder so the comments of the passengers reflect an unsympathetic and uncaring view of certain people. Cinnirella, M., & Loewebthal, K.M. (1999), reported that some religious groups assert that depression is impossible if you are a truly religious individual, and to consult a doctor or psychotherapist may results in them giving instructions which are irreligious. A qualitative study of British religious people revealed that one third of participants felt religion could play a causal role in depression. If a depressive person lived in an environment which meant it was difficult for them to receive the correct treatment, it may be that their illness would remain longer. This problem continues due to the conflict of advice between religious and medical establishments.
Current depression research has indicated that taking part in religious activity may actually be one way to prevent depression. It is statistically plausible to claim that the fall in the number of actively religious people in Britain may link to the rise in cases of depression as the 2001 census reported by the National Office of Statistics showed that 15% of the population claim to have no religion. Maltby, J., Lewis, C.A., & Day, L. (1999), demonstrated that public measures of religiosity such as church attendance are sometimes associated with decreased levels of well being, where as private measures such as personal prayer are significantly associated with increased levels. These findings were confirmed by a study in the United States which showed that religious people were half as likely to become depressed as non-religious people, however, Wolpert, L. (2001) also showed failure to attend services did increase levels of depression. It would make sense that having a feeling of an omnipotent god to listen to your problems would reduce the feeling of depression; an idea posed by Cinnirella, M., & Loewebthal, K.M. (1999); where as the judgement of other people through church attendance may increase these depressive feelings. Yet to tell people they should pray to prevent depression is highly controversial. People want increased freedom to decide if they want to be part of a religious group, so to be instructed to perform certain religious actions does not fit in with this freedom ideal.
James, O. (1997) proposed that a logical way to combat depression would be to restrict people's freedom, reducing the number of goods available, and increasing health care facilities, even trying to install a sense of religion within people. However, it is likely that the majority of un-depressed people would never consider these restrictions. If the structure of this society does not seem to work perhaps the answers need to come from other countries. Wolpert, L. (2001) describes Morita Treatment used in the East which allows people to learn about their illness for one to two months, the first stage involves 10 days of bed confinement with no television. This would help people in Britain who need to be immediately withdrawn from the source of their faulty depressive thoughts. Morita treatment was rejected by the United States, however, if people cannot be cured using the British system available at the moment, and society does not want to reduce its levels of freedom, treatment like this may be the only option.