The dilemma of whether animals possess culture has been tackled in many different ways, primarily because definitions of culture come from different perspectives, the biological approach focuses on information which is processed non-genetically, whereas the psychological approach is concerned with the cognitive and learning mechanisms employed by different species, (Boesch et al, 1998). So far no single definition of culture has gained universal acceptance, (Byrne et al, 2004) other than the basic idea that culture involves social learning. Many cultural definitions are also based on a human concept of culture, these human concepts are often transposed onto a particular animal species, and when not found it is determined that animals do not possess culture, (Boyd, 1995). However, it could be argued that a human definition of culture is one definition, and it should be expected that other species may have cultural aspects to their behaviour which are not seen in humans. Definitions of culture range from the relatively non-cognitive that culture can be seen in patterns of behaviours, to the view that possessing the capacity for imitation and a theory of mind are the only ways for a species to exhibit culture. It could be the high levels of cognitive ability associated with culture are misguided and we can speak of animals having culture in lower cognitive terms. For example it is possible to question the need for higher cognitive processes such as imitation as being necessary for culture; this could be an example of looking for the presence of human cultural actions in the behaviour of other species.
A simple form of social interaction is when species learn via patterns of behaviour and therefore exhibit culture, (Byrne et al, 2004). White et al (2000) presents an example of patterns of mate behaviour which are transmitted from one female quail to another. A focal female is exposed to two types of males with a test female watching, after viewing the mating the test female has to choose a mate for herself. Results showed the test female was more likely to copy the mating preferences of the focal female, suggesting that females make the same choices they have seen others make, and so show patterns of social learning behaviour. It could be said that we can speak of animals having culture at what appears to be a low level of cognitive ability.
Byrne et al (2004) stresses that to define culture as pattern does not account for the cognitive capacity of a species, something they propose is a necessity for animals to be assessed as having culture. Perhaps a definition of culture requires behaviour to be acquired, so different types of cultural traditions can exist within the same species and within the same environment (Boesch et al 1998). This could be associated with higher levels of cognitive ability because within one species different groups have developed different cultural methods to solve the same problem.
Whithen, (2005) and Boesch et al (1998) noted that ant catching techniques used by Tai forest chimpanzees differ from chimpanzees that live at Gombe. Both ants and sticks are available at each site, yet Tai chimpanzees use a short stick to pick up just a few ants, whereas chimpanzees in Gombe swipe their hands along a longer stick to collect a large ball of ants. At Mahale where sticks and ants are both still available, chimpanzees do not ever eat ants. The varying degrees of behaviour appear to show different cultural traditions within the same type of environment, and so show culture within a species. However, Withen (2005) states that to prove this conclusively would require removing Tai chimpanzees to Gombe and vice versa to see if the behaviour continued in the new environment, as it should do if both habitats are the same - the ethical implications of this mean it is unlikely to occur!
A study conducted by Biro et al (2003) into nut cracking techniques of wild chimpanzees again shows that there are different cultural nut cracking techniques used by different groups. Most interestingly were the results of a female chimpanzee called Yo, a member of the Bossou group. The experiment involved presenting the group with the previously unseen coula nut; Yo proceeded to crack the nut expertly and with complete familiarity, suggesting she was an immigrant female who had previously lived in an area where these nuts were present. Yo had remembered both the nut and how to crack it for over 20 years. This memory for nut cracking seems to solve Withen's (2005) dilemma of moving chimpanzees from one location to another, here is a Chimpanzee which is believed to have done just that as she had the capacity to use a technique learnt from another social group. Yo appears to be an example of culture within a species when culture is defined as having different social patterns for the same activity in the same environment.
Culture as tradition which exist within species can also be seen when examining the abnormal behaviour of chimpanzees and rhesus macaques in captivity, (Hook, 2002) and again in the emergence of docile behaviour of wild male baboons (Saplosky et al, 2004). Hook's (2002) study examined the variance of abnormal behaviour such as faeces smearing, rocking and repetitive body movements, which suggest that social learning is involved in the acquisition of new abnormal behaviour. However, this raises important ethical implications for the study of culture in animals. Is it acceptable to say that chimpanzees have culture when examining those in captivity? Could it be that any animal which comes into contact with a human is influenced by the interaction, (Boesch et al, 1998)? For example the quail used in White et al's (2000) study may be more docile than their wild counterparts. As the animals studied by Hook et al (2002) exhibited abnormal behaviour in captivity, this should be a cause for concern, especially as the chimpanzees and monkeys would not exhibit these abnormal behaviours in the wild.
Perhaps the existence of cultural traditions necessarily requires tool use, as shown by the chimpanzees that use sticks to catch ants, (Byrne, 2004). It is generally agreed that during human evolution when a leap occurred in tool use, a cultural leap also occurred as social learning increased (O'Neil, 2005). Tool use demonstrates how social learning can be best optimised, for example forms produced by an individual accidentally may be produced for a purpose later on, with other group members seeing the tool and adding their developments to it. The original tool does not have to be re-invented by each group member and one can learn socially from another.
Involving tool use in a definition of culture again means that higher level cognitive processes are also in operation. Byrne at al (2004) compared the digging stick of the human to the chimpanzee ant-probes mentioned by Whithen (2005); they state that the chimpanzees stick is made using one distinct stage as opposed to a chain of events used to produce a digging stick, demonstrating the different cognitive requirements needed for both. It is important to examine the tool to see if it requires a greater level of cognitive ability and so more demand for social learning, and in return a further development of culture. Introducing a need for tool use for culture actually contradicts the definition of culture mentioned above, because the tools used by the chimpanzees are not sufficiently sophisticated to count as a true tool, which should involve a stage process in its creation.
Perhaps introducing tool use into the definition of culture, is nothing more than again trying to increase the level of cognitive ability needed for culture, which leaves humans as the highest point or pinnacle. After all it has been successfully argued that whales and dolphins have many diverse traditions without the need for tool use, (Deecke et al, 2000). Does a sophisticated level of tool use necessarily imply a higher cultural ability? Are chimpanzees which use sticks to eat ants cultural, or simply just good at thinking about tools (Mithen, 1998)? It may be that animals which do use tools have some sort of barrier between social activities and tool use which prevents them thinking about the tool use of others, so prevents social learning (Mithen, 1998). Perhaps it is not the tool use which is the important part in this definition, but the ability of one group member to imitate another, one member of a group could watch another crack a nut and know that they could also perform the same action. Being able to understand the actions of others in terms of the individual is known as having a theory of mind.
The definition of cultural development involving imitation and a theory of mind has to be carefully considered as it is possible to imitate at a mechanistic level. it could be that the quail used in White et al's (2000) experiment were imitating the mate preferences of others. However, this behaviour could be a simple mechanistic pattern which does not require the bird to have a theory of mind at all. Boyd (1995) argues that as well as mechanistic imitation there are many examples given for imitation in animals, which could be explained not by imitation but by independent learning. Hook et al (2002) provides the example of potato washing in Japanese macaques which many have claimed is a clear example of imitation, yet Boyd (1995) and Boesch et al (1998) claim that the macaques each learned to wash the potatoes separately which is why the behaviour took so long to spread between the group members.
The introduction of imitation into any definition of culture brings with it the concept of culture being passed from one generation to the next via non-genetic means, as imitation allows for inter-generation social learning. Boyd (1995) argues that social learning is present within many species however, cumulative cultural evolution is rare. This is when behaviour evolves which no single individual could invent, as the behaviour is a combination of many individuals' actions. Boyd (1995) proposes that one of the major requirements for this type of evolution is the capacity to imitate, for example a young baboon could watch its mother perform a task which the younger one later can also complete and in turn teach to its own offspring.
Whithen (2005) created an experimental situation to test the imitation ability of animals where artificial fruits were placed in a container, which could either be opened by twisting and pulling, or pushing a pair of sticks. Chimpanzees were tested and compared to human children on their ability to copy the technique used by the experimenter. The chimpanzees were more likely to ignore the experimenter's example than the children and so children were much better at imitation than their chimpanzee counterparts.
However, this experiment has some major flaws, which show how difficult it is to speak of animals demonstrating culture in terms of imitation. Twisting the sticks as the experimenter did was not necessary to open the box and whereas the chimpanzees did not copy this part of the behaviour children did - this could be interpreted to show that chimpanzees are both able to imitate and work on what they have seen, as opposed to children who imitate without question. Surely this cannot show that humans have a culture when chimpanzees do not. The second fault is that it is inherently biased towards the human participants as the children have to think about another human, where as the chimpanzees are meant to copy the experimenter who they cannot communicate with let alone comprehend (Mithen 1998). This experiment should not be cited as a proof that chimpanzees do not posses culture, but should be highlighted to demonstrate the difficulties is assessing imitation. The experiment again highlights the problem of experimenting on captive animals. Boesch et al (1998) highlights that captive chimpanzees regularly imitate where as wild chimpanzees rarely do.
Horowitz (2003) also questions the methodology used by Whitien (2005), he challenges the basic assumption that imitation is important for a species to be determined as cultural. Horowitz (2003) tested chimpanzees and human children using the same experimental technique as Whitien (2005) however, he also compared the results to the scores of imitation for 37 adult humans. The results were surprising, again it was found that children were good imitators, but the adult data looked more like the results produced by the chimpanzees than the children. Also the adults believed the task was 'to get the object from the box' and not to imitate at all. If adults did not realise the purpose of the study it seems certain the chimpanzees would not either! The methodological faults highlighted do not seem to support the assumption that only humans imitate and therefore are the only species to exhibit culture.
Are humans as continuously conscious of their actions as the use of imitation would imply? Young children in both experimental studies described seem to be intensely trying to learn via imitation, yet the results from the adults in the second study suggest that this conscious ability to imitate maybe lost, or other problem solving tools are developed (Horowitz, 2003). To look for evidence of imitation in other species as a sign of culture appears misguided because it is not always present in humans. This seems to be an example of humans defining culture in human terms and then looking for it in other species, without reflecting on the fact that imitation may just be one way to learn socially from others, whereas human adults and members of other species may learn in different ways, this does not make them any less cultural.
Learning via emulation could be a technique employed as opposed to imitation. Emulative learning is when an observer is drawn to the place where another member is acting upon the environment and learns the affordances of an object from what it sees, (Hook et al, 2002; Boesch et al, 1998). Gibson's Theory of Affordances states that an object 'affords' its purpose, or provides the perceiver with information about it and its use, (Gregory, 2004). One chimpanzee could discover that a stick may be used for catching ants, this chimpanzee leaves the stick by the ants' nest, and a second chimpanzee could perhaps afford from seeing the stick next to the ants how to use it. This chimpanzee could also perhaps add to the design, maybe bending the stick in a certain way which makes it more effective. Obviously this is a condensed version of what could occur in a chimpanzee's natural habitat however, yet it shows that animals may have other ways to learn socially without using imitation. This also challenges the problem presented by Mithen (1998), that through using affordances animals do not need to access the social behaviour information and tool use development at the same time, they can afford from a tool how it may have been used by another member of the species. Just as the chimpanzees in Gombe use a more effective stick to catch the ants than the Tai chimpanzees, imitation may be a more effective method of social learning than affording - but affording information still serves the same purpose.
It is possible to tentatively say that you can speak animals of having culture in the sense of having cultural traditions which can be different even in the same environment. When the definition of culture requires higher levels of cognitive ability, the difficulty becomes assessing this without being biased by what is considered human cultural behaviour. Many researchers look to define culture in human terms in order to comprehend human nature. However, if this human bias were to be dropped it is likely that more examples of culture could be spoken of in other species, as culture would be defined in a more appropriate way.