Research into intergroup relations and prejudice are topical areas in social psychology and are particularly relevant in contemporary society in regards to understanding sources of societal conflict and hostility. Allport (1954), argued that without a knowledge of the origins of hostility, 'we cannot hope to employ our intelligence effectively in controlling its' destructiveness,' (as cited in Tesser, p.425). Throughout history there has been copious examples of this 'destructiveness,' such as the genocide of Jews in Nazi Germany, the terrorist attacks on September 11 th 2001, and more recently the July 2005 bombings in London, to name but a few. This essay aims to discuss the role of theories and explanations on intergroup relations and prejudice, in terms of the extent that they can contribute to our understanding of such conflict, with the ultimate goal of reducing acts of terrorism and political violence. This essay will pay particular attention to the contemporary relations between America, and the Middle East.
Humans are functional social beings and therefore they actively construe the world around them by making inferences and categorisations on the basis of personal observations. Categorisation is a universal and essential procedure, which is often 'automatic and mindless, but with negative side effects,' (Brewer & Hewstone, 2004, p.115). The Social identity theory, proposed by Tajfel and Turner (1979) is a theory of group membership and intergroup relations defined by self categorisation, social comparison, and self concept in terms of identification with a specific group, (Hogg & Vaughan, 2002). Ultimatly the theory outlines the function of categorisation in regards to the creation of social identity. Once categorisations are formed issues of competition and rivalry occur, as demonstrated in classic experiment by Sherif, (1961, as cited in Brown) which discovered that intergroup rivalry occurred between two groups of boys even before competitions had been announced; therefore mere identification with a group based on categorisation seemed to trigger a sense of competitive rivalry. Leading on from this, Sherif's Realistic Conflict hypothesis argues that in intergroup situations in which competition arises, the relations between groups are marked by conflict and can result in ethnocentrism. Hence categorisation is significant as it is the basis not only of self identification but also of differentiation between the ingroup and outgroup. This differentiation can be established as the source of prejudice and ethnocentric values.
The process of categorisation is of great importance to the understanding of prejudiced attitudes as 'once formed, categories are the basis for normal prejudgement,' (Tesser, 1995, p.468). If based on competitive values, this prejudgement mainly contains negative connotations. Prejudice is defined as a hostility or antagonism towards individuals purely on the basis of their group membership, and is identified as the source of much of humanity's suffering, (Tesser, 1995). Prejudice, is therefore a social phenomena, as intergroup conflict is created in the social environment. If this hostility and conflict escalates, its effects can be disastrous. The Holocaust is a widely used example of the catastrophic effects of prejudice, as it can be explained as a function of social differentiations between groups, which ultimatly led to the mass murder of innocent civilians. The extent to which prejudice and intergroup relations can cause such acts of violence is alarming, and even more so when evidence suggests that these prejudices are difficult to reverse. This is because negative traits are easy to confirm but difficult to disconfirm, (Messic & Mackie, 1989).
As a result, the task of reducing acts of destructiveness and violence should be aimed at eliminating differentiation between social groups, especially when that differentiation is negative and competitive. Pettigrew, (1979, as cited in Tesser) called the emphasis of negative out group behaviours the 'ultimate attribution error,' as they are based on genralised stereotypical judgements. Differentiation of this nature can have deindividuating effects, as individual members of outgroups are increasingly perceived as a homogenous group, thus causing some individuals to feel a loss of social identity, which may result in antisocial behavioural acts, (Hogg & Vaughn, 2002). In order to reduce antisocial acts of violence due to competition and differentiation social psychologists have proposed ideas such as the contact hypothesis or the introduction of superordinte goals. Contact between groups is assumed to lead to friendlier and less prejudiced intergroup attitudes, and if conflictual goal relationships lead to hostile competition then it is assumed that superordinate goals should lead to co operation, (Brown, 1988). However the opportunity for contact between groups or the formation of superordinate goals are oversimplified solutions to a much greater problem, for example could suggestions such as these prove successful at reducing violence between America and the Middle East?
In regards to the troubles between America and the Middle East, the contact hypothesis or the formation of superordinate goals may be perceived as an unrealistic challenge, primarily due to the fact that they ignore the underlying problem of hierarchal imbalance. The social dominance theory argues that terror and violence between groups can be explained in terms of social dominance struggles. Therefore the superior group, in this case, America, is disproportionately dominant over the inferior group, the Arab community. This can lead to feelings of: unfairness, marginalisation and inferiority for the lower status group, which in turn can result in terrorist acts of violence. For instance;
Research into the social dominance theory in Middle Eastern countries is limited however the research that has been embarked on has yielded strong support for the link between status and violence. Levin et al., (2003) examined group identifications amongst Lebanese Muslims and Catholics, and how these identifications related to social dominance orientation (SDO) and support for violence against the West. It is important to note that religion plays a key role in the violence between America and the Middle East, Allport, (1954) suggested that thus far 'no one religion has succeeded at uniting the world,' (p.445). Religion is therefore an evidential source of differentiation; however religion was not the focus of this study. Results of Levin's study (2003) portrayed that SDO related negatively with Arabs and in turn, this group identification related positively to support for terrorist feelings that the 9/11 attacks on America were justified. Similarly a study by Henry et al., (2005) extended these findings to suggest that SDO among Middle Eastern citizens is a product of counter-dominance, and therefore Americans typically had a consistently positive SDO relationship where as there is a consistently negative SDO for the Lebanese. This suggests that SDO indicates support for violence directed at maintaining or reducing group based hegemony, especially depending on which hierarchal position your social group is in.
A contemporary example of SDO in action is the outbreaks of violence that are currently occurring in France. The failure of the 'French model' which was an incentive to integrate both French and International citizens and practice an 'ethnically colour blind' treatment of these groups, has been attributed as the cause of the current violence in France. As a result, the minority groups in France- seven million of whom are of Arab and African origin-feel that they have been shunted to urban cities in which unemployment is high, which increases the perception of an unequal status relationship. As an example, the ban on Muslim headwear in schools as part of a French incentive to promote integration has heightened the feeling of exclusion which in turn fed the rise of Muslim radicalism, (Bremner, 2005, p.7). This suggests that negative differentiation and a hierarchal imbalance can inflate to violent extremes. In addition, these findings can also be linked to the realistic conflict hypothesis; those in lower status urban cities feel that they are competing for scare resources.
According to Louis & Taylor (2002), the Americans have two options for dealing with terrorism, one which they call the 'dove' and the other the 'hawk' approach. Essentially the 'hawk' approach is based on; coercion, American power assertion and support for anti-American Muslim moderates. However these coercive approaches appear to be what led to intergroup violence and prejudice in the first place, and the application of this model may evoke cognitive alternatives which invest in the belief that status quo is unstable and illegitimate. This may lead to the assumption that social competition, perhaps by violent means is the solution, (Hogg & Vaughn, 2002).
The more diplomatic 'dove' approach essentially is the superior technique to tackle terrorism as it adopts a positive approach of reward and respect. An example of this approach (which evidently has been unsuccessfully applied in France) is the acceptance of multicultural societies; this increases the perception of intergroup permeability, which may undermine violent methods via social creativity. Social creativity refers to group based behavioural strategies that improve social identity without directly attacking the dominant group. Consequently this may encourage a more political and diplomatic as opposed to violent approach to the problem of intergroup inequality. This may lead the inferior group to believe that their voice will be heard without using violent action. As a result, Westerners can reduce the onset of violence by attempting to reduce the defensive norm violation by increasing the discernment among the Arab community-particularly Muslims-that positive and political outcomes are achievable.
The methods of reducing intergroup hostility proposed by Louis & Taylor (2002) deals with problems at present; however research has shown that methods of prejudice reduction can be successfully incorporated at a younger age, primarily in education. A study by Eliot, (1968, as cited in Hogg & Vaughn) suggested that prejudice could be learned, simultaneously implying that it could be unlearned on the basis that if children experienced stigmatisation than they would be aware how unpleasant it is and should be less likely to replicate it. In addition Woolf et al., (2005) suggested that education can be a primary source of intervention. If children are taught how to think independently and critically than there is a possibility that this could 'counter the tendency in humans towards blind obedience to authority...in situations supporting the promotion of inter and intrapersonal violence,' (p.122). If education can inhibit the development of ethnocentric values, and prejudice against those that appear different, and in turn enhance assimilation and multicultural values; than the onset of extreme prejudice can be reduced. Therefore if children are taught more about other cultures and religions, the differentiation between people from countries such as the Middle East and themselves will not be as acute as at present. Sadly however, formal education only has a marginal impact on the reduction of prejudice if children are exposed to prejudice outside the classroom in the form of media, family and peers.
If education is paired with the aid of external sources such as propaganda and legislation, the possibility of reducing prejudice at a young age and maintaining less ethnocentric values is more viable. The establishment of a legal norm may not overtly control prejudice but rather it challenges its open expression, and provides awareness in the form of a social conscience of its existence. 'People need and want their consciences bolstered by law, and is nowhere more true than the area of group relations,' (Allport, 1954, p.471). Furthermore attempts to change prejudiced attitudes through propaganda have met with variable success, media is utilised as a source of information, and thus it is most successful when dealing with a poorly informed public. However, Cooper & Jahoda, (1947, as cited in Tesser, p. 500) argued that prejudice people developed a highly effective mechanism to evade anti-prejudice media messages. Furthermore if this information contains mixed messages, for example the reporting on the war in Iraq, which is highly debated in the public, the effect of propaganda may be diluted.
The problem of intergroup relations and prejudice is multifaced and beyond the scope of this essay; the challenge of reducing these acts of prejudice such as terrorism and political violence is also multifaced. Returning to Allport's quotation, now that we know more about the origins of hostility, can we employ our intelligence effectively in controlling its' destructiveness? According to the research and findings of social psychologists the answer is yes, but not by one single approach. Prejudice and intergroup hostility must be challenged from all levels, in both a direct and indirect manner. By challenging prejudice norms and attitudes in a constructive way, using tools such as; cooperation, acceptance, the media and education, then in turn the acts of violence that arise due to these prejudices should also be reduced. In this sense social psychologists have contributed to public knowledge on the making, and in turn the possibility of diminishing acts of violence based on intergroup relations and prejudice.