Mr. & Mrs. Hurst purchased their matrimonial home in 1984, registered in their joint names and holding it as tenants in common under a constructive trust. They both signed the document, which recorded that a survivor could give a good receipt of moneys on purchase. No express declaration was made as regards the share of each person. The money for the purchase came partly from the sale of the old property jointly held by them, contribution from Mrs. Hurst's father and a mortgage in the name of Mr. & Mrs. Hurst, secured on the property. A question that arose was whether the money given by Mrs. Hurst's father was intended only for Mrs. Hurst or to both of them. But the registrar, on evidence found that it was intended only for Mrs. Hurst.
Mr. Hurst, a solicitor was made bankrupt. He had provided information to his former partners that he had a 50% share in the property. And later, in a letter to his solicitor he claimed that he had erred and that he held a part of the 50% of his share on trust for his wife. In 2001 Mrs. Hurst made a written statement, i.e., an Individual Voluntary Agreement (IVA) stating that Mr. & Mrs. Hurst shared the property on a 50/50 basis beneficially. But the IVA failed. Mr. Supperstone, trustee in bankruptcy of Mr. Hurst brought proceedings for the possession and sale of property on an equal basis. However, now Mr. Hurst argues that he is entitled to only a 15% share whereas Mrs. Hurst is entitled to an 85% beneficial share. They claimed under a resulting trust. The issue before the court is to quantify their respective shares.
Dismissing the appeal, the court Held-
Mr. & Mrs. Hurst was entitled to a 50% share. In identifying the share recourse is to be had to the actual or assumed common intention at the time of purchase rather than at any later date. But recourse may be had to a conduct at a later date, which may be treated as showing what the intention at the date of purchase had been.
An additional relevant question that lies between the conclusion that the parties had an actual or presumed intention to share the beneficial ownership and the quantification of the respective shares is whether they should have imputed to them an intention to own as beneficial joint tenants as opposed to tenants in common. But the issue of quantification of shares arises only under a tenancy in common because joint tenants cannot hold in unequal shares; if the tenancy were severed they would share equally.
The too ready assumption of tenancy in common in cases of matrimonial homes begs an important prior question since joint tenancy is neither unjust nor inappropriate in cases of this nature.
The statements in the IVA did not give rise to a trust; they were mere statements made to the husband's creditors of the wife's willingness to co - operate for the sale of property and realisation of the husband's interest for the creditor's benefit.
In the absence of any actual or presumed intention, the court looks into the parties conduct both at the time of purchase of the property and subsequent to it and determines a share, which is fair and reasonable according to the situation. It is wrong to infer an intention, which the parties never intended. It would be unreal to suppose that both the spouses had the same intention at the date of purchase without any discussion to that effect.
The learned registrar in his decision used the IVA as a compelling factor in determining a fair share. It would be wrong for Mrs. Hurst to claim a share greater than 50% since she had stated in the agreement to the creditors that her husband and she had equal beneficial interest.
The underlying legal principle in deciding the case was the application of the fairness test whereby the parties' conduct have to be taken to decide the outcome in a way not to cause any detriment to the party claiming from the property. The parties' intention at the time of, or subsequent to the purchase has to be taken into account to determine the size of the beneficial interest.
This case mainly deals with the doctrine of constructive trusts. Although the wife's contribution was more than the husband's, the registrar reached the conclusion that they intended to share the beneficial interest equally under constructive trust instead of unequal shares under a resulting trust.
The case is set out to determine the shares of the parties and bring about an outcome desirable on the novel concept of fairness. In a resulting trust, no such thing can be used because the one and only factor that determines the shares is contribution to the purchase price. But under a constructive trust the court gives due consideration to the parties' intentions.
In conclusion I would like to say that I agree with the outcome of the case. It was only fair that the creditors did not lose out their interest because of Mrs. Hurst's greed in claiming a greater share than she intended to and was willing to give. The IVA, though not a conclusive proof of their intention to share the beneficial interest equally, was nevertheless a persuasive document. And the parties' conduct in general was proof of this.
The case, in effect is similar to the cases decided previously on the issue of constructive trusts and the deputy judge, for the most part relied on the Court of Appeal decision in Oxley v Hiscock in reaching the decision. The 'fairness principle' was applied very aptly in deciding the case. The deputy judge complemented the legal doctrines of constructive trusts and tenancies in common with the equitable principle of 'Fairness', which in my view is very important.
On a consideration of the facts, this case is different since almost all the cases that have come before the court till now have been cases of matrimonial home where the cohabitees claim interest on the breakdown of the relationship. In that sense the case may set a precedent if the House of Lords decides a similar issue in the future. The deputy judge applied the same law applied in the other cases of determining the interest although the legal title is owned jointly, saying there is no real difference in the underlying legal analysis due to this.
On the whole the case has brought about a desired result. And has been fair to the claimant, who would have otherwise been the weaker party.