The idea of behaviourism has been around for a long time but was made famous by the work of Ivan Pavlov. He conditioned the behaviour of dogs to salivate at the sound of a bell by repeatedly associating the ring of a bell with presentation of food. B. F. Skinner extended this idea whilst working with pigeons to show that animals could be trained to perform various acts in order to get food, as long as the association was made between food and the desired response. Skinner always recommended positive reinforcement such as rewards over negative reinforcement or punishment, (Eysenck, 2002). Such ideas have gradually leaked into the classroom, to increase desired behaviour from children, and even into the National Health Service, to attempt to 'cure' psychological disorders.
One major criticism of the behaviouristic approach addresses the claim that behaviour can be explained without reference to mental activity. Human beings have a sense of feeling and of free will; behaviourism disregards this and sees the personality as a set of outward reactions rather than a distinct entity. This means that psychological disorders are not examined for their cause or brain dysfunction but simply observed. As a treatment in the practice of mental health this is often dismissed by cognitive scientists developing intricate internal information processing models and by medical experts who view the brain in terms of chemical reactions, (Comer, 1992). Despite this opposition though, behavioural therapy is currently used for the treatment of many psychological disorders and can have excellent results. It is perhaps fair to say that the success of such therapy will depend mostly on the type of disorder and its origin, if known, as there are a number of disorders that are considered too inbuilt to be changed merely through training.
Certain kinds of psychological disorder can be reasonably explained by the behaviourist model and these tend to be phobias and anxiety disorders rather than personality disorders. Phobias are often explained as the result of classical conditioning, much like Pavlov's dogs. A person learns to associate a traumatic reaction (e.g. fear, shock) with a particular occurrence even though the level of fear is not in proportion with the possible danger. For example contact with a very aggressive dog as a child may cause someone to avoid situations with dogs in future so the fear is not stopped. However this can be effectively treated with behavioural therapy. One form is systematic desensitisation where a patient learns to associate a relaxed, happy state with the idea of the phobic situation and learns to gradually accept it through the opposite of the original conditioning. This treatment is a highly appropriate one, which can be explained due to the cause of the phobia being a behavioural one, therefore the treatment works like the cause in reverse. Wolpe's original method of constructing a hierarchy of fears, training in relaxation then graded exposure (1969) was updated by Shapiro (1989) who replaced muscle relaxation with induced eye movements. This proved very popular in the treatment of traumatic memories with over 50% moving from clinical to normal levels on the Impact of Events scale, (Greenwald, 1996). Other methods include flooding, where a patient is placed directly in the feared situation for some time to allow reality testing. This may be uncomfortable at first but results are quicker. Despite the success rate though, further research has shown that neither relaxation nor construction of a hierarchy of fears is necessary, and that exposure to real feared stimulus is better than imaginary ones. Whilst treatments boast that 70 % show some improvement in symptoms, few patients are ever completely free of anxiety and the systematic desensitisation methods used are slow to show results, (Seligman, 1995).
Not all behavioural therapies use positive reinforcement as Skinner suggested though, and negative, punishing therapies have been used for many years. Aversion therapy is a form of behaviour modification that employs an unpleasant or even painful stimulus to prevent certain unwanted behaviour in patients. The first recorded use of this was in 1930 for the treatment of alcoholism, an area where it is still used today, but in the 1950s aversion therapy was widely accepted as a 'treatment' for sexual deviation such as homosexuality. Men could be shown images of attractive men whilst being administered an electric shock, and then shown pictures of women afterwards. In many cases this didn't work at all but simply gave its patients nightmares. Today aversion therapy is occasionally used on alcoholics, where chemicals such as disulfiram or Antabuse can be given, which react with alcohol to cause nausea and vomiting. The idea is to allow the patient to associate alcohol with the nausea and reduce or prevent excessive drinking, (Eysenck, 2002). Although this can have immediate beneficial effects, it is unethical to cause any patient such discomfort and often does not work in a number of cases where alcoholism has become a way of life and the cause is rooted in deeper psychological problems. Negative reinforcement is not such an effective way of altering behaviour as rewards. It is also criticised for being a controlling approach and it is sometimes asked in who's interest is the treatment - the individual or society? In cases such as alcoholism, paedophilia and antisocial personality disorder the treatment may work in the treatment situation but not in the unpredictable situations of real life, and they often target only the problem, not the cause of behaviour.
In many other disorders behaviourism is used but in conjunction with counselling drugs or cognitive therapy, and has a good success rate. Cognitive behaviour therapy is promoted in the Department of Health guidelines as the first line treatment for depression, eating disorders, panic disorder, anxiety disorders and deliberate self-harm. It is efficient, relatively easy to learn and easy to deliver, (Department of Health, 2000). In the treatment of anorexia nervosa patients are encouraged to understand their thought and behaviour patterns and try to change any behaviours that are harmful or not helpful. Behaviour therapy can be effective in improving positive behaviours but concentrates on current actions, never looking into the past. This often means that disorders improve for only a short period of time then reoccur, as the cause is not addressed. In the safety of a therapist's office behaviour therapy can seem to work well but often does not continue in the normal environment of the patient.
One such idea that has received this criticism is the token economies that are used in mental institutions. Although not strictly a form of treatment this system can be used to generally encourage desired behaviour and eliminate abnormal behaviour. Allyon and Azrin (1968) used a token economy with patients, giving them tokens for acts such as making their bed or brushing their hair, which could later be exchanged for pleasant activities. It was very successful and is implemented in many hospitals and even schools for children with behavioural disorders, however it can be seen that this is not indicative of real life and cannot continue indefinitely. Ideally people should learn to behave appropriately by themselves, not through bribery, but this is sometimes the only way of creating desired responses. Token economies are the most useful with groups who are particularly hard to treat, such as the chronically disturbed, schizophrenics, children and those with learning difficulties.
With patients who display deep personality disorders though, treatment can be very difficult as behaviour is hard to predict and rewards of this kind give little motivation. One particular example is narcissistic personality disorder, which is an all-pervasive disorder similar to alcoholism but worse. It consumes the whole personality and therefore cannot be changed at will with therapy or training. Narcissists display many reckless behaviours, some incontrollable, and so rational learning therapies rarely have any effect. It is these severe psychological disorders which cannot be treated by a strictly behavioural approach - although behaviour modification can help with some effects, there is no effective therapy for narcissism itself, (Young, 1990).
It appears then that behaviour therapy, in its many forms, can be a useful and well-used form of treatment for some psychological disorders but is rarely recommended as the sole treatment for any mental health problems. In general terms, behaviourism is an effective approach only when used along side other therapies and treatments, including cognitive therapy, counselling or even pharmacological prescriptions. The strictly behavioural approach is only successful in more minor cases of disorders such as posttraumatic stress, anxiety disorders or phobias. Any long term, deeply rooted disorders require careful examination of causes and the mental processes which accompany observable behaviour. It might be said that taken alone behaviour therapy is as effective as other popular therapies alone (Smithal. 1980), but the best approach is a more diverse mixture of psychoanalytic theory, medical treatment and cognitive behaviour therapy.