Tort is a civil wrong which neither a breach of contract nor a breach of trust. The main goal of tort is to compensate for injury suffered by the victim and try to put him back to the position had the accident not occurred.
In this essay I would look at several areas of law which tort law delves into, its implications and what can be done to improve the law.
Negligence is one of the important areas under tort law. A person owes a duty of care to several persons and would be liable if he breaches the same. There are special duties owed, e.g. in cases of nervous shock. But there is a tension as to the degree of proximity (the "neighbour principle") required to be liable under this. Until recently the 'foreseeability of injury by shock' was the basis of compensating victims of nervous shock (King v Phillips [1953] 1 QB 429)
. Now there are 'primary victims' who are at a risk of physical damage and 'secondary victims' who are not at risk of suffering physical damage, but saw or heard the accident, which caused the shock. He can only recover if he is a person of "normal fortitude" and "customary phlegm".
In Page v Smith
 the claimant (primary victim) did not suffer any physical damage in the accident but saw a revival of chronic fatigue syndrome, which he had suffered a few years before. The defendant was held liable for psychiatric illness. It was laid down that the defendant could only be liable if the risk of psychiatric illness was reasonably foreseen or the risk of physical injury was foreseen. There was the earlier case of Bourhill v Young
 where the claimant who was just a bystander miscarried as a result of witnessing a motorcycle accident from a distance. Held, was not a foreseeable victim. The law is rather absurd because had she suffered physical injury she could have recovered for that as well as her mental trauma but since she didn't, she could not recover for anything.
Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
 was a case where the relatives and friends of Hillsborough disaster victims brought claims. It failed because there was no sufficient proximity in 'time and space'. The people did not suffer injury as a result of witnessing the incident in its "immediate aftermath". The court also held that the people who brought the claims had no close tie of love and affection. It was restricted to spouses, parent and children of victims. Psychiatric illness resulting from witnessing the incident on TV was not actionable. The judges may have had the floodgates issue at the back of their mind when they limited the persons who could bring an action for damages. In Chadwick v British Railways Board
 the claimant assisted in the Lewisham Train crash by giving injections to the injured by crawling between the two collided trains. He suffered clinical depression as a result of witnessing the incident and committed suicide. His wife could recover since rescuers were primary victims. Contrasting this is the case of White v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
 where the policemen who had assisted the victims in the Hillsborough football disaster could not recover for the harm suffered. Held, rescuers were not primary victims or a special category of people. But Lord Steyn has said that it should not make a difference because: a rescuer is a rescuer is a rescuer. In McLoughlin v O' Brian
 the House of Lords held, liability was owed only if the claimant was present at the scene of the incident, or was a person who witnessed the incident in the "immediate aftermath" and had ties of love and affection with the victim.
The 'secondary victims' are to prove that close friends or relatives witnessed a 'shocking' event.
Another important area under tort law is Economic loss. As a principle pure economic loss is not recoverable unless it is consequential to physical loss. This is an area of contract law but tort fills in for the gaps created by contract law. Here it only compensates losses, but does not restore status quo like under the other areas. It also redresses the wrongs done by contract law. Tort law provides remedies for strangers too.
Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd. v Heller and Partners Ltd. is the leading case which says that a person is responsible for economic loss arising out of negligent misstatement if there is a special relationship between the parties and there is a voluntary assumption of responsibility. These restrictions are placed reduce the number of cases coming before the court, i.e., the floodgate issue. If there were a disclaimer then the person is exempt from responsibility; if someone with special skill gives any advice it is reasonably foreseeable that there would be a reliance on the statement, making him liable. White v Jones
 says the relationship of a solicitor and beneficiary of will is a fiduciary relationship and a special one.
Another important yet rare area of tort law is awarding punitive damages (exemplary damages). These are only awarded if they are required for adequately punishing the defendant. Rookes v Barnard
 is the authority on this, it says that punitive damages can only be awarded if the person was a servant of the Government at the time of commission of the tort; he committed it because he figured he would make more money than he would have to pay as damages or there is a statutory award.
Having looked at few important areas under tort law one would think that the law deals with a number of issues. If a case does not fall under any other civil law, it falls under tort. But we can see that not only does tort law deal with cases which other branches of law do not deal with but also ones that fall under categories of law, like contract law (economic loss - contractual breach). Again, the aim of tort law is not to punish people, but to compensate the party and restore status quo. The award of punitive damages falls under criminal law. These only increase the number of cases. But exemplary damages are only awarded rarely. Usually regular or special damages are awarded.
Tort law has been there for centuries and there cannot be a sudden change, the judges cannot say that they would only deal with particular areas and reject the rest; it is expected of them to address the claims of the injured party. Yet it would be desirable if tort law limited its scope to promote efficiency.
Yet another important problem under tort law is it lacks coherence. When we look at the cases above we can notice that there are conflicting decisions. Judges mostly decide cases on policy arguments than relying upon precedents. This leads to incoherence in the law. But this has been the problem prevailing since times immemorial. But it would be welcome to see tort law being more coherent, if the judges follow the 'rule of precedents', there would automatically be more coherence. And also if the law concentrates on its primary aim of compensating for the injuries suffered and tries not to extend the law, then tort law would be more certain. Extending the law would only increase the cases before it and would make the law inefficient and incoherent which is not desirable.