In this essay I would be talking about the role of principles in deciding cases and if its use would bring about coherence or incoherence in the legal system. In doing so I would be looking at the theories of Dworkin and the Critical Legal Studies Movement (herein referred to as CLS) and what each one said about the same.
A principle is "a standard to be observed, not because it will advance or secure an economic, political, or social situation, but because it is a requirement of justice or some other dimension of morality". For e.g.: "A person should not benefit from his own wrong". So if a person kills his relative to inherit property, he should not be allowed to inherit even if he's the heir since he has done something morally objectionable. The law includes both rules as well as principles and the judges must use them to decide cases and arrive at a decision. This is the view of Dworkin. The CLS movement on the other hand says that all reasoning is political, and that the law has so many contradictions, even the use of principles would not help the judges in their decisions and what the law, rather the whole legal system needs is a complete reconstruction.
The essay will be divided into the following heads:
Ronald Dworkin is an American philosopher born in 1931. His contribution to Jurisprudence is commendable. His theory has little resemblance to the natural law theories yet Dworkin regards himself as a natural lawyer. It may sometimes be useful to see Dworkin as establishing a third alternative, being neither legal positivism nor natural law theory: an interpretive theory of law.
He says that law does not comprise only of rules but also legal principles. The rules apply in an "all or nothing" fashion, which means that the rules either apply completely or do not apply at all. When there are rules then the cases are decided on them and these are the 'easy cases' because rule is directly applied. There is "no law greater than the law", he says. In cases where there are no rules, the principles come into picture. Principles were especially important because of the role they played in judicial reasoning and the judges invoke them when the law is controversial. A case where principles supersede rules is McLoughlin v O' Brian
. These are what Dworkin calls as 'Hard Cases'. Even here the judge is obliged to follow the law but they are influences by way of principles. The judges do have a certain amount of discretion but it does not mean that they are allowed to do whatever they like; they have to give effect to the meaning of the law/ statute. Principles have weight favouring one result and also because it supports the argument that like cases must be treated alike but there may be but often are many principles favouring contrary results on one legal question.
Dworkin calls his judge Hercules who is a superhuman with supreme intelligence who decides the so-called 'Hard Cases' and cases, which fit best with the institutional history of his community. He is thought to have an answer for every legal question. But this is not possible and people have criticises him as being a myth. It is impossible for a judge to be 'all - knowing' and invincible.
Apart from principles there are also policies; they tend to develop community goals. When there is a conflict between principles and policies, the principles take precedence since they describe rights whereas policies focus on social and community goals. This is what is called 'Rights as trumps'. Since rights are a part of law and the legal system they have to be given importance. Only 'law as integrity' provides adequate protection for individual rights; certainly positivism or pragmatism do not.
The CLS movement came into the scene in the 1970s in the United States because of their dissatisfaction with the current legal system. They wanted to achieve an egalitarian society.
The main features of CLS are they treat law as politics, law as ideology, the radical indeterminacy of law and their claim that law protects the powerful and legitimates injustice. The CLS rejects formalism, i.e., there is no distinct form of legal reasoning.
For CLS everything that is law is politics. And everything political is contested. As a result of this there is no 'one right answer' as Dworkin calls it. There are different approaches to legal decisions and to legal doctrine, which can be equally rational and legitimate as forms of argumentation.
There are contradictions in law. There are 'Principles' and 'Counter - Principles' which is a reflection of the political power in the society. Thus the Principle become the expression of the main political power and the counter - principle an expression of the less powerful. Both operate in tandem in the society and this causes contradictions (or exceptions). The contradiction is not problematic for the judge alone but it is symbolic of the society's position. E.g.: The principle of contractual freedom which says that the contracting parties are free to contract in any manner they wish to, whereas there is the counter - principle which restricts them from contracting for illegal activities and so on. The CLS scholars prefer to use the words 'Principle' and 'Counter - Principles' rather than 'contradictions' because this has a precise logical meaning to it and the CLS scholars do not use it in this way, so they use a very apt terminology to avoid any misunderstanding. For the CLS even if a judge attempts to use principles to arrive at the one answer it is not possible because there is always a counter principle, which creates an exception. There are always the external (political) factors, which operate on a judge creating an influence in arriving at a decision.
The CLS writers say that the legal system has a lot of vices, which can be rectified by the process of "trashing", "deconstruction" and "delegitimation". "Trashing" shows that the dominant legal doctrines do not work, are not coherent and are fundamentally contradictory. "Delegitimation" is achieved by showing that the liberal theory is incoherent in fundamental ways. Delegitimation does not mean that the law is illegitimate; it says we need not accept everything in the legal system as right. Alan Freeman in "Truth and Mystification in Legal Scholarship" says this:
The CLS believe that the legal system is inherent with so many contradictions that there has to be a change in the system and not the law alone. The trashing is achieved through a deconstructive analysis, which reveals that in each supposed solution a counter - principle has been overlaid by some privileged ruling principle, whereas the counter - principle has quite as rational a title to govern decision, as has the dominant principle. Neil MacCormick in his work 'Reconstruction after deconstruction' opines that what is required is more of reconstruction than deconstruction. Rational reconstruction is where the existing legal material are put in manner to achieve coherence, than the complicated process of deconstruction exposing the incoherence and trying to bring out a whole new legal system. The judges are allowed certain discretion in cases, which have to be looked at from an individual point of view. Legal systems tend towards chaos almost as strongly as they tend toward system. Each attempt at legislative simplification will only generate more complexity. But the CLS writers want a process of "Deconstruction", i.e., re - analysing the whole preliminary material. This way they would form a whole new legal system, which is coherent, where there is no scope for any contradictions.
But this is not possible because there will always arise a case where a different result would arise because of the peculiarity of the case. And 'Every law has an exception'. The CLS movement is fading away and does not have much influence over the legal system today.
Dworkin refers to political morality but says there can be a determinate answer fitting into the legal system - 'one right answer'. But the same political morality in CLS gives rise to indeterminacy. They propound the possibility of political choice through application of counter - principles. For the CLS law is political but Dworkin wants to steer clear of politics.
Dworkin says that by keeping the discretionary power of the judge to the minimum, there will be coherence. The work of the judges is to interpret and give meaning to the law already present and not to create new law. But CLS believe that law is necessarily inconsistent, incoherent and contradictory and if any change is to be brought about it is through the process of 'trashing' and 'deconstruction'.
CLS believes that all decisions are political. Dworkin also says that the decisions judges makes must be political in one sense, that they are liked by one political group and disliked by the other. It is not that the judge decides on party politics but makes decisions that are characteristic of one political party rather than the other.
When we look at Dworkin's theory and the view of the CLS writers we see that though their aim is the same, i.e., to bring about consistency in the legal system the routes they take is different. Dworkin believes that by keeping the judges' discretionary power to the minimum and using well-established rules and principles in deciding cases by interpreting them, there would be coherence. Whereas the CLS writers believe that any at interpretation either by using rules or principles would not fetch any result. A complete change has to be brought about. The law is so flawed and has so many contradictions; if the judges were given discretion it would only aggravate the problem. The process of 'trashing' whereby all the inconsistencies are highlighted and 'deconstruction' where all the legal material are re - analysed would help in the endeavour to make law more consistent.
The 'one right answer' of Dworkin is not an acceptable one, because every question has more than one answer, we can just think of this as a better alternative but not the right answer. As for CLS, speaking in a realistic way whatever is done the legal system will still have its own contradictions. The Utopian legal system is impossible to achieve. Why do we have to regard an incoherent and inconsistent legal doctrine as a flaw in the system, especially if we are arguing that law is necessarily inconsistent and contradictory?
To sum up the use of principles is very important in deciding cases but wherever possible well-established rules may be used. Otherwise there will be inconsistency in the law because the judge will use principles and may be give an altogether different decision not consistent with the rules. So their power must be curtailed according to Dworkin. But for the CLS scholars whether a case is decided by rules or principles there will be inconsistency in the law; so the legal system has to undergo a change. But it better to use rules and maintain some coherence than try attempt a complete change with the result that the position will still remain the same. Every system has flaws.