The Domestic Violence Crime and Victims Act (DVCVA) 2004 came into force to deal with cases where the death of a child was brought about by someone in the household and it is difficult to prove which one of them did it.
In this essay I would first be answering the problem question, giving the reasons for my decision. Then I would move on to the next portion and analyse the quote from Abbott. This would include explaining the position of law at that time and the development of the law and the present position under the DVCVA 2004.
Section 5 of the DVCVA 2004 defines the 'Offence' of causing or allowing the death of a child or a vulnerable adult. S. 5(1) (a) says that a person is guilty of an offence if a child dies as a result of an unlawful act of a person who is a member of the household having frequent contact with him. A "member of a household", as defined under S. 5(4) (a) not only includes parents or persons who live in the house but also people who visit them so frequently and for such periods as is sufficient to regard them as a member. If we apply this definition to the present case we can see that Dan would be regarded as a "member" of the household since he was living there with Maureen and the child Valerie.
Dan had always been a little cruel to Valerie, slapping her on two occasions and often getting annoyed if she cried. Dan can be convicted of this offence because he committed an unlawful act of throwing the child against the wall, which caused her death. That he was drunk is not an excuse because drunkenness is not a sufficient excuse under all cases in Criminal Law, though there are may be exceptions under certain circumstances.
The mens rea for murder is malice aforethought, i.e., intent to kill or to cause grievous bodily harm (GBH). And the actus reus is the actual act performed. In the present case Dan did not have the necessary intention to cause death or GBH. In Woollin
 the principle was slightly extended to say that a person could be guilty of murder if he foresaw death as a virtual certainty. Woollin
 was where a father who was provoked threw his three - month old son with great force as a result of which the child died. Here there was no intent to kill or cause GBH but death was seen as a "virtual certainty". He was first convicted of murder but on appeal the conviction was substituted for manslaughter. But if the foreseeable result could be seen as intended then the person can be convicted of murder. Here, Dan did not have the intent either to cause death or GBH. He might have been reckless but recklessness does not form a necessary intent for murder. Since he was in a drunken state he might not have reasonably expected to understand the consequences of his act. But drunkenness is no excuse for murder.
Manslaughter is where the defendant commits the actus reus of murder but the necessary mens rea for murder, i.e., malice aforethought is absent (involuntary manslaughter), or where the mens rea is present the act under the circumstances was regarded as mitigating the seriousness of the offence (voluntary manslaughter). In constructive manslaughter the defendant must commit an unlawful act that exposes the victim to some risk. It may seem like Dan may be convicted of manslaughter since he acted recklessly. Dan was irritated by Valerie's crying and threw her in a fit of rage. His act is not one of provocation rather a loss of self - control because of anger and this is not a defence for manslaughter. So he may be convicted of manslaughter. And there may be a foreseeability of death resulting from the act like in the case of Woollin. It is thought or at least intended the new offence under S.5 DVCVA is less serious than manslaughter. The S.5 offence says that since a person belongs to a particular household he would have a duty to protect the child against any risk even if he is not the parent. There is no such duty element under murder or manslaughter. This is a separate class of offence where it involves only the "members" of a particular household and would not come under the general class of persons under murder or manslaughter. And child killings are, in a way more peculiar than the other general killings and they need to be treated differently and the new offence under S. 5 DVCVA does just the same. The jury, under S. 6 (4) of DVCVA considers all the evidence before it before deciding if it is a case or murder/ manslaughter or the new S. 5 offence. Here, I feel that the Crown Prosecution Service was sufficiently convinced that it was neither murder nor manslaughter because there was no 'intention' on Dan's part to cause any harm to Valerie. And this, I feel is one of the most influential factors for which Dan would not be guilty of murder or manslaughter.
Maureen would also be convicted because as the mother she had the responsibility of taking care of taking care of the child. On two occasions Dan had slapped Maureen and she did not take any reasonable steps like reporting the incident to the police or the social service. Though these are not the only steps these are considered reasonable since there was a threat to the child. The only thing she did was to tell Dan not to repeat it again. And despite these incidents she still allowed Dan to visit the house again.
There was a significant risk of harm being caused to Valerie from Dan (S. 5 (1) (c)). When Dan came to her house drunk she must have foreseen that there may have been some risk to the child and should have ensured that reasonable steps were taken to protect Valerie from any hurt by Dan. Instead she wanted to escape this and went to the shower. So under S. 5 (1) (d), Maureen would also be liable to be convicted for the offence for failing to take reasonable steps to protect the child from any unlawful act.
Any risk would not amount to a conviction. It is highly qualified offence: the risk which D ought to have been aware of is a 'significant' one of 'serious injury' and the death must have occurred in the circumstances that D ought to have foreseen. If we consider this Maureen might not have foreseen that Dan might throw Valerie resulting in her death because on the previous occasions he had only slapped her. The degree of the offence is slightly higher. But it is not something that is entirely different in its nature; in all the cases there is infliction of physical harm to the victim. The fact that Dan was drunk and was in a bad mood is also factors to be considered and the risk was slightly higher than on the previous occasions. So I would favour the argument to convict her.
Abbott
 says that in cases of joint enterprise when there is no evidence to show that one person committed the offence rather than the other, both of them may be acquitted. It is not a necessity, as is quoted in the case itself but the jury 'may' decide to acquit them. And in most cases they do unless there is at least some evidence pointing in favour of one or both the parties. This was the position of law at that time which may be evidenced in certain cases.
In Marsh and Marsh v Hodgson
 there was clear evidence that the child suffered injuries from blows with hand and evidence pointed out that both the parents were present. So joint enterprise could be inferred. In Gibson & Gibson
 both the parents were silent and no evidence pointed out to one rather than the other. There was joint custody that led them to believe that both of them were responsible. Lane and Lane
 disapproved Gibson and Gibson
 and held that when there was no clear evidence of a joint enterprise one could not be inferred in the absence of an explanation. There might have been no explanation because s/he had none to give. In this case the mother and stepfather of the child were charged of manslaughter of the child who died of brain fracture. The appellants were not present at the time when the child may have sustained injuries but they might have been there for short periods. Both denied responsibility and lied. But lies did not lead the court to believe that they were responsible and the principle under Abbott upheld.
There was the issue of whether there was a right to silence and if the defendants would be guilty for not giving evidence when indeed there was none. The 'problem' of silence is addressed under S. 35 Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 which says that a person has to give evidence unless his guilt is not an issue or he suffers from some condition which makes it undesirable to do so. Sub section (2) says if the prosecution satisfies itself that evidence can be given but when the accused chose not to without a good cause then they may draw inferences as appear proper. If there is no evidence of the crime then the case fails.
In most of the cases where the accused did not give evidence they used to be invariably acquitted unless there was clear evidence of their guilt. When the parents did not give evidence for cause of the child's death, one or both the parent might have 'got away with murder'. They believed that it was important not to convict an innocent defendant; it would lead to miscarriage of justice. The Law Commission proposed a reform in the said area of law.
They recommended that the must be a statutory duty to give evidence, applicable to the people who were responsible for the child at the time of its death. Their proposals were to draw inferences from the parent's silence, but the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice (1993) rejected their proposal. The breach of the right to silence could not be justified. Art. 6 of the European Convention on Human rights emphasises on the presumption of innocence. So this proposal, if accepted would be in contravention of the ECHR article.
There was also a proposal that the parent may be compelled to give account of incident subject to penalty but the Law Commission rejected it. There is the tension between the right to silence and the parent's duty towards the child.
To remedy the situation the Domestic Violence Crime and Victims Act 2004 came into force in cases where a child suffers an unlawful death and it can be proved that a small class of persons are responsible for the death, i.e., the persons who have frequent contact with the child. As already explained it is not only the parents but any person who is a "member" of the household would be held liable. As a member of the particular household a person is expected to have some responsibility toward the child. This applies both to the person who commits the act or fails to prevent the occurring of the incident. The maximum penalty is 14 years. The prosecution need not prove if the person was guilty of the act or failed to protect the victim against possible harm. Its main aim is to remedy the situation where the people remain silent about their act or blame each other. S. 5 of the DVCVA is a separate offence altogether and if any of the conditions of the section are fulfilled then the prosecution may find them guilty without having to take any account of their evidence.
So we can see that S. 5 DVCVA is a complete departure from the principle laid down under Abbott. Here the mere fact that a person was a "member" of the household and was present at the time of act or allowed the act to occur (omission) made him liable. Omission was not enough to hold a person guilty for murder or manslaughter except under very rare circumstances. While this is welcome because in most of the cases, following Lane and Lane
 people used to get away because they failed to give evidence, S.5 DVCVA may be stretching the law a little too much. It is certainly desirable to hold a person who is responsible for the unlawful act to be punished but omission to act may not be the reason for injury or death at all times. And sometimes a person may not be able to foresee that such an act might result and take precautions at all times. If it was limited to only the victim's close relatives, say the mother/ father of a child to be responsible for failure to take reasonable steps then it would have been more reasonable. To hold someone responsible for failure to act merely because they live in the house for a sufficiently long time seems a little unreasonable. Failure to act is nothing but negligence and negligence may become the mens rea if seen this way.
The courts must be realistic when determining liability because of the likely range of defendants and impose liability based on the environment one lives in. In Stone and Dobinson
 no account of their mental weaknesses was taken into account and they were held guilty because of the relationship to the deceased. This can be seen as injustice. In the problem dealt with in part (A) it may not have been reasonably foreseeable that Dan would have thrown Valerie resulting in her death but Maureen would still be liable since she failed to take steps to prevent the unlawful act from occurring and that she should have reasonably foreseen the act as possible because of the earlier two incidents.
These are some examples of possible miscarriages of justice. But they may occur rarely since in most cases of convictions, the parties would be guilty of the offence.
The Domestic Violence Crime and Victims Act is a welcome change from the principles in Abbott or Lane and sometimes it is more important that the person who commits an unlawful act is punished for the same. The DVCVA is a departure from the traditional law on murder and manslaughter, where the prosecution need not even have to prove if the defendant is being convicted for the act or omission. But care has to be taken to see that an innocent party is not being punished wrongly. And the ECHR provisions of fair trial and presumption of innocence have to be upheld.