In this essay I would be dealing with the Commission of European Communities' (Commission) enforcement action under Art. 226 of the Treaty of Amsterdam (Treaty establishing the European Economic Community), popularly known as the EC Treaty, and the enforcement action in the national courts, i.e., the doctrine of direct effect (of directives). Particular reference is made to the Council Directive 93/104 of the European Council dealing with protecting the health and safety of workers, and the case of Commission v UK
 dealing with the Commission's action against the United Kingdom for infective implementation of the said directive.
The European Community's (EC) politico - legal process has been considered to have four distinct phases. The first is the adoption of EC legislation through one of the legislative processes; second the incorporation of EC law into the national legal systems - e.g., the transposition of a Directive; third the application of EC law by those subject to its obligations; and fourth being enforcement.
If a Member State fails to implement a particular Community law or there is ineffective implementation then the Commission takes action. This can be done in two ways - first an action by the Commission under Articles 226 - 228 EC and another by the principles of law developed by the Court of Justice - like the direct effect, indirect effect and principles of State liability. For the purposes of this essay we would mainly be dealing with Art. 226, and the principle of direct effect.
Art. 226 EC lays down the procedure for bringing actions against member states in cases where there is a failure to implement the directive or where there is ineffective implementation. The commission can initiate proceedings either on its own or by complaints from someone in the Member State. And since there is no investigation service it takes actions based on information gained, e.g., press, Member States' failure to notify their implementation of the Directive, etc. It has stated in its annual reports that complaints from citizens constitute a significant source of detection of infringements thereby contributing to a participatory community where the citizens play a role in law enforcement.
Art. 226 proceedings take place in two different stages: Administrative stage and the judicial stage. In fact the administrative role of the Commission is most important and most of the disputes are resolved at this stage and only in cases where no settlement is possible the matter is taken before the Court of Justice. In the administrative stage, the Member States are given opportunity to explain its actions or make any suitable changes. If this does not happen then the Commission gives a formal notice to the member states which defines the subject matter of the dispute and the Member state is then given time, usually two months to prepare its defence. If the problem is still not resolved then the Commission issues a reasoned opinion which lays down the ground for dispute. This is very important since it clearly lays down the ground on which the alleged infringement rests, and marks the beginning of the time period within which the Member state must comply in order to avoid the final stage. Any proceedings thereafter can only be founded on the grounds laid down in the reasoned opinion. The liability of the defaulting Member state is determined by the position prevailing at end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion; subsequent changes will not be taken into account. Finally, if no settlement is possible the Commission brings an action before the Court of Justice. This is the judicial stage.
It is to be noted that the Commission has discretion whether or not to bring the member state before the court. The fact that the Commission takes action against the defaulting Member State under Art. 226 does not mean that the individuals cannot bring action before a national court if the situation so deems fit.
Art. 228(2) says that if a Member state defies the declaration under Art. 226, the Commission, may at its discretion bring an action before the Court of Justice to impose a 'lump sum or penalty sum' where the member state fails to comply with the second reasoned opinion. This is if the defaulting state fails to take action to rectify the situation after it is found to be at fault.
Now going on to the concept of direct effect which was first introduced in Case26/62 Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen
; this case dealt with direct effect of treaty provisions. It said that the treaty created rights for the citizens of Member States, which if enforced by them in the national courts would create additional supervisory function created by Articles 226 and 227 of the EC treaty. This case also established a general principle of direct effect and said that any treaty article, which was sufficiently precise and unconditional, is said to be directly effective. Case 43/75 Defrenne and Sabena
 expanded the principle of direct effect to bring within its purview cases even where the Community law was not sufficiently precise and unconditional.
Directives are not directly effective unlike treaties since they require further enactment by the Member State. Art. 249 EC states the member states have to achieve the objective of the directive but it nevertheless gives them the choice of form and method of implementation. These provisions having direct effect can be invoked before the national courts. In Case 41/74Van Duyn v Home Office
 the court applied the sufficiently precise and unconditional test of direct effect under the Van Gend case to directives. The court said that a directive may be relied upon by the citizens before Member States court. Though there were certain ambiguities in this case, the court nevertheless held that the directive in question was sufficiently precise to be directly effective thus opening doors to extend the scope of direct effect to Directives. Case 148/78 Pubblico Ministero v Ratti
 explains how, when and why directives can produce direct effect at national level.
Directly effective directives can only be enforced against the State or any body, which is an emanation of the state ("Vertical Direct effect") and not against individuals or private institutions ("Horizontal direct effect") since the directives do not create any obligation on the part of the individuals. One important thing to be noted is that directives are only directly effective at the expiration of the time limit for its implementation into national law. The criteria laid down in Case C-188/89 Foster v British Gas
 defines a 'State'. It says any body that provides public service, is under state control and having special powers comes under the definition of 'State' and provisions having direct effect may be relied upon .
Case C-6, 9/90 Francovich and Bonifaci v Republic of Italy
 lays down a test to determine if the citizens can bring action against the state in case the state fails to implement a directive. This applies in cases where the individual suffers due to ineffective implementation of Community law. He can make the State liable for damages (the principle of State liability), which he would have otherwise claimed against individuals had the directive been properly implemented. But this is limited to situations where the directive is intended to confer rights on citizens and the harm suffered can be related to the State's breach of its obligations.
But why is the enforcement action so important? It is not only of historical importance that the Commission takes actions against defaulting Member states under Articles 226 and 227 (ex. 169 & 170) but it is a way of scrutinising the activities of the Member states and bring about uniformity of law in all the Community states. And it is of particular importance today because of the enlargement of the Community with 25 Member States (27 from January 2007). The enforcement procedure originally envisaged accountability of defaulting Member States for violations to the Commission and the Court of Justice. It gives the member states an opportunity to justify its actions.
Working Time Directive (Council Directive 93/104) - It was formulated with a view to giving workers right to have proper rest and work intervals. According to Article 1(1) of the directive, it lays down the minimum health and safety requirements for organising the working time. This was directly effective and the member states were to implement this directive before 1996. But the United Kingdom passed the Working Time Regulations (WTR) to implement the Working Time Directive into national Law only in 1998 (w.e.f. 1999). But the UK failed to comply with Art. 249 EC, Para 3, which states that the Member States have to give effect to the objective, intended even though it has discretion as regards the implementation. The commission took action against the UK in the case of Commission of the European Communities v United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
. In this case, the commission brought the action since the UK failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 17(1), 3 and 5 of the Directive 93/104 and Art. 249 EC. The derogation provided under Art. 17(1) was ineffectively implemented. Art. 17(1) of the directive provides for circumstances where the working time is not measured and/ or predetermined or can be determined by the workers themselves. But Regulation 20(2) of the WTR, giving effect to Art. 17(1) was implemented ineffectively. Advocate General Kokott says that Regulation 20(2) provides for a situation where only part of the working time is not measured and/or predetermined or only part can be determined by the worker himself and the Article does not apply to these situations. She says that when the objective of workers protection is achieved it leads to harmonisation of the law at the Community level. The Commission said the national measures taken to implement Articles 3 & 5 of Directive 93/104 encouraged non-compliance. Articles 3 & 5 provide that the periods of rest per day and per week respectively (i.e., 11 hours consecutive rest period per 24 hours and not less than 24 hours consecutive rest periods per week in addition to the 11 hours). The UK argued that the 'employers are not required to ensure that the workers do take the rest but merely that they cannot refuse it when the workers wish to claim this right'. But it was held that the provision of proper rest periods for the workers was a social law at Community level and the workers must be able to benefit from them. Thus the member states are under an obligation to guarantee this right in order to maintain the health and safety of the workers. The Advocate general observed that the employers' responsibility under Articles 3 & 5 are not without limits. But in the present case the UK actually enacted the articles in a way that encouraged non - compliance and it did not comply with the objective to be achieved enshrined in Articles 6 and 8 of the said directive. It was finally held that the UK failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 17(1), 3 & 5 of the directive and was ordered to pay the costs.
Though Directive 93/104 was directly effective the Commission thought it necessary to bring action against the UK because it did not meet the objectives laid down in the directive. As already mentioned the citizen's right of enforcement against the state (direct effect) is only subsidiary to the supervisory function taken up by the Commission under Art. 226. One of the Commission's very important duties is to see to it that the Member States are actually following the community law and ensure compliance in cases of infringement by bringing an action under Art. 226 EC. Advocate General Warner in Case 30/77 Boucherau
 has said that Art. 226 would only be used in cases where the Member State has deliberately disregarded or ignored Community law and not in cases of simple judicial error. The action can only be taken up against Member States and not individuals. The Commission has limited resources, which it has to use on cases that it considers very important. In case of direct effect the individuals can bring action against their respective State to enforce the directive they are relying upon. Usually the Commission takes action against Member States from the complaint received from particular individuals and in case the Commission does not accept this then the individuals resort to enforcement at national - level. When an individual brings a case before the national courts all he can claim is usually compensation or any other remedy for the loss suffered individually, but if he refers the matter to the Commission and/or if the Commission takes action against the Member state then it is beneficial to the Member State as a whole and this in turn may reduce the number of cases coming before the national courts because the individuals can rely upon the legislation implementing the directive instead of taking action against the Member State. So the Commission thought it necessary to bring an action against the UK despite Directive 93/104 being directly effective.
To sum up we can say that though direct effectiveness is one of the ways by which the citizens have discretion to bring actions against Member State for failure to implement directives; it is only in addition to the Commission's enforcement action under Art. 226 EC. The Commission's enforcement proceedings is more effective because it leads to, in most cases a change in the national law to meet the objectives of the Community Law. One of the main aims of the Commission is to see that there is uniformity in the law in all the member states and all the individuals can enjoy the rights conferred under the directives. But on the other hand, when individuals take action against the member state it can be more persuasive since it makes the State aware that the citizens are informed of their rights and this may prevent future non - compliance of Community law. And this, in turn stops the number of cases of enforcement coming before the national courts, and in few cases reduces the burden on the Court of Justice where a reference may be made to under Art.234 EC. It also reinforces the doctrine of Supremacy of EU law, which the member states have taken up voluntarily, in the case of the UK, Sec. 2(4) of the European Communities Act, 1972. Directly effective directives are binding on the UK courts. In this particular case, Commission v UK the Commission was justified in taking action against the UK because it was in the larger interest of the Community and the individuals. And in general too the Commission's action serves the wider community interest, and better are cases where the Commission takes action on the basis of complaints received from individuals, which encourages individuals' participation in Community law enforcement.