Choice of the method of strategy making is a dilemma that faces every person managing an organization. There are numerous different approaches and schools of thought presenting procedures to respond the needs of an organization. One of the concerns is, whether emphasis should be put on the discipline in the long-term strategic plans or to concentrate on the needs helping the organization to address flexibly emergent changes. The real life examples are often controversial and incomparable. It is obviously impossible to form a general reasoning on such a chaotic basis. Thus, there has been considerable academic debate about the choice of strategy and strategy making, portrayed often by very pointed views.
In order to understand the strengths and weaknesses of the contradicting views of long-term discipline and short-term flexibility we must first establish the concepts of strategic plans and emergent change strategy process as methods of reaching feasible goals. Strategic plan is defined by a management consulting company, Bridgefield Group: "[t]he long range, highest-level company plan that describes its overall goals and objectives in determining what businesses to participate in, which strategic resources are required, assesses company strengths and weaknesses vs. the competition, and serves as the basis or target for the next detail level". Furthermore, strategic plan itself is a controversial concept because a strategy itself is a plan. Accordingly, flexibility to address emergent change is difficult to define, but it is clear that it involves adaptation process in order to evolve the function of an organization against a change in its environment to continue on the future goals. Mintzberg, Ahlstrand and Lampel present these two concepts in their work Strategy Safari as major doctrinal arguments in the schools of thought called "the Planning School" and "the Learning School" respectively. These two schools represent extremes in the strategy formation doctrines.
To compare the extreme schools, the doctrines are discussed. In strategic plans, the major objective is to formalise and implement the strategy suitable for comprehensive models, allowing consecutive lower level planning. In Strategy Safari "the Planning School" strategy formation process is described: "[central ideas of planning school on strategy formation process are] formal procedure, formal training, formal analysis, lots of numbers." However, "lots of numbers" does not give a right to the uses of mathematical modelling and is clearly critique. For example, mathematics is clearly useful when planning production rates for large manufacturing machinery. Chemical manufacturer Colgate-Palmolive Company relies largely on discipline in strategic planning and has been successful. The reason to this pointed critique is likely to be the decades long dominancy of strategic plans as a major method of strategy formation, the authors emphasise new views by criticism. The business environment today is less stable than in 1960's, when the planning view was more suitable and one of the central works on strategic planning, Corporate Strategy (1965) by H. Igor Ansoff, was written. Interestingly, Mintzberg assesses the importance of planning: "[t]oo much planning would lead us to chaos, but so too would too little, more directly." Accordingly, the ideas of formalisation have lost their absolute supremacy since the 1980's, the "new economy" boom prevailed. In contrast, the Learning School strategy formation process is described: "[in learning school] strategies emerge as people, sometimes acting individually but more often collectively, come to learn about a situation as well as their organization's capability of dealing with it." This method is consistent with the present business environment, due to the rapid change and innovation. More importantly, it allows the information to travel from the lowest level to the top management, which can be difficult with a disciplined strategic plan. There are limitations in this view; several authors including Ansoff have counter-criticised learning views, arguing that formalisation and modelling does indeed help in corporate strategy formation and its advantages cannot be denied or replaced by pure learning. Moreover, alternative approaches, such as the political approach on strategy making and "the positioning school" (emphasising analysis in strategy making), have received increased attention as developments from the ideas of planning and learning. A deduction can be made: no school of thought offers the right way of strategy making. Question remains: what are the main uses and limitations of the two views in the dynamic business environment?
The success of a strategic plan is dependent on the accuracy of the predicted future variables. A supportive method to maintain long-term discipline in strategic plans is scenario planning, which is defined: "scenario planning is concerned about the process for developing a plan [according to predicted future variables]". If future predictions are correct, an organization can adjust to changes according to plan. As contrasted to learning point of view, the change is addressed by learning from it, which involves a delay. This gives rise to the case for strategic plans, but the limitations are clear. Predictions can be wrong and planners tend to concentrate on the obvious variables, but often unexpected events have the serious effects on an organization. Moreover, the time of the planners is limited and involves an opportunity cost. The power of modelling is not absolute, as models are ideal, not real. Therefore, the use of common sense becomes crucial when a change requiring an immediate response occurs. For example, if a customer has made an offer to a business and its main competitor for a purchase, there is barely room for modelling. Common sense tells that if the offer seems reasonable, one should take it before the competitor. Thus, in the light of limitations of modelling, the flexibility to address emergent changes in strategy making is more crucial in strategy making instead of strictly following a modelled long-term strategic plan.
The crucial importance of flexibility to address emergent changes can be further supported by economic theory. Short run is defined: "[i]n microeconomics and managerial economics, the short run is the decision-making period during which at least one input is considered fixed." It is possible to make plans on fixed factors, e.g. how to use an assembly line the company owns. However, to function in very short run an organization has to meet only its variable costs. In an unexpected situation, to ensure its short term viability, a company must adapt flexibility to address the changes. A long-term plan execution does not necessarily allow for a response to such a change and the organization must deviate from its discipline. It is clear that: "the economic long run is a planning horizon that looks beyond current commitments to a future period in which all inputs can be varied." Again, there are only variables. By definition, in the long run nothing is fixed and hence it is difficult to make accurate predictions. In result, in the light of economic theory, it is possible to argue that the flexibility to meet the emerging changes is more crucial than the discipline in executing long-term strategic plans.
An interesting example controversial impact of the two aspects is Finnish technology giant Nokia oyj. In Nokia's case a long-term disciplinary benefit, allowing flexible adaptation of technology improvements, turned into a loss due to lack of flexibility in response to emergent changes in customers' preferences. Nokia had relied on its standard type cellular phone platform as a part of its manufacturing strategy. Discipline of standard type platform allowed Nokia to bring new innovations to the cellular phones market rather quickly, the platform was versatile. This was Nokia's response to emergent change in the field of innovation and technology. They could rather easily make use of new technology and innovations with their standardised platforms. The adaptation of emergent change process in its strategy was one of the key factors to the wide success of Nokia. Its main competitors in early 2000's produced various of platforms. However, consumers showed increasing interest towards so-called "clamshell" phones in 2003. Nokia's rivals noticed this and reacted accordingly - Nokia losing its market share, Nokia released its first clamshells in 2004. Nokia failed to pay adequate attention to this emergent change and the lack of flexibility in the strategy became an obvious reason for the lost market share. Based on Nokia's case, it can be argued that discipline in executing strategic plans in the long term provided a considerable advantage for a limited time by manufacturing standard platforms instead of various platforms like its competitors. Furthermore, their long-term strategy allowed for innovations, in other words emergent change. The failure to respond to an emerging change in consumer moods caused loss of market share, as the consumer preferences were changing in Nokia's business environment. The duality of Nokia's case shows that aspects of long term discipline and short term flexibility are useful and may overlap. But, main indication is that the advantages are more likely to arise from flexibility rather than from discipline.
In conclusion, the flexibility to address emergent changes makes a crucial contribution in the process of strategy making and its merits are undeniable, but, the discipline in long-term plans is most certainly needed to some extent. The strategic planning point of view in its old sense of formalisation has become ineffective, but its views give a manager to some extent better means to prepare for the future changes and new approaches to planning are developed. Even if the flexibility to address emergent changes is more crucial, there is no absolute right way of strategy formation. The choice rests inevitably on the organization where it considers its future and the best way to reach feasible outcomes for its operations. It is possible to argue that the general guideline is to rely on a combination of methods of strategy formation, as the benefits of different methods can be employed to create successful strategies. Nevertheless, a good strategy maker needs flair and insight for his profession, because our world is not the one of the ideal models and all situations are unique.