India's history has been frequently disrupted by the influence of famine, on average twice a century regions would be severely hit by an extreme shortage of food, resulting in mass casualties. However, from 1765 (which saw the British conquer Bengal) to 1900, there were approximately 17 major famines, a dramatic increase that was conflicting with the modernisation process associated with the period. Government policies were certainly significant in the development of these famines, but the roles of factors such as climate, over-population and social reaction should not be ignored. Once assessed against these reasons, the importance of the role a government plays can be accurately determined.
Climate is perhaps the most appropriate place to start as it is undoubtedly at the origin of all shortages of food. The weather dictates the success of the harvest, which in turn determines how much food is available to distribute in the coming year. David Arnold highlights the role which climate plays: 'The history of famine in India, too, seems to substantiate the importance, if not the primacy, of climate. Every major famine of the nineteenth century was preceded by the partial, sometimes the complete, failure of the monsoon rains on which Indian agriculture has traditionally been so heavily dependent'1.
Although climate begins the process by making a shortage of food it does not determine whether this becomes a famine. There have been many droughts, particularly in the twentieth century, which have not been followed by anything close to a famine. Climate does also not explain why some societies remain largely unaffected by droughts and why in others it can easily turn into a famine that costs millions of lives. Therefore climate should not be classified as the 'cause' of famine, or as important as government policies, but rather as a precipitating factor, too insufficient and common to explain the emergence of a major famine.
Another factor that has been historically seen as important enough to be classified as the 'cause' of famine is over-population. The most radical theories around this subject were those argued by Thomas Malthus, who wrote 'Essay on the Principles of Population' in 1798. He asserted that famine, war and pestilence were positive ways of checking the growth in population, sweeping away excess peoples, and then maintaining a rough equilibrium between people and necessities. 'The common people', he wrote, 'must regard themselves as being themselves the principal cause of their misfortunes'2. The most damaging effects of these theories were brought about by Indian civil servants, who were taught this school of thought and then had no hesitation in letting famines continue, having the horrifying belief of it being 'healthy'.
These theories are of course seen as nonsensical in modern terms, Amartya Sen states 'the increase in food supply has been comparable to, or faster than, the expansion of population'3. The annual population rise was estimated at 0.3% in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, way below global rates in this period 4. The formation of the Malthusian League and its sympathisers can also be seen as a result of racial divides - the west being unable to understand the ways of existence in another culture, or even a Western fear of a Third World revolution and a disruption of the existing power structure. In any case, the reaction of civil servants to theories of over-population were in fact more dangerous than the amount of people itself, it cannot be classed as a cause or explanation for a famine.
Just as influential as the weathers dictation of crops, is the social reaction to a shortage of food. In a culture where famine was the greatest threat to human existence, it is easy for hysteria to develop and double the severity of a situation, stimulated from the struggle for ones survival dictated by human nature.
Patterns in Indian societies response to a shortage of food have been created with mistakes being repeated before times of a major famine: 'a partial failure of the rains, a deficient crop yield, rumours of price rises... triggering alarm, sending prices soaring, and encouraging hoarding and speculation'5. Traders begin to hoard grain, and as food prices rise they send it to more profitable areas (cities and abroad) where the richer classes can pay more for what is available. The unequal distribution of food between classes at times of a food shortage can help turn it into a famine.
The theories of Adam Smith about a free market economy being the answer to famine fails at these moments - the market seeks to make more profit rather than channel it into the most needy areas, and so famine only creates further polarisation in society when the exact opposite is needed. Indian markets must therefore be held accountable for exacerbating the plight of the majority, and being a large contributing factor in creating a crisis.
If the development of a famine was plotted along points in a process, it would show that social panic triggered by a shortage of food from abnormal climate creates a food crisis, but most important in this process would be whether government policies are able to prevent an outbreak of famine. Therefore it is reasonable to say that it is the reaction of the government that is the deciding factor between crisis and famine, and so can be classified as the 'cause'.
The Indian government's distribution of food is often the most important responsibility when the possibility of famine becomes apparent, if people have access to grain famines can be avoided. Sen makes an important differentiation when stating starvation "is the characteristic of some people not having enough to eat. It is not the characteristic of there not being enough to eat'6, and 'no matter how a famine is  caused, methods of breaking it call for a large supply of food in the public distribution system'7. Famines in India are always confined to an area of the country, and getting food to this area is the of the most pressing importance. In a study of Indian poverty P.Sainath discovered: "Between March and June 1995, nineteen children... died of starvation. Not far from where the deaths occurred, were godowns stocked to the roof with food grain. The families of the victims just could not access or afford that grain"8.
The governments preparation, or lack of it, before times of famine is also crucial. This is shown by Arnold's description of the Orissa famine of 1866. Here the government were at fault for their exportation system and not having a reserve supply of food readily available to the area in crisis. There were 'severely deficient rice harvest following years of heavy grain exports to other parts of Eastern India. This left peasants without reserve food stocks to tide them over the crisis months'9.
The 1943 Bengal Famine is an instance of 'bureaucratic cowardice'10 - government hesitation or refusal to act can allow a famine to take place, in this case costing 2 - 4 million lives. Bengal was the only major Indian famine to occur in the twentieth century, and happened due to the Indian government being reluctant to accept the magnitude of the problem, it 'was never officially 'declared' as a famine, which would have brought in an obligation to organize work programmes and relief operations specified by the famine code, dating from 1883'11.
From the beginning of British rule in 1765 to the revolt in 1858 there were twelve famines altogether, proving that British political responsibility worsened the Indian governments course of action rather than improving it. Arnold states that 'British wartime policies fuelled inflation and created a 'speculative spiral' of price rises, and no doubt this was a significant contributory factor'12. Taxes would often strip the poor of their livelihood, if after a bad harvest they did not have the money to pay their lands would be confiscated, leaving them with no means to support themselves.
Despite this, attempts were made by British officials to prevent famine in India. The series of canals and railways built across India by the British were intended to solve distribution problems, but Burton Stein argues they worsened existing problems: 'India slid into deeper poverty partly as a result of its modernisation and especially its railways'13 - a reasonable argument as they were used to export grain quickly rather than distribute it. Transport improvements also, he argues, carried disease (the major killer in a famine) across the country to become the pandemics of the later nineteenth century.
The 'Famine Codes', drawn up in 1880 (but only effective after 1900), proved more beneficial. These made loans available during a famine to the poor, a form of social security, which averted a major famine in the United Provinces in 1908. Sen argues that social security is hugely important to successfully avoid a famine, and even states that 'With the proportion of unemployment as high it is, say, in Britain or America today, but for the social security arrangements there would be widespread starvation and possibly a famine'14
To summarise, a food crisis, created by climate and social panic, is either turned into a famine or mainly avoided by a governments course of action. The success of this is dependent on whether food from the harvest is distributed to the areas who need it most, if a reserve supply of food has been prepared, if food prices are kept under strict control, and (particularly from 1900) whether loans are made available. Famine is no longer seen as a result of temporary climatic aberrations, but of a weakness in society. For this reason a famine is man-made, caused primarily by government policies, only when thorough preparation and organisation is lacking will a famine occur.
Endnotes
(1) Arnold, David - 'Famine: Social Crisis and Historical Change' (Oxford, 1988) - p30.
(2) Cited in Droz, Jacques - 'Europe Between Revolutions 1815-1848' (London, 1967) - p45-46
(3) Sen, Amartya, 'Poverty and Famine' (New York, 1981) - p7
(4) Figures from Stein, Burton, A History of India (Oxford,1998) - p263
(5) Arnold, David - 'Famine: Social Crisis and Historical Change' (Oxford, 1988) - P45
(6) Sen, Amartya, 'Poverty and Famine' (New York, 1981) - p1
(7) Sen, Amartya, 'Poverty and Famine' (New York, 1981) - p79
(8) Sainath, P - 'Everybody Loves a Good Drought: Stories from India's Poorest Districts' (London, 1996) - p336
(9) Arnold, David - 'Famine: Social Crisis and Historical Change' (Oxford, 1988) - p45
(10) Stein, Burton, A History of India (Oxford,1998) - p260
(11) Sen, Amartya, 'Poverty and Famine' (New York, 1981) - p79
(12) Arnold, David - 'Famine: Social Crisis and Historical Change' (Oxford, 1988) - p45
(13) Stein, Burton, A History of India (Oxford,1998) - p263
(14) Sen, Amartya, 'Poverty and Famine' (New York, 1981) - p7