Hoplite warfare was the dominant form of combat in ancient Greece from the seventh century to the Hellenistic period, revolutionising how war was fought, and the extent of its success meant that little change was needed in equipment or tactics for some three hundred years. The advantages of a hoplite phalanx over other contemporary fighting styles were that it ensured soldiers would fight with order, discipline and follow strict fighting tactics - due to this making survival much more likely. Tracing the development, nature and consequences of hoplites is made difficult by there being a limited amount of conclusive evidence, therefore interpretations must rely on what is available.
When studying the development of the hoplite style, the major question is how the transition was brought about - whether heavy armour made possible the phalanx, or the introduction of the phalanx pressed the need for armour. A key factor in deciding this argument is to assess why the hoplite phalanx was able to develop in the seventh century and not before. This seems to be due to the state of the Greek economy, which allowed the armour for the hoplites to be built on a mass scale. Oswyn Murray states "By the late eighteenth century the economic base for the manufacture of weapons, in terms of supply of raw materials and productive capacity and skills, was strong enough to sustain a military breakthrough, the creation of new mass armies of heavy-armed troops'1. The most likely explanation therefore is that the mass production of hoplite armour originated the process, but once this armour had been introduced an interdependent development took place.
When comparing hoplite warfare to the conflict which had gone before, the most distinctive disparity in the features is undoubtedly the classic hoplite shield. It is a reasonable conclusion to make from limited evidence that this was the crucial instrument in the mass produced armour which then allowed hoplites to develop their tactics.
The chief difference with the hoplite shield was a unique double grip for the forearm and the hand, which allowed the shield to be much heavier (about 7kg) but less maneuverable, making it better for pushing rather than protecting, so its advantages were only felt in close formation. The use of this shield therefore will have been a leap forward in the development of the hoplite phalanx, a view taken by Greek archaeologist James Whitley: 'It was the large round shield in particular that was necessary for hoplite tactics to develop. Its absence before 700 BC thus provides an indispensable terminus post quem for the emergence of hoplite phalanx' 2.
However, the theory of an interdependent development can be proven by the fact that the Greeks were already fighting in mass formations, ready for the hoplite shield to revolutionize the skirmishing: 'it seems likely that the invention of a shield like this took place when fighting in massed ranks was already normal, and that having a heavier and more securely held shield... was seen as militarily desirable' 3. The development of hoplite combat then was a process stimulated by an economic base enabling the production of heavy armour, and once this had been secured the introduction of the hoplite shield to mass formations created the state of classical hoplite warfare.
There are many different arguments for the dates of when the state of classic hoplite warfare could have been first implemented. It is impossible to give a decisive date, but archaeological evidence can reduce the possibilities to a concise period. Sparta is well known for being the state of Greece to develop hoplite warfare, basing its existence on its military, and throughout history its Spartiates were the most feared hoplites due to their extensive military training. At two Spartan shrines, the sanctuaries of Menelaos and Artemis Orthia, archaeologists have found a series of cheap mass-produced lead figurines of hoplites, showing they had a prominent part in Spartan life by at least 650 BC. The Spartan poet Tyrtaios, writing around 650 described the formations and discipline needed in the hoplite ranks: 'Young men, fight keeping steadfastly by one another. Don't start shamefully running away and don't start to panic... Don't flee and desert your seniors, the old men, whose knees are not so nimble'4. From these dates Oswyn Murray makes a reasonable argument that the Spartans suffering a 'crushing defeat by the Argives at Hysiai in 669 may have been the catalyst of change to hoplite methods'5.
The mid-seventh century also provides a strong image of hoplite warfare in the form of the Chigi vase (below right). This is 'the earliest unequivocal representation of what is known as hoplite warfare'6 due to its portrayal of hoplite double grip shields, helmets, close ranks and even a piper to keep them in step. The artist's inspiration to include this may well have been to show off this new kind of warfare.
This vase also acts as a clear example of a problem with some of the evidence for hoplite warfare. The middle set of hoplites have one set of legs too many, showing that by taking vases and plates at face value we are in danger of reading images as a direct reflection of reality. It is understandable to say that 'the painter may not have been very good at depicting more complex fighting scenes, constrained as he was by the artistic conventions of the time'7, meaning hoplite warfare may have been more complex and disordered than is able to be depicted on plates or vases. However, as Greek images of hoplite warfare do on the whole coincide with descriptions by poets (Tyrtaios) and Greek historians (Thucydides) this argument is ultimately flawed - images such as those seen on the Chigi vase remains good evidence.
A hoplite itself was a heavy infantryman, making up a strictly regimented formation, or phalanx, fighting en masse. The standard defensive equipment was made up of the helmet and shield (aspis), bronze greaves and breastplate, and most often a leather corslet, sometimes plated with bronze. More armour protecting the lower arms and legs could be purchased by the wealthier citizens. The primary offensive weapon was a spear, around 3 metres in length, but as this frequently broke upon charging and was unwieldy for close combat, hoplites would also carry a smaller 60 cm thrusting sword or 'xiphos'.
The mountainous landscape of Greece would at first suggest the need for light and mobile troops, and the importance of taking the tactically desirable higher areas. However, as the territoriality of Greek states meant that the most frequent cause of war was conflicting expansionist policies for more agriculturally and economically desirable plains, this was where battles were fought. The result was that "whichever side could dominate the plain could wreck the others crops" 8, the victors then claiming the land for themselves.
The hoplites themselves would be ordinary citizens completing their compulsory military service, comprising of any men from the polis who met a certain property requirement and could afford to provide himself with the heavy armour. In today's terms this could be classified as the middle and upper middle classes - the hoplites were not drawn from the wealthiest elites who would be able to obtain a horse and be a part of the cavalry. This 'was in fact a remarkably wide group... producing a force of some three to eight thousand soldiers' 9. In the archaic period the hoplites were actually the majority of citizens in the Greek army, but population rises meant this changed to the subhoplites from the early fifth century - the men who were not wealthy enough to reach hoplite status, often making up the light infantry or becoming a rower in a trireme.
The success of a hoplite army often depended on the soldier's discipline and a controlled courage, as it was crucial to stay in formation, breaking ranks threatened the cohesion of a phalanx, and due to the gruesome combat losing composure was often a distinct possibility. Outside of Sparta, having a system of compulsory military service rather than a state army meant that training was often substandard. Osborne argues 'as part-time soldiers, citizen hoplites subscribed to a distinctly non-professional ethos... training and organization remained rudimentary everywhere except Sparta' 10.
To combat the lack of training, other methods were used to ensure that hoplites remained controlled and did not break formation. Thucydides gives an example of how ranks were kept together at the battle between the Argives and Lacedaemonians in 418: 'The Lacedaemonians moved slowly and to the music of many flute-players, who were stationed in their ranks, and played, not as an act of religion, but in order that the army might march evenly and in true measure, and that the line might not break, as often happens in great armies when they go into battle' 11. The evidence for music keeping ranks together is substantiated by their appearance on the Chigi vase.
Another technique used was 'brigading according to locality, so that each man was known to his neighbour' 12 - positioning soldiers next to friends and family members. This would act as a form of reassurance, and knowing intimately other hoplites made it less likely soldiers would be willing to break the formation and by doing so endanger the rest of the phalanx. The most extreme example of this are the Theban Sacred Band, which was a company of three hundred warriors made up of homosexual couples, acknowledged to be a ferocious enemy due to their willingness to fight for one another.
The most protection a hoplite soldier could gain was by fighting in tight formation, facing the enemy, as he could guard himself with his own shield and with those around him. The importance of interdependence was highlighted by Thucydides: 'every soldier individually fears for his exposed side, which he tries to cover with the shield of his comrade on the right, conceiving that the closer he draws in the better he will be protected' 13.
A revisionist argument put forward by Robin Osborne, however, claims that this is a common misconception. He contends that 'a hoplite, in order to wield his spear or sword with any force at all, would have to adopt a sideways-on stance in combat and by doing so automatically placed himself behind the middle of his shield' 14. In practise, this would have been much more practical and offensively effective on the hoplite battlefield, and so may well have been the preferred method of many hoplite armies - it is unlikely that the disparate states of Thebes, Athens and Sparta had identical hoplite tactics. However, his claim that spears required six feet of space in every direction, and that hoplite warfare was essentially individuals fighting individuals does not seem possible as this would have left men extremely isolated defensively, going against the human instinct of taking comfort in numbers in combat.
A key tactical decision for Greek generals was whether to make the phalanx deep and narrow, in order to break through a section and cause general panic, or to make it wide but shallow, which was more effective for outflanking the enemy. Murray argues 'the ranks of hoplites were arranged in depth, so as to combine maximum push with the need not to be outflanked' 15, while Osborne favours the opposing approach: 'most armies opted for width' 16. The true explanation is most probably another example of variations in hoplite tactics, not only across states but with each general, so a compromise of ranks of eight would perhaps be nearer to an average.
The moment of combat consisted of intensive pushing using the shield, while thrusting the spear or sword above or below the opponents shield, causing multiple unpleasant wounds to the neck, groin and legs. As the hoplites in the front line fell, their places would be filled by those behind to prevent gaps being exploited. This had an advantage of avoiding mass casualties, as only the front ranks were in danger, but the disadvantage was a brutal end for those who were killed. Once a victor was becoming obvious, one side would break and run, leaving their shields behind in order to escape with their lives. Due to the weight of the armour pursuit was rare, instead the victors 'contented themselves with possessing the battlefield, stripping the slain, killing or holding for ransom or sale as slaves the wounded, burying their own dead, and setting up a trophy' 17.
By the end of the Peloponnesian war, hoplite warfare had dominated ancient Greece for nearly four centuries. However, the importance given to the building of fortifications in the late Classical and Hellenistic periods suggests that 'the nature of war had changed. The classic hoplite clash of arms became less frequent, and the importance of the citizen-hoplite consequently diminished. Mobile light infantry, cavalry and sieges became more significant components in Greek warfare' 18, with the navy's importance also increasing.
Long before the final demise of hoplite tactics, its consequences had been felt throughout the Greek empire. Archaeologist James Whitley argues that even the notion of citizenship and the polis may have originated solely from the hoplite phalanx: 'in the hoplite phalanx men fight together as a unit, each depending on the other, each equal to his neighbour, and this experience might be held to foster a sense of equality, common purpose and common identity... the development of the hoplite might indeed herald the appearance of the polis' 19.
This argument seems far-fetched, as even such a dominant form of warfare could not have been solely responsible as to singularly create the citizenship that Greek city-state lifestyle is based upon, especially as only one class of the male population could be a part of a phalanx. A more reasonable argument would be to say that hoplite warfare did contribute to the development of poleis but as part of a combination - the 'polis developed due to military and sociopolitical change' 20.
This lasting influence that hoplite warfare had on poleis and the Greek empire in general was that it redefined the social boundaries within a polis. No longer was a polis separated between the elite and the citizens, hoplites gave rise to the emergence of the middle class, ending the phase of elite domination and ushering in an age of more egalitarian constitutions in which the free played a decisive role. Kurt Raaflaub argues 'hoplites were formally integrated in egalitarian polis constitutions... in an effort, supported by the entire polis, to stabilize the community and set it on a broader base of citizen involvement and communal responsibility' 21.
The citizens that could include themselves in this new class had political and social benefits. In Sparta the right to vote was only given to those who met the hoplite property census, and similarly in Athens hoplites had the right to hold offices that others did not. The social perception of the hoplites rose so that the values instilled by hoplite warfare came to be seen as desirable elements in all men, which serves as proof of hoplite ideology becoming dominant: 'The needs of hoplite fighting, steady discipline and a steadfast refusal to give ground, shaped the classical conception of what a good man ought to be' 22. However, the citizens unable to financially subscribe to this class found themselves socially impoverished, the community was now divided into those who mattered and those who did not due to their position in military service.
Finally, the consequences of hoplite warfare can be seen in the Greek military conquests inside and outside its borders. Within Greece, the Peloponnesian League formed around Spartan protection due to their hoplite expertise, while the Persian wars in particular showed the 'superiority of Greek heavy infantry over any oriental force which could be brought to bear against them' 23. Here, clear advantages could be seen with the precise, controlled hoplite movements, the cohesion, and their superior armour.
In conclusion, the centuries in which hoplite warfare maintained dominance is a tribute to the success of the phalanx, as today the war techniques of just 20 years ago seems severely anachronistic. Evidence from vases, Greek historians and poets show that it modernized warfare from scattered and disorderly skirmishes based on the strength of individuals into tactical and ordered conflicts, and put classical Greece at the centre of the military and cultural world.