Classical Greek theatre played an essential role in the cultural life of democratic Athens. The drama at the annual festival of Dionysus was much more than just a piece of competitive performance theatre, it was one of the few institutions in a polis that intertwined religion, democracy and empire, creating a cultural spectacle that everyone was encouraged to attend. Amongst the sacrifices, parades, tributes and decrees, the plays of famous tragedians such as Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides were witnessed and admired by almost a whole community, becoming 'the great democratic art form'1. This made theatre an ideal platform to spread messages about Greek culture (defined by factors such as politics, society, war, role of women etc) through the citizens of the polis.
Although conclusive evidence from the period is severely limited, it is clear from surviving scripts that the plays themselves were mostly based on Greek mythological stories. This should not be seen as restrictive, as 'despite the heroic plots and characters the situations enacted in the plays were related to the contemporary issues of Athens in the fifth century'2. The skills of the playwrights lay not only in keeping these myths original and fascinating for Athenians, but in using renowned plots involving figures such as Oedipus or even the Goddess Athena to cleverly convey their own outlook on cultural issues to the masses. It is indisputable that in this way the great tragedians were able to comment in a way that would have been quite radical for the time, pushing for cultural change in certain areas. However, it is also important to remember that the plays of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides could have both pushed at cultural boundaries while also being socially affirming and praising the state of Greece and the Athenian polis in particular.
Aeschylus (525-456BC) is the earliest world dramatist whose work survives, and was the first of the great acknowledged tragedians to use his plays as a social comment. While dominating the Athenian stage for the first forty years of the fifth century, plays such as Eumenides and Persians commented on cultural Athens, and political themes in particular: 'tragedy both presupposed and fostered a popular concern with political issues in the broadest sense, encouraging critical scrutiny of both individual and community actions'3.
Through Eumenides (458), Aeschylus encourages this critical scrutiny by entering into a political debate about the role of the Areopagus Council, an ancient legal institution, existing long before democratic government. The play was written 'shortly after the Assembly voted to reduce the extra-judicial powers of the Areopagus Council'4, and features Athena giving the council the important power to decide over the fate of Orestes, prince of Argos, telling them (and the audience):
In this way Aeschylus is able to criticise the changes made by democratic Athens to the long-established law system, and communicate his message to the men of the polis.
Aeschylus, like all great dramatists, did not just focus on Greek political culture, but encompassed most aspects in the Athenian civic society. Persians (472) is Aeschylus' (and the worlds) earliest surviving tragedy, and brought to life for the Athenian public the terrible consequences of defeat, the evils of war were denounced to a culture that embraced conflict in everyday life. Greek historian Oswyn Murray states: 'Greek victory is seen as a Persian tragedy, and the play is an attempt to understand the Persian situation by translating it into Greek terms'6. Aeschylus appeals to the audience's sympathy for the Persians in the aftermath of Greek victory in the Persian Wars:
Written only seven years after victory at Mykale, the plot would have been performed to many who had fought in the war, and at a time when it was still prominent in Greek culture. Aeschylus, perhaps inspired by his own experience of the Persian wars as a soldier at the Battle of Marathon, encourages citizens to see war from a different, more critical perspective. Sympathising with the enemy rather than celebrating a famous victory, however, would have been almost unheard of in Greek culture, so this is a clear example of how plays pushed at cultural norms in Athens.
An important feature of the way in which cultural messages are transmitted to Athenians in many Greek tragedies is using the setting of foreign lands rather than Athens itself. Greek historian Robin Osborne explains: 'It can be no accident that the great majority of tragedies put on at the Dionysia dealt with conflicts situated in other cities, and not at Athens itself, playing out Athenian political issues obliquely rather than directly'8.
This is a feature of Sophocles' Oedipus the King (around 427 BC), and also Antigone (441-442 BC), the latter of which is a sinister depiction of political conflict in the polis, as Antigone finds herself battling between traditional religious practises and the demands of political authority. Significantly, the play is set in Thebes rather than Athens, as this convention allows a more critical approach by the playwright due to it arousing less controversy - criticism is not directly aimed at Athenian politics but still arouses enough interest to debate the cultural issue in question. In this instance, the Athenian audience is warned 'a city so desperately divided against itself was ultimately doomed'9.
Euripides is credited with aiming to separate the meaning from the narrative of his plays more than any other of the great tragedians. Andrew Brown comments 'by keeping to the traditional themes, but giving them a fresh and often ironic interpretation, he was able to achieve an arresting mixture of modes which made a challenge to established ways of thinking and feeling'10. Ion (414-412BC) is an example of a play that both pushes at Athenian social boundaries while affirming the supremacy of the Athenian state over others. The cultural messages being conveyed in this play are focused on the issues of citizenship. The Athenian audience is made to consider their prejudiced views on other cultures - since 451 BC citizenship depended on having double descent, thereby creating a society of 'pure Athenians'. This is debated through Ion when he laments over the welcome he would get in Athens, thinking at this moment of the play that he is a non-Athenian:
The Athenian audience is encouraged to evaluate their own narrow-mindedness, especially as the audience knows (through dramatic irony) that Ion is in fact unknowingly the Prince of Athens. This is an important cultural message given to democratic Athens through theatre.
Euripides, as well as questioning the audience, confirms some parts of Athenian culture through his positive interpretation of imperial Athenian ideology. Minerva's speech foretells that:
By telling the audience that Ion, future King of Athens, founded the Ionian race, Euripides allows Athenians to claim ancestral authority over all Ionians, a powerful and convenient cultural message as Ionian dialect made up a large percentage of Athens' imperial subjects. This will have justified the Athenian Empire to the citizens of Athens, and created a sense of superiority over other Greek races. It is important to acknowledge the tragedians were not only trying to create social unrest, often very positive cultural messages would be conveyed.
When analysing how the tragedians entered into cultural debates, to increase our understanding it is also valuable to assess how these messages were received. As with all Greek studies, the sources are extremely limited, but it is possible to gain some information about the power a play could have. The renowned Greek historian Herodotus tells us that 'when Phrynichus wrote a play entitled "The Fall of Miletus" and produced it, the whole theatre fell to weeping; they fined Phrynichus a thousand drachmas for bringing to mind a calamity that affected them so personally, and forbade the performance of that play forever'13. Although the books of Herodotus survived due to his ability to dramatise reality, and it is unlikely that the whole theatre wept, the basis in truth does still prove that cultural messages within a play could have a profound effect on an audience.
In conclusion the scripts of Aeschylus, Euripides and Sophocles that have survived show clearly how dramatists can push at the cultural norms of democratic Athens through issues such as law, politics, bloodshed, and citizenship to name but a few. While these themes and inspirations were certainly inherent for tragedies in the fifth century, it is crucial to remember that the tragedians were not always judgmental. Indeed, they will have had great respect and admiration for the cultural capital of the world in this period, the foundation of drama, and one of few places which would have allowed them to write and perform their culturally progressive plays.