The aim of this assignment is to carry out a simple enquiry based on indicators of development, using the World Development Indicators and the statistical features of Excel. My choice of Indicators was Gross Domestic Product of random 50 countries in year 2002, and military expenditure as a percentage of the GDP in those countries in the same year. This was of particular interest for me, since in 2002 the attacks on the World Trade Centre could already have some effect on military expenditure, especially in the western world, United States and countries with similar interests in world politics. Also it would be interesting to see whether the size of GDP would have any effect on the percentage of military expenditure, one could think that the larger economy, the smaller percentage of the aggregate output is required to maintain an army. Even if a country is willing to enlarge its military power, the total share could get smaller as economy increases.
The countries represented in this investigation are shown in the end.
The frequency distribution table for GDP per capita of the 50 in 2002 countries in terms of 1995 US Dollars:
The frequency distribution table shows how many countries there are representing each income class. The classes work as limits, for example there are five countries in the class from 7 500 dollars to 15 000. The right side of the frequency table is the same table, just put in decreasing order. However in this case the value zero does not represent a group as such, it is just the number of countries, which did not have data of that indicator for 2002. It has to be noted, that this will affect the calculations later on, changing the summary statistics by a small factor. Out of these 50 countries the largest group of countries was of income level 0 - 7 500 Dollars per capita. The histogram formed using the above data and the summary statistics for GDP per capita:
The summary statistics gives the results of the calculations made. The mean is the average and out of these 50 countries it is 11 814.58 of 1995 US Dollars. It has to be noted however, that the mean is affected by the three countries, that weren't given a value for GDP per capita. The median is the middle value of the range, it divides the data in two equal parts, 50 % of the data is to the left of median and 50% of the data is to the right. In this case median is 4478.196 of the same US Dollars.
The range of all the values is 45 029.42, which is the difference between the minimum and maximum values. The standard deviation is a statistic that tells you how tightly all the various examples are clustered around the mean in a set of data, It is the "mean of mean". In this case it is 13 627.34. Skewness is a measure of symmetry, negative values for the skewness indicate data that are skewed left and positive values for the skewness indicate data that are skewed right of its middle point, mean. In this case the skewness measure is positive, so the data is skewed right of the mean, meaning that the median is left from the mean.
The frequency distribution for military expenditure as a percentage of GDP in 2002 and the histogram produced:
It can be seen that for most of the countries the percentage share of military expenditure is between 1.6 and 3.2 per cent. In this variable there is quite a large number with no data, 10 in total. This will affect the following calculations.
In this case the mean is 2.419 (3DP), meaning that the average military expenditure of the 50 countries is 2.419% (3 Decimal Places). The middle value, median, is 1.9. Range is 11.2; the largest percentage of GDP in military expenditure is 11.2%, shown by Kuwait in this case. The standard deviation, , is 2.361 (Correct to 3 Decimal Places). The skewness of military expenditure is also positive, so the data is skewed to the right. In this case however, it has to emphasised, that there is some error in these calculations, due to the fact, that 10 countries did not have available data for military expenditure.
When plotting one variable against the other, the following result is:
The trend in this diagram seems to be, that the larger the GDP per capita, the smaller the military expenditure, as a percentage of GDP. It seems reasonable to conclude, that for different countries, at least some military expenditure is required, and as wealth increases, the opportunity cost of maintaining an army gets smaller, i.e. the percentage share gets smaller. However, much care has to be taken, this is a large simplification, and does not explain everything, that could affect the need or willingness to spend money on military.
All the above sources seem to be reliable sources of information. The Washington Times is a known newspaper, and should contain relevant information, at least from the American point of view. BBC web page includes information from European perspective, but not from the Euro zone itself. Voice of America and Bloomberg sites are both American, pages for people interested in current issues in financial sector. All the pages, apart from BBC, were last updated on December 1 st, and therefore all of them should have had accessed the most recent available data to write their articles. The BBC website was last updated on 10 th November, but that particular article is still relevant to this topic, the issue of US trade deficit is not one of short term.
The US trade deficit exceeded 50bn USD for fourth month in a row in September. About a month later Euro exceeded 1.30 Dollars, being 1.3334 Dollars on 30 th of November. A strong euro has raised economic fears in Europe, where exporters want the dollar to stay strong to boost their international competitiveness. As Euro gets more expensive in terms of Dollars, European goods will be more expensive. As a result of this the US customers will not buy as many European goods, and the US money paid abroad will get smaller, i.e. the US trade deficit gets smaller. Also weaker Dollar will make US goods cheaper for foreign markets, and as a result, US firms will collect more revenues. Raising the cost to us of foreign goods and lowering the cost of American goods to foreigners, should reduce imports and increase exports
However, it may be that the weakening Dollar in comparison to Euro is not enough to reduce the US trade deficit, which counts to 6% of the GDP by now and is rising. China keeps its currency pegged to the dollar, so a cheaper dollar doesn't improve our trade balance with the Chinese. It seems that Japanese automobile producers adjust their prices as Dollar falls in comparison to other currencies, so Japanese producers will keep their share in the US car market, using the "price to market" principle.
As can be seen from the data above, the decline of Dollar against Euro, will make European goods less attractive in the US market, and hence have a negative effect on the European economy and possible positive effect on US trade deficit. However, some criticism occurs against the view, that declining Dollar would solve the problem altogether. Other aspects, such as interest rates, foreign investment to US markets, and the interests paid abroad as a result of this have to be considered as well. As Dollar declines, European economy faces threat of further decline, but it is not said, that the US trade deficit would fall.