The main features of the data for this assignment are the features of the main variables used in the regression analysis in question 6. The regressand, qtmark is evaluated against other variables, the most important of them ability. Over the three years, the time period in which the observations were made, the average mark was 65, in this case both the median and mean value (the actual exam results do not contain decimals).
The main variable in the regression is clearly the variable ability. Looking at the graph in the Appendix, it seems that the variable follows roughly a normal distribution. This variable has a mean and median of around 25. The correlation between qtmark and ability is 0.37, which implies that there is a linear relationship between the two variables. The value for correlation between the regressand and the regressors, is biggest for the previous variable.
Other variables are also important in the following analysis, especially alevelsa, which tells the number of A-grades (or equivalent) at A-level (or equivalent). This has a correlation 0.256 with qtmark, implying a possible linear relationship between the two variables. The data overall has several variables, some of which are in a form that cannot be estimated in regression analysis without modification into smaller variables. The main new variables used in the analysis are mentioned in the correlation table. Some of the variables are very closely linked to each other and cannot therefore be used in full analysis. The correlation table in the Appendix implies that there is linear relationship between the listed variables; and the following regression analysis will investigate, if there is indeed causality between the variables of the whole data and qtmark.
When estimating a bivariate regression of qtmark against attr, we estimated how proportion of revision lectures attended affects the mark gained in first year statistics exam. This regression is analysed restricting sample for the students who have observations on ability, and hrsqt, average hours spent per week working on all subjects during the year. The model is as follows: .
As the regression is analysed using Eviews, the value of the intersect  was given as
63.74 (2 DP) and the value of 
1 is 0.002263. In an econometric analysis this model turns out to be insignificant. If a normal t-test is run on this regression with the null hypothesis, that 
1 is equal to zero, we are unable to reject it, even at 10%-level. Also it has to be noted, that the value of the coefficient is rather small, it cannot explain movements in qtmark very well.
In this model ability and hrsqt are added to the above model as additional explanatory variables, and the sample is not longer restricted. As a result the following model is obtained:
.
As the new variables were included the coefficient on 
1 changed to have a value of 0.105949, which is considerably more than previously. From this we can conclude that the proportion of revision lectures attended has effect on the mark achieved, when ability and average hours spent per week on all lectures are added to the regression. So the effect of the proportion of revision lectures attended has effect on qtmark only when considered with other variables. When the significance of 
1 is tested against the null hypothesis that it is equal to zero, the null hypothesis was rejected, even when using the 1% significance level.
The overall significance of the regression was analysed as well, testing the null hypothesis, H0: 1= 2= 3=0. This was done using the normal F-test, using the R 2-test. As a result the null hypothesis was rejected, and the coefficients are therefore jointly significantly different from zero, even with 1% significance level
For this question dummy variables are created from the variable hrsqt. This is done using the Generate Series command in the Quick menu. The hrsqt is split to 6 new variables. They take values in intervals of 2, starting from 0. The last variable is identified as 10 and above hours spent on statistics on average per week. This was done, because the median of the data on hrsqt is 3.00, so most of the data is below the value 3. When the variables created are added to the regression as additional dummy variables it turns out that their effects on the qtmark differ from each other a lot. From the tables it can be seen that their effects are not linear. However, testing for linearity one can do t-tests for their significance. Only the last variable is not significantly different, when evaluated at 5%-level. This can be seen from the probability column at the table in the appendix. Testing for the joint significance of the dummy variables, H0: 3= 4= 5= 6= 7=0, we find that the H0 can be rejected.
For this question new variables were created as in the previous question. The variable year is split to three variables, each representing a year, yr1=year2002, yr2=year2003 and yr3=year2004. In the regression run on the variables the default level is the year 2004, and the regression is as follows:
.
The regression consists of new variables attc, proportion of classes attended, and alevelsa.
The value of 
1 is 0.5599, meaning that for every unit increase of ability the mark in the first year statistics exam raises by 0.5599 units, percentage points in this case. The effect of a unit increase in attc, percentage point increase in the proportion of classes attended results in 0.1551 percentage point increase in qtmark, the value of 
2 is 0.1551. If the number of A-grades at A-levels is increased by one, this will lead to a 1.530 percentage point increase in the mark obtained. The values of the additional dummy variables show the effect that the year has on the intercept of the regression. The values for the dummy variables were: 
4=-5.203, 
5=-7.196. Therefore the results in 2003 were about 5.203 percentage points lower than in 2004 and in 2002 about 7.196 percentage points lower than in the default year, 2004.
When the significance of the dummy variables is investigated, simple t-tests showed that both variables are significantly different from zero, even at 1%-level. When the joint significance of the dummies is investigated, an F-test was used, with the null hypothesis:
H0: 5= 6=0 against  H1: any j0, j=5, 6. The test gives the value for F=11.1783, and since the critical value at 5%-level is 3.00, we reject the null hypothesis and the dummy variables are indeed significant.
For this question the regression qtmark =  + 1*ability + 2*attc + 3* alevelsa was run separately on the three years 2002, 2003 and 2004. When just looking at the data, it seems that there are major differences in the intercepts, varying from 23.6067 in year 2003 and 41.7107 in 2004. The differences in the coefficients of the regressors seem to play a smaller role, the biggest difference coming from alevelsa, varying from 2.8125 in 2002 to 0.4675 in 2004. When investigating the regression of 2004 it has to be noted that the coefficient 
3 is not statistically different from 0, when a t-test is carried out.
When investigating for the constancy of the model between the three different subsamples of the model, a Chow-test is carried out. The null hypothesis is as follows:
So in the restricted model none of these coefficients are allowed to vary, the regression becomes:
.
which was run on the whole sample, not making difference between the years. The unrestricted model is the three separate regressions added together. The test gives the value of F=4.2538 and when the critical value at 5%-level is 1.94, the H0 is rejected. So there is statistical evidence, that the coefficients are not constant over the three regressions.
]For this question the null hypothesis is changed:
In this case, in the restricted model, the intercept is allowed to vary, so the model where the yr1 and yr2 are added as dummy variables is the restricted model. In that model the coefficients of the regressors are the same, but the intercept varies. The unrestricted model is in this case the three separate years added together. When the F-test is carried out for this the result is 1.8897; and when the critical value of the test in this case is 2.21 at 5%-level the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. Therefore we can conclude that the structural change comes from the intercept, and the coefficients of the regressions are constant over the three samples at 5%-level. Hence the best model to describe this is the model, where the years are added as dummy variables.
The aim of this question was to provide a statistically preferred model for the result in first year statistics exam. To generate a model that provides a coherent model for qtmark, the initial step is to start eliminating variables. This is done by starting with a large model, including most the variables appearing in the question sheet provided and then eliminating the insignificant ones by using individual t-tests and not taking into account variables with small coefficients. To reach the final model, other tests were applied, to test for overall significance, structural change, inspection for outliers and the R 2-value. Also few new variables were created from the data provided to gain more coherent results. Different functional forms were also searched for, but there was no evidence of them being significant, so the final model is indeed linear in variables. The test for overall significance provided positive results, so the model can be used.
The final regression chosen is as follows:
.
The value of the mark gained in the first year statistics exam depends on the students ability, the number of A-grades gained in A-levels and average hours spent per week working on statistics during the year. Also additional dummy variables were used to describe the additional effects of studying pure economics, econ=1 when the person studies economics, zero otherwise. The same argument applies for the person having either an A in her A-level mathematics or a 7 in IB mathematics, if the person is British or not, and the effect of the years on the regression, yr1 and yr2.
The variable ability has a very large effect on the R 2-value. Even though the R 2 cannot be used on its own to measure the appropriateness of the model, identifying this particular variable it is a useful tool. The R 2 tells how much of the model is explained by the variables in the regression. When the variable ability was included the R 2-value increased from 0.193295 to 0.315355. The variable  alevelsa is added, because its coefficient is large providing a good explanation for the regressand, it cannot be missed as insignificant in a t-test, and its effect on the R 2-value is relatively large. The variable hrsqt is included since it cannot be missed as insignificant in a t-test and it has a positive effect on the R 2-value. Even though in question 2 c) it is found that the effect of hrsqt is most likely not linear, it is included since it provides a good explanation for the movement in qtmark.
All the variables listed above have positive values, and intuitively the model sounds rational. The more able the student is, the more likely he is to do well in his statistics exam. Also having A-grades (or equivalent) in A-levels (or equivalent) and spending more hours on average per week on statistics during the year have positive effects on the qtmark achieved. The value of 
1 is 0.543, 
2 is 2.235, and 
3 0.661. For every extra unit of the variables will increase the value of qtmark by percentage points indicated by the coefficients.
When the variable econ is created the original variable  course is split to six dummy variables according to the degree course. The other dummies are not included, since some of them fail the t-test in the large regression or when tried with other variables. The variable matha7 is adopted since it is statistically significant and it has a good positive effect on the qtmark. When the variable uk is included, it is clear that it has a large negative effect on the mark gained, does not fail the t-test and also affects the R 2-value, so it can be used when explaining the model. The dummy variables yr1 and yr2 are significant in all regressions run and also explain the movement in qtmark very well. The values obtained were 
1=3.7449, 
2 =3.1367, 
3=-5.8846, 
4=-5.2275 and 
5=-7.5866. The additional effect on qtmark, in percentage points, caused by a person belonging to any of the groups or the year being different are the numbers above.
So the additional effect of doing economics as a degree course, or having A or 7 in mathematics has a strong positive effect on the qtmark. Being British or having taken the test in 2002 or 2003 has negative additional effects on the mark obtained.
The chow-test to test for structural change caused by the different years is also carried out. This is done by a similar method to the one used in questions 4. and 5. The unrestricted model is where the regression is run (without the year dummy variables) on the three years separately; and the restricted one where it is run on the whole sample. From this test there is evidence for structural change. Then the question is changed to test the null hypothesis that the coefficients are constant over the samples, but intercept is allowed to vary. The unrestricted model is the same as in the first test, but the restricted model is changed to the one with the years included as dummy variables. From this test there is evidence for the coefficients being constant over the three samples, therefore the structural change results from the intercept. Hence the years are added as dummy variables for the final regression.
When investigating the variables included it was found that in the variable alevelsa there is an obvious outlier. Somebody is claimed to have 19 A-grades in A-levels, which is highly unlikely to be true. Therefore this observation was deleted to avoid it having negative effect on the whole regression. Also it has to be noted at this stage that there is a slight inaccuracy within the model. The variable alevelsa is correlated to matha7 with a value 0.408984. This is explained by the fact that the information of matha7 is partially included in alevelsa, if a person has an A or 7 in mathematics; it is a unit increase in number of A-grades in A-levels. The variable matha7 was included however, since it proved to be significant and provided additional explanation on qtmark.
Overall the regression run above explains the determinants of exam performance, and there is both statistical evidence to support its validity and an intuitive explanation, describing the effect of the explanatory variables on exam performance, qtmark in this case.