The development of feminist thought and action in Japan is distinct from that of its emergence in the West, more specifically within the United States and Britain. Though influenced by Western politics, the development of feminism in Japan was also initiated by numerous other social and political factors that affected the political climate at that specific time and place. Adherence to Confucian ideologies severely restricted women within Japanese society, as well as subordinating the working classes and those not owning property. A growing political awareness and imperialist competition later led to the struggle for social reform, of which women were arguably at the forefront. This essay will deal with such social and political factors as these to account for the development of feminism in Japan.
The subordinate position of women within Japanese society came to be highlighted at the end of the nineteenth century, whereas previously notions of the 'natural inferiority of women'1 had been largely unchallenged. This had implications for the rights of women concerning property, marriage and divorce, amongst other issues. Adopting Chinese Confucian ethics, the Japanese sought to uphold and promote to younger generations the established patriarchy through regulating the autonomy and independence of women. This was achieved through the establishment of a patrilineal family system that demanded filial respect within the family, which was then reflected in the necessity for obedience to the head of state.2 It can be observed from this that women were subject to conform to male ruling, both in familial terms and within the wider political sphere. This originated from the Confucian teaching that women were to be understood as yin, hence passive and in need of ruling by the male yang. This therefore left women no place to rule, either within the family or within the feudalistic structure prevailing in Japan at the time.3 Such oppression of female autonomy was further reinforced through the Civil Code of 1897, which successfully restricted women's power as it granted control of marital property and possessions to the husband, specifying that a wife could not act without her husband's permission.4 This subordination of Japanese women was only challenged after the re-ascendance of the Emperor Meiji in 1868, termed the Meiji Restoration (1868-1912). This signalled 'a process of reform, modernisation and democratisation'.5 From this point, widespread social and political reform took place within Japan, primarily to compete with Western imperialistic powers and assert a national strength. Western intellectuals linked the Japanese subordination of women to their weakness as a nation; a theory which was to be adopted by Japanese reformers such as those involved with the Meiji Six Journal, seeking to modernise and civilise their nation.6 It was seen as paramount to liberate women in society in order to 'gain international respectability for Japan'7 and thus to compete successfully in the global political economy. The Meiji Restoration was a more liberal form of government than had been in place previously and directly questioned the status of women, holding them to be 'at the centre of change' for reform of society and modernisation.8 It was arguably this revolution which made the woman question accessible to Japanese society, paving the way for women to make their own voices heard in the changing political context and thus providing a powerful medium for this oppressed section of society.
During the struggle for women's liberation, nationalism gained increasing interest and received considerably more attention from Japanese intellectuals, reformers and citizens. Feminism and nationalism were interlinked in discourses on social reform, though many believed the latter to take precedence through exploiting the former for its own aims, observing how the state 'moulded women's options and energies into national rather than individual goals'.9 This may be explained in terms of Japan's increasing need to assert itself economically against Western capitalist structures, thus necessitating the mobilisation of the female half of the population, though this could only be achieved after their inclusion within the political sphere. However, the extent to which this was truly implemented is questionable. The fact that women were subordinate to men in Japanese society led many to suggest that this was the reason for Japan's economic and military weakness and consequent subordination as a nation to the West.10 Women were thus implicated in the development of a stronger nation and were relied upon heavily in new empire building. That is not to say that women were independent of the state, in fact the issue of support for mothers was highly debated. There existed, to some extent, interdependency between women and the state, though Yosano Akiko, a prominent feminist at the time, argued that 'it is slave morality for women to be dependent on men because of their procreational role [and therefore women] must refuse dependency on the state for the very same reason'.11 This serves to highlight the role assigned to women; primarily viewed as mothers providing the next generation of patriotic, nationalist fighters for the country.
An additional factor affecting women was arguably their education. Debated by reformers, intellectuals and feminists, many continued to feel that this was a large
barrier to women's struggle. It was observed that the 'inadequacy of women's education reinforced their low status'12 and was thus a cause for concern and in need of reform. In 1873, forty percent of boys and fifteen percent of girls attended primary school, though by 1910, nearly ninety nine percent of boys and ninety seven percent of girls were in this position.13 In 1885 the Minister of Education, Mori Arinori, a 'nationalist who said publicly that education was for the benefit of the state, not the individual'14 promoted the idea that women were to be educated for a purpose other than their own emancipation. This originated from the emphasis placed by the both state and traditional society on the need to produce good wives and wise mothers, or ryosai kembo.15 Hence, the limited education women received was aimed at developing their domestic and nurturing skills, rather than instilling them with intellectual desires and political awareness.
The issue of political awareness and activity held the key to women's liberation in Japan. Though reformist ideologies became increasingly more popular, legislation remained highly conservative, reflected in laws such as the 1890 Peace Preservation Law regulating 'subversive activities', a move largely aimed at feminists, and also within laws preventing women from attending political meetings.16 However, with the reinstatement of the Emperor Meiji there was a shift towards democracy, which led women, as well as other oppressed groups, to question their position in society and to reject 'taxation without representation'.17 The growth of capitalism and the erosion of the feudalistic power structure supported the expansion of the middle class; a new group demanding more political rights and voicing their oppression through the right-wing People's Rights Movement, established in 1874. By 1878 the Movement had expanded membership to women, recognising them as 'a force to be mobilised', whereas they had previously been unconcerned with women's rights.18 Within a few years, Kishida Toshiko spoke at a public meeting on women's rights; the first woman to do so within the Movement. This signified a large step forward in women's liberation and inspired numerous other women to act, including Fukuda Hideko.19 Other notable groups formed due to the feeling within the middle classes that there was not sufficient political freedom and representation. For example, the Tokyo Women's Reform Society was set up chiefly by middle class Christians and campaigned largely against social evils oppressing women, such as prostitution and concubinage.20
Due to rapid industrialisation taking place in Japan as an attempt to keep up with Western capitalism and the newly-introduced free trade market, there ensued an influx of women into the labour force. Whilst in 1930 there were ten million female workers in Japan, by 1944 this figure had increased to thirteen million, as well as showing a marked decrease in the percentage of men in the workforce.21 Women gradually entered such professions as teaching, nursing and clerical work, thus providing a strong basis for the working women's movement. However, women soon began to rise up against oppressive working conditions and laws, resulting in a strike in the Amamiya Silk Mill in Kofu. Here, as in other strikes taking place, women workers protested against worsening conditions of employment, wage decreases and abuse from male employers.22 Such dissatisfaction stemmed principally from the exploitative way in which female labour was being harnessed, so that industries 'could be made competitive in world markets if they were able to utilise cheap female labour'23 in order to then generate capital for use in other investments. A growing awareness of unfair working conditions led to a proliferation of working women's trade unions, thus granting improved representation and a medium through which they could make themselves heard in the rapidly modernising and industrialising nation. A further medium through which women gained representation was via the Seito journal, first published in 1911 by a women's literary appreciation group.24 Though not originally intended as a political group, it soon developed into such due to increasing pressure from the government to terminate its publication; feared as a threat to patriarchy and Japanese tradition. Eventually, the journal and members of the 'Bluestockings' group, such as Hiratsuka Raicho, came to question women's issues such as maternity provision, equal pay, the family system and marriage. The group demonstrably made the personal political and engaged many middle class Japanese women with the issue of their subordination, causing the government to enforce its termination in 1916.25
Ultimately, it can be seen that a varied combination of changing social and political factors led to the development of feminism in Japan. Through increased political awareness and changing structures within the government, women were able to challenge their position for the first time. In the national struggle for increased economic and military power, gender identities were redefined in order to benefit the state. Women were arguably used in this process before being liberated themselves. Thereby, 'in the process of refusing subordinate status [as a nation], Japan constructed a new womanhood as a demonstration of its equality with the West and as a means of proving its civilised status'.26 It was this use of women for national goals that led to increased feelings of oppression and eventual action against exploitation and subordination, resulting in a strong feminist movement in Japan towards the end of the nineteenth century.