A survey was carried out to investigate the causes and occurrences of the emotions shame, guilt and embarrassment. Ten participants were asked to cite three examples of occasions when they would feel these emotions. Responses were then looked at for general trends and categorised as to the type of situation or response given. It was generally noted that embarrassment was a more public emotion than shame or guilt, and that shame and guilt were brought about by similar situations. These results are discussed in terms of the meanings of these three emotions and the nature of social consciousness.
Guilt, shame and embarrassment are emotions of similar origin and type, in that they are moments of unpleasant self-consciousness that we all experience. It is sometimes believed that they are basically the same. However Tangney et al., (1996) described these emotions as distinctly separate experiences. A study was conducted amongst undergraduates to determine what sort of experiences lead to feelings of guilt, shame and embarrassment, and how different the three emotions were considered to be. It seemed that shame and guilt were similar emotions, with shame a more public experience, and that embarrassment was the most public of all, and milder than shame or guilt, (Tangney et al., 1996).
The present study therefore aimed to differentiate between the emotions, if possible, to assess what kind of situations bring about these feelings and if the circumstances are similar in each case.
It was expected that guilt and shame would be closely linked in terms of how they are felt and when, but that embarrassment would be a different emotion and caused by more public or social situations, rather than self-induced.
The participants' answers were looked at for general trends that might identify the differences in these emotions. It was immediately noticed that nearly every answer was given in the passive or infinitive tenses, and not referring to an actual incident that has happened. It was also noticed that many examples were cited by more than one person, for example, three people quoted 'tripping over in public' as an embarrassing event, four people said for guilt 'relaxing instead of working' or something similar, and seven answers for shame involved lying. Using these common themes the answers were classified according to the groups mentioned in the method. Some of these groupings showed no differing results so they will be omitted, as the aim is to assess the differences between these emotions. One trend emerged immediately that was expected; results for shame and guilt were very similar for most categories, but different to results for embarrassment. Firstly a tally was made for answers that involved active events that the person had chosen to do, rather than passive events which the person had no control over. For guilt, 19 responses were active (63%) and 11 were passive (37%), similarly for shame 20 answers were active (67%) and 10 were passive (33%), but for embarrassment nearly all were passive events (87%) with only 4 active events (13%). This would show that embarrassment tends to be out of our control, whereas shame and guilt are results of regretting our own actions. Another interesting result was for one-on-one/private situations against occurrences in public or in front of a group of people. For guilt, 87% of answers and for shame 93% involved the self or just one other person, whereas for embarrassment only 2 answers were personal. A huge 93% of embarrassment responses occurred in front of many people. Answers typically included social situations, such as parties, clubs or restaurants, where perhaps people feel they are on show in front of strangers and must conform to certain behaviour patterns. Related to this category were the groupings for mention of a personal relationship, versus strangers or public. Personal relationships included partner, friend, children or family, whilst public included the generic term 'work', or general public. For guilt, 30% of responses included a personal relation, for shame, a considerable 57%, but for embarrassment no answers referred to a personal relationship. This implies that embarrassment is caused by people unknown to the subject, rarely by close friends or family. Also 100% of embarrassment examples showed the feeling occurring during the event, whilst the majority of guilt and shame emotions (73% and 97%) came after the event. Almost all the responses were short answers (10 words or under) with only five examples in total over ten words. However, surprisingly, 80% of embarrassment responses did describe detail of a specific event rather than general situations, compared to just 27% for both shame and guilt. A pattern emerged, then, that shame and guilt responses were in general very similar and written in similar ways, with embarrassment being a seemingly different emotion. The only instances where shame and guilt emotions differed were firstly, that eight guilt responses were felt during the event with only one shame response described during the event, and secondly that 17 shame answers included reference to a personal relationship, compared to only 9 guilt answers. This might be pure chance, but it does seem to suggest that shame is a more intense feeling, often coming from disgust at letting a loved one or friend down, whereas guilt is a milder version of this, more often relating to people in general, for example many answers involved guilt at not helping someone in general.
It emerged that shame and guilt had more in common, for example being emotions relating to personal failure or letting close friends and relations down. Embarrassment tended to focus on more trivial and light-hearted mistakes which were beyond the participant's control. Finally embarrassment occurred mainly in front of a group of people who were not known well, e.g. at a restaurant or party, whereas shame and guilt related to more personal situations involving just the self or one other person. This was generally as expected and followed the pattern of results given by Tangney (1996).
The methods used in this study were qualitative methods, which allowed free, unstructured answers that were likely to be honest and reliable, but at the same time did not manipulate any variables (situations) and used no control groups. This means that it cannot be concluded that any situations specifically cause the emotions shame, guilt or embarrassment, only that participants claimed to feel guilt etc. in these types of situations.
It might be necessary to conduct further studies under more controlled conditions, for example by asking participants to perform specific events, then asking what emotions were experienced and to what degree. If the experiment were to be repeated using qualitative methods it would be advisable to gain responses from a far larger sample. The survey could also include some kind of grading system, e.g. how guilty did this make you feel, from 1-5? Responses could also be correlated against males and females separately, to establish differences in males and females.
In conclusion, shame, guilt and embarrassment are not words for the same emotion, but contrasting feelings of self-consciousness, which arise from different situations and events. Shame and guilt emotions were considered similar, arising from personal failure or failing what is expected of a close relationship. Embarrassment arose from uncomfortable, unfamiliar public situations, which could not be controlled. Embarrassment tended to be a more trivial and transient emotion, but it also reflected a lapse in what is expected in social environments. These findings tell us something of the nature of social interaction; self-conscious emotions are brought about from a failure to comply with what is socially expected of a person, either in personal relationships or social situations. It would appear that these emotions are closely linked to the idea of conformity; people judge themselves based on what they assume others would think yet tend to be their own worst critic.