Formation of the vertebrate limb requires specification of cell position along 3 axes: the proximal-distal axis, the antero-posterior axis and the dorso-ventral axis.
These 3 axes are governed by signalling centres: the apical ectodermal ridge and the progress zone for the proximal distal elements, the polarizing activity region for the antero-posterior axis and the overlying ectoderm that determines the dorso-ventral axis. These signalling centres emanate proteins which cross-talk linking the formation of each axis to each other.
A decade of intensive studies has identified some signals that pattern the different axes. The apical ectodermal ridge releases Fibroblast growth fators (Fgfs) in particular Fgf- 4 and Fgf-8 which mimic it if removed. Fgf-8 is also involved in the formation of the fore and hind limb formation as it forms a feedback loop with Fgf-10 mediated by Wnt3a, which is induced by Tbx 5 and 4 via Wnt2b and Wnt8c respectively.
The polarizing activity region releases Sonic Hegdhog (Shh), a limb morphogen, which is induced by Gli3 a protein implicated in human Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome, which forms a feedback loop (mediated by Formin, Gremlin, a Bmp antagonist and of course Bmp) with Fgf-8 and Fgf-4. Sonic Hedgehog is also induced by dHand, a transcription factor, and in the forelimb by Hoxb8.
However, dorso-ventral patterning is very different as it does not rely on a gradient of expression but more on an ON/OFF system. Wnt7a, another member of the Wnt family, is restricted to the dorsal region by Engrailed1 and induces the expression of Lmx1 without -catenin dependent activity to specify the dorsal fate. It is also required for maintenance of Shh and thus Fgf signalling.
This quote from Charles Darwin highlights the intrigue that is the making of the vertebrate limb and how it has been conserved in evolution and between the different vertebrates. This is an extremely complex organ, which is not necessary for embryonic survival (therefore makes it a fantastic candidate for studying how structures develop in the right places in the embryo), is initiated when the vertebrate body plan is being mapped out and finished when the precise array of organised cells and tissues have been generated. The question the developmental biologists seek to answer is: how is the vertebrate limb made?
Limb patterning is established along 3 dimensions: the proximal-distal axis which consists in the replacement of the initial cartilage by bone and accompanied by the rises of the stylopod (humerus/femur), zeugopod (radius, ulna/ tibia and fibula) and autopod (carpal fingers/ankle and toes). The second axis is the anterior-posterior axis (thumb to little finger) and finally the third one is the dorsal-ventral axis (knuckles/palm respectively).
Figure 1 represents a schematic diagram of these 3 axes and a recapitulatory of all the terms and their definitions used in this review can be viewed in the end table.
In order to analyse the making of a vertebrate limb, the 3 different pattern of development must be discussed.
The last ten years of research into this field has given insight into how all three axes are mutually linked to allow co-ordinated growth and patterning of the limb.
Several aspects remain in the dark such as the fact that Gli3 activity is not required for expression of the genes downstream of Shh, however these genes are not sufficient to generate posterior digit identity (posterior pattern is not generated in the Gli3-/- limbs despite intact levels of Shh signalling as shown by expression of genes downstream of Shh). It is possible that another Gli family member fulfils this role or a different transcription factor. Another enigma is what are the downstream targets that translate the signals from the organizing centres into skeletal pattern?
And the greatest question is why some of the molecules involved have been conserved between vertebrates and invertebrates whereas others have been changed within a specific developmental program?