C. elegans is a very good model organism for developmental biology: it is small, cheap and easy to manipulate. It is extensively used for the understanding of maternal effect genes. These are genes from the mother which are inherited by the embryos and which are essential for the correct and complete development of the embryo. In C. elegans, there are 3 major developmental pathways studied: the establishment of the anterior-posterior axis, the specification of the germline and the dorsal-ventral formation.
The anterior- posterior axis is set up through maternal and paternal contribution. The position of the sperm after entry into the egg specifies the posterior pole. Maternal material consists of PAR proteins which are localized at different poles through the action of centrosomes brought by the sperm. These proteins are required for maintenance of the asymmetry along with the CDC-42 G-protein. An array of other proteins such as RIC-8, LET-99, LIN-5 and others are also involved in a-p axis formation.
Once the egg is fertilized in undergoes a series of divisions that give rise to somatic blastomeres and germline blastomeres. Specification of the germline involves the maternal genes pie-1 and the mex-1. pie-1 encodes a protein that has dual functionality: it blocks mRNA translation in germline blastomeres and induces maternal programs involved in germ cell development.
Finally, the dorsal-ventral formation relies on the somatic blastomeres, in particular ABa, ABp and EMS. ABa generates the anterior pharyngeal cells through cell-cell interaction with EMS, also involving the receptor GLP-1 and an unknown ligand. EMS forms the posterior pharyngeal cells autonomously and with the help of the skn-1 gene which is distributed unequally. Finally ABp forms the rectal and valve cells through interaction between its receptor GLP-1 as well, and the ligand APX-1 signalled from P 2.
All these genes have homologies with other species including human, and although most of them form a complex interactive network, their analysis is vital for understanding human development.
The success of molecular biology is due to the existence of model systems. These are defined as extremely simple organism such as Drosophila, Arabidopsis and Caenorhabditis elegans. The latter was introduced as model system by Dr. Sydney Brenner in 1974 (Gilbert, 2003).
This free living, non-parasitic soil nematode has all the characteristics of the ideal model organism: it is small, easy to manipulate, cheap, has a short life cycle and most importantly its genome (which is approximately 100 Mbp, that is to say 20 times bigger than that of E. coli and about 1/30 of that of the human) shows 40% homology to that of the human (Gilbert, 2003). Figure 1 shows 3 nematode worms viewed under the microscope.
Moreover, this multicellular organism is a hermaphrodite. It is also transparent making the tracking of cells and following of cell lineages (which is most of the time invariant) very easy using reporter genes such as GFP (green fluorescent protein) (Gilbert, 2003). Its genome also makes it easy to mutate it: various mutagens can be used, such as EMS, to define mutants. Mutants can also be obtained using reverse genetics particularly RNA interference (RNAi) which consists of transcribing RNA in vitro from a specific target gene and injecting it into the gonad of wild type worms. It then prevents the production of the protein product of the target gene (Rose and Kemphues, 1998). The latter has been extensively used to study maternally expressed genes. Maternal effect genes are genes required for the development of the embryo.
Many of these appear to have a role in the development of the worm and researchers are currently analysing is their exact role.
Understanding such an analysis requires the discussion of how the initial asymmetries are set up in the embryo, how the cell fates and lineage are specified.
Three different developmental pathways and so many genes! However, they are interconnected forming a complex cross-network.
Table 4 summarizes all the genes and proteins involved in the different pathways.
Could the analysis reveal some aspect of the human development?
It seems that understand how this organisms and other invertebrates acquire different potentials could be a further step to understanding embryo development, finding a treatments for prenatal malformations and avoiding miscarriages.