Anoxia (or hypoxia) occurs when the level of oxygen present and needed by the brain becomes insufficient. Most mammals and in particular humans have a very low tolerance to this condition resulting in brain damage. However, evolution seems to have resolved this problem in a few species.
Researchers have studied 3 species that show a very high tolerance to anoxia/hypoxia: Carassius sp. , Trachemys and Chrysemys sp. and Hemiscyllium ocellatum sp. They use different strategies to survive anoxia but their overall goal is to maintain ATP production to a certain level.
Carrassius sp. survives by increasing its glycolytic pathway and converting the end-product lactate into ethanol. It also reduces its neuronal activity as a second line of defence resulting in the organism being active through the anoxic period.
The freshwater turtles survive by entering a comatose-like state due to a radical repression of the brain's activity and by buffering any lactate and sequestering it in the shell.
As for Hemiscyllium ocellatum sp, it survives at elevated temperatures and protects itself from any neuronal damage by increasing nitric oxide synthase production.
These mechanisms appear to have evolved several times and separately. Their understanding therefore relies on a concise analysis of each of them independently.
The brain is one of the most sensitive organs in any vertebrate
organism and damage to it is most of the time irreversible and fatal. Brain cells are extremely sensitive to oxygen deprivation, even though there is an adequate blood flow (). This condition refers to cerebral hypoxia also known as cerebral anoxia. This can result from, for example, carbon monoxide poisoning, head trauma, choking, but the most common occurrence is being under water, which greatly increases the possibility of encountering anoxia (). This is primarily because water can hold much less oxygen than air, and its diffusion rate is only about 1/10000 of that in air (Nilsson and Renshaw, 2004).
However, there are a few aquatic vertebrates that have evolved to become hypoxia tolerant. The study of these vertebrates is of great importance for non-anoxia tolerant mammalians, especially humans and can lead to the prevention and treatment of this condition. This study focuses on one question: how do these vertebrates survive anoxia and avoid brain damage?
In this essay three species that have evolved adaptive mechanism for dealing with anoxia will be reviewed: the Crucian carp, the freshwater turtles and finally the epaulette shark. They all appear to survive anoxia via different mechanisms and they will each be discussed along with their survival scheme in order to answer the question asked above.
Three species, three different strategies in surviving anoxia and avoiding brain damage. These three strategies are summarized in table 1.
Could the study of these species be the answer to minimising brain damage injury after heart surgery or stroke?
Maybe a combination of an aspect of each strategies could be the solution. For example the freshwater turtles have their neuronal activity also controlled by many molecular factors such as heat shock proteins (Hsp), HIF-1 alpha mRNA and NF-kappaB also found to play a major role in coordinating many adaptive response to hypoxia (the former) and a delayed defence mechanism to prevent reoxygenation reactive oxygen species (ROS) damage and initial apoptosis in mammals (Nilsson and Lutz, 2004). And so this combined to the fact that the epaulette shark survives anoxia at 25-30 C (normal room temperature) may be an important step further to treatment.
However, other species are also under investigation such as the leopard frog (Rana pipiens), although death is the ultimate result of its encountering hypoxia, which eventually might help in discovering a treatment.