Stem cells are undifferentiated cells that can give rise to specialized cells. There are different types of stem cells, but those that are thoroughly studied at the present time are pluripotent stem cells. These cells in theory can give rise to any cells in the body. There are 3 kinds of pluripotent stem cells: embryonal carcinoma stem cells which are derived from teratocarcinomas and primordial germ cells, embryonic germ cells derived from primordial germ cell as well and embryonic stem cell derived from the inner cell mass cells and the primitive ectoderm. Each of those cells exhibit markers that define their state as undifferentiated and they also require growth factors. This leads to one of their properties: self-renewal. When kept in their niches, these stem cells can divide symmetrically giving rise to 2 identical daughter cells which in turn will give rise to 2 identical daughter cells each. Pluripotent stem cells also possess 2 other properties, they can undergo differentiation (which is correlated with their exit from their niche, secreted factors and a clock mechanism) and they are capable of plasticity.
These cells are of great importance as they can be used in cell-based therapies to treat diseases and injuries but their use also raises many concerns, morally and ethically.
Stem cells may be the answer to a new medical generation and era. The analysis of their origin, properties and medical potential are therefore primordial.
The aim of researchers has always been to find a way of treating diseases caused by damaged or non-functional cells. In their years of investigation, a new class of cells has been discovered: stem cells. Stem cells are a special kind of cells that are unique. They are undifferentiated cells, which under certain conditions are capable of self-renewal and maintenance and are also capable of differentiating into specialized tissue-forming cells (The official national institutes of health resource for stem cell research; Donovan and Gearhart, 2001). Some cells will only give rise to one particular cell type, others will give rise to many. And it is this characteristic that has differentiated them from each other. Many stem cells have now been discovered: adult stem cells, embryonic stem cells, pluripotent stem cells and many more. But scientists have focused on pluripotent stem cells. These cells possess the ability to give rise to every cell type and tissues in the animal body and are derived from embryonic tissues (Musina et al, 2003).
The investigation of biologists have been based on one question: what is the origin, properties and medical potential of these particular cells?
To understand why researchers have focused on them, a full understanding of these cells is primordial and their origin, properties and medical potential must be reviewed individually and concisely.
Stem cells, especially pluripotent stem cells are of great interest in the research field. These cells although very different from one another and derived from different origins are connected by their amazing properties and medical potential. Table 1 summarizes the different and important aspects reviewed.
The importance and great potential of pluripotent stem cells has been recognized amongst the different communities (scientific, clergy, governmental) but have also raised concerns about their sources and use. If the creation of embryos for the derivation of pluripotent stem cells is reconsidered and allowed, what criteria will be used for cell-based therapies? Could the use of embryo be just allowed for therapeutic cloning? Adult stem cells might be the answer as there are less ethical issues surrounding them. But biologists are still trying to find ways to grow them in cell culture and manipulate them to generate specific cell types.