As a second order moral sceptic, Mackie believes that "there are no objective values" and he boldly states this in his opening paragraph. His view is about the status of moral values and the nature of moral valuing, rather than one that bluntly condemns all moral judgements (first order view). Mackie uses his arguments from relativity and from queerness to break down the claim to objective values, but meanwhile tries to justify a cause for continuing to argue about moral values in real life situations. I shall begin by contextualising the argument from queerness in terms of Mackie's argument for a second order moral scepticism. I shall then explain how this fits in with Mackie's bigger argument against the existence of moral values with the argument from relativity. Finally, I shall wrap up by discussing whether or not the argument actually works.
What Mackie means by moral values not being objective is that they are not part of the "fabric of the world," i.e. they are not characterisable independently of us. (Note that under this definition, Immanuel Kant's categorical imperative is not objective either as it is defined in terms of our actions.) If a value, such as good, is objective there must be some way in which one can be made aware of it. For example, say you see someone beating up an elderly lady. You see this happening and take in this primary information that is external from yourself and analyse it in your brain. Your brain then makes a judgement - lets say it concludes that this action is morally wrong. Regardless of how you act afterwards, where has this judgment of wrongness come from? An objectivist would say that the value of wrongness has come from the action itself, not from you. This is an externalist view. This action has an intrinsic property that makes you aware of its wrongness and this property is also action-guiding; it makes you act in a certain way. Now before we even get started on explaining why different people would act in different ways after having seen this event, let me put forward Mackie's argument from queerness. This states that if moral values were objective they would have an intrinsic action-guiding property as described above (how else would we be aware of their existence?). To Mackie the very notion that such a property could exist is absurd. He uses this argument to refute the claim to objectivity, most notably in the case of Platonic Forms, and thereby to bolster his argument for a second order moral scepticism. Taking a quote from Mackie, Plato explicitly states in "The Republic" that being acquainted with the Forms of Good, Justice and Beauty will impel one, "by this knowledge alone, and without any further motivation... to pursue and promote these ideals." This is precisely the kind of property that Mackie sees as "queer" and absurd. It would seem completely out of place in out world - different from all other types of properties, so Mackie implies that it makes more sense that this type of property does not exist. Mackie himself admits that Platonic Forms are one of moral philosophy's more fanciful arguments, so does the argument from queerness stand against other claims to the objectivity of moral values, such as Kant's categorical imperative?
In Mackie's overall case he also poses another argument - the argument from relativity. This states that the way we perceive values - what is good and what is bad - is constantly changing over time. Therefore, it does not make sense that there is one correct set of objective values. Different people from different cultures at different periods in time have often had conflicting views on morality. How can we rightly choose whose views on moral values correct? For example, it has long been common practise for Eskimo societies in North America to kill the weakest of their elders ahead of a particularly vicious winter in an act of euthanasia that would spare their suffering. This would be seen as an extremely immoral act in many other cultures and is a prime example of Mackie's argument. This line of reasoning is used alongside the argument from queerness as Mackie's case against objectivism.
Now I shall look at whether Mackie's argument actually works. At first glance, the argument from queerness seems to hold its ground. The existence of a intrinsically-motivating property does seems very odd, and it seems to make sense that such a property probably does not exist. However, the refutation of objectivism is not a logically necessary conclusion that can be made from this. Perhaps such a property does exist but we just have not yet discovered a method to detect or measure it. The concept of electricity and electric charge was merely a natural phenomenon until experiments were carried out in the eighteenth century. Perhaps it is the same with the concept of the intrinsically-motivating property. If this is true and Mackie is wrong there is still a problem of where this would property reside. Would it be in the action itself, and how would this be possible?
If Mackie is correct and objectivism is a false idea, then why does it feel so right? Why does the notion that murder is objectively wrong seem so appealing? G. E. Moore says that moral values are objective and that we detect them through a faculty of intuition. It is our faculty of intuition that tells us that beating up an elderly lady is bad. Mackie suggests that it is just the conditioning of our minds that makes the objectivity of moral values seem like an appealing idea. He says that values only seem objective because of what we are and the way we are - our minds have been conditioned by society - by our surroundings and our upbringing. This is all well and good but more is required than the argument from queerness to completely deny the case for objectivity.
Mackie's thesis that there are no objective values relies entirely, as one would expect, on his assumed definition of what makes something objective. According to him, if something (X) is objective, it is part of the "fabric of the world." This means, in essence, that X is characterisable independently of us, and hence independently of effects on us. However, since values are intrinsically action-guiding (i.e. they affect our actions) they cannot be part of the fabric of the world. This argument follows, presuming you accept Mackie's definition that to be objective something must be characterisable independently of us. However, according to Kant, for an action to be objectively morally good it must simply be universalizable. He states that "the 'maxim' implied by a proposed action must be such that one can will that it become a universal law of nature." Consider lying to someone so that they will lend you money, your maxim therefore being "Whenever I can gain something from it, I shall lie." Can you will this to become a universal law of nature? The answer must be no, as the practises of communication on which lying depends would break down. In this situation we have another way of defining objectivity, which, if accepted over Mackie's definition, takes out Mackie's entire case.
In conclusion, although Mackie's argument from queerness may seem at first glance to make sense, it is not powerful enough for me to endorse his thesis that there are no objective moral values. Mackie provides a sensible explanation for the claim to objectivity - that values may seem to be objective simply because of the way our mind has been conditioned due to the social environment in which we have been brought up. However, this does not override the inherent weakness in Mackie's argument from queerness - that its conclusion is not a logical necessity and the truth could easily be otherwise. The other main flaw in Mackie's argument is that it assumes an underlying definition of what it means to be objective - that for something to be objective it must be characterisable independently of us. As moral values apply to our actions, they are intrinsically related to us and by this definition they cannot be objective. However, if you take another definition of objectivity, say that of universalizability, then by Kant's categorical imperative objective moral values do exist, and Mackie's argument does not hold its ground.