The economic history of Britain in the late 18 th and early 19 th centuries certainly displayed symptoms of the beginning of an industrial revolution. This essay shall examine the period between 1760 and 1830; the 1760s seeing the introduction of important inventions, such as Hargreaves' Spinning Jenny, and Watts' steam engine, and the period until 1830 being one in which these macroinventions were still being improved to provide greater utility. Crafts (2002), for instance, states that until 1830 water power was still often more inexpensive than steam power. A revolution could be thought of as being an almost complete transformation in many aspects of society, with "industrial" implying an almost complete revolution from an agrarian to an industrialised economy involving factories and mass production. Important changes socially, technologically and economically could therefore be implied by this definition. This essay shall however argue that whilst important technological change did occur, the fact that the full potential impact had yet to occur showed that this period constituted an important prerequisite for what was to follow rather than constituting the revolution in itself.
The total factor productivity growth measures of Crafts, cited in Berg and Hudson (1992) estimate that TFP growth did not exceed 1% until post 1830. In itself, this illustrates that throughout the period pre 1830, macroinventions did not lead to a revolutionary change in the allocation of labour, production methods and finance. In fact, much of the advantage of the technological change had yet to be fully exploited. Berg and Hudson however contest the reliability of Crafts' measure, believing Crafts' samples to be heavily weighted and ignored certain industries. Some of their points, for instance that early steam engines were unreliable and often subject to breakdown however could demonstrate that indeed this measure was subject to an upward trend, which did not reach a peak until successive microinventions had resulted in a reliable and widely useable technology. For instance, a compound engine designed in 1803 to drastically save on fuel costs was not given adapted for industry until 1845. This therefore suggests that this period of slower TFP growth was an important prerequisite for a later acceleration, although by 1830 this had not gathered full steam. The period in question therefore can only be described as the beginnings of a revolution and not the revolution in itself.
It could however be considered that Mokyr's (1985) distinction between the traditional economy, which included agriculture and traditional trades, such as blacksmiths, from the modern economy consisting of new industrialised industries illustrates that in fact aggregate productivity growth was weighted down by a large traditional sector. Mokyr cit McCloskey estimates that between 1780 and 1860, labour productivity growth in the traditional sector was 0.6% per annum, compared with 1.8% in the modern sector. Although firstly these estimates are not directly comparable with those of Crafts due to differences in the productivity used, they illustrate the impact that the traditional economy had on the picture of the aggregate economy. This therefore suggests that by comparison a revolution was occurring in this modern sector, labour productivity growth being triple that of the Mokyr's traditional economy. As it is possible to consider that a revolution must have a starting point from which it must spread this again helps to illustrate that the period 1760 until 1830 as an important prerequisite for an Industrial Revolution, i.e. a revolution here could be seen as beginning within a small proportion of the economy.
Crafts (1989) further illustrates the above argument by stating that sixty percent of industrial employment in the first half of the nineteenth century occurred in the "traditional and small-scale" industry. This again helps to illustrate that there hadn't been a complete revolution, with much labour still allocated to traditional occupations. Berg and Hudson's (1992) argument that pre 1830 worker's living standards had suffered little impact from the changes reinforces Craft's previous point; using the idea that a revolution is supposed to bring an all encompassing positive change in society, the fact that personal consumption had been largely unaffected illustrates that socially a revolution had definitely not occurred. However, changes in the allocation of the male labour force between industry and agriculture do illustrate significant change; Crafts (1994) estimates that male employment in agriculture fell from 53% to 29% between 1760 and 1840, whilst male employment in industry rose from 24% to 47% in the same period. The net effect could therefore again be considered as beginnings of a revolution, changes in occupation could be considered to be a major change in society, although this had yet to feed through to worker's standards of living.
Technologically speaking, however, it could be considered unfair to say that traditional industry was not affected by the Industrial Revolution. Bekar (1999) cit Berg points out that small cottage producers installed new technology and small steam engines. It is therefore perhaps wrong to think of Mokyr's "traditional" sector as being wholly traditional and stagnant. This therefore illustrates that many businesses sought to try to take advantage of the benefits that technological improvement potentially brought to them, showing that the increase in innovation post 1770 brought a change to working practices throughout much of the economy. However, Bekar states that it was not until factories were redesigned specifically to exploit new steam power that the advantages of this General Purpose Technology were able to be widely felt. Bekar (1999) cit Mokyr however points out that even as late as the 1850s, the "traditional" sector still employed hundreds of thousands of people suggesting that whilst this significant proportion of the population were still employed in workshop based employment there was still a large sector of the economy not designed to gain efficiently from earlier inventions. Consequentially, this demonstrates that whilst dominant small scale industry did not prevent the beginnings of an industrial revolution, the time lags involved in implementing the changes which needed to occur meant that an industrial revolution was not going to occur instantaneously.
Berg and Hudson (1992) point out the high investment requirements involved with rapid technological development. As new innovation was firstly unreliable and often subject to breakdown, and secondly, became quickly obsolete, high capital investment was constantly needed to upgrade. It therefore seems logical that the ability to accumulate capital is an important consideration for this question of whether this period could be indeed described as an Industrial Revolution, since finance appears such a fundamental necessity. Bekar (1999) cit Williamson states that capital accumulation during the period examined was dented because of the borrowing of the British Government to finance war spending, Williamson believing that had the Napoleonic War not occurred, then British GDP could have been 0.8% higher at that time. This suggests that perhaps this period of economic history could not be described as revolutionary because time lags in industrialisation became an opportunity cost of war spending; industrialisation wasn't revolutionary because it hadn't reached its full potential. The fact that there was greater demand for loanable funds created a "crowding out effect" whereby interest rates rose, making the cost of borrowing more expensive for entrepreneurs and businesses. What was however particularly significant was the Usury Law, which existed until 1832. This prevented the interest rate on any borrowing from exceeding 5%, although this did not apply to Government borrowing. Mathias (1969) for instance points out how this dented the construction industry who suffered from higher interest rates; when the market rate of interest exceeded 5%, the loans were directed towards the Government. Therefore, the fact that the financial market was not allowed to function entirely freely could illustrate that perhaps there were some political constraints that dented the ability for a full revolution to occur. Capital accumulation is evidently an important part of economic growth, and the fact that this was dented by Government policy perhaps suggests that a major stakeholder in the national economy had not responded to aid growth. There had therefore not been a full political revolution in the necessary conditions for industrialisation.
To conclude, although the economic history of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries certainly had significance, in itself this period cannot be described as a full industrial revolution. Certainly, the growth of total factor productivity, as shown by Crafts estimates was on the rise, however by 1830, there was still much room for improvement. What, more than anything else, makes this only the beginnings of a revolution is the fact that the traditional industries still carried such large weight that in aggregate terms, the economic effects had been far from astounding. Although these traditional industries were far from being completely stagnant, many workshops using small steam engines and Spinning Jennies, what was needed was a more complete transformation that would take full advantage of the efficiencies of the new technologies. Although this could partly be explained by the slowdown in potential capital accumulation during the period of the Napoleonic War, due to higher Government demand for loanable funds, what is certain is that a complete revolution is a process which takes many years to complete, with constant improvement needed to ensure that new inventions fulfil their potential. The analysis in this essay overall therefore concludes that although an Industrial Revolution had started and a lot of the foundation laid, it was by no means complete.