A monopoly is where the market for a product is dominated by a single seller. Monopoly tends to have the following characteristics, price above marginal cost, consequently output is lower and a greater than normal profit. This affects consumers in that they pay a higher price than if the market was competitive. This will obviously have an effect on economic or Pareto efficiency. Efficiency in this case, means that there can be no Pareto improvement; a Pareto improvement is where a group of people can be made better off without making any other group of people worse off.
Logically it can be seen that a monopoly is inefficient as the consumers are worse off with a higher price and lower output than they would be in a competitive market. This, however, leads to the monopolist firm being better off. To decide whether a monopoly is inefficient on these grounds would require a method to evaluate the relative welfare changes in a monopoly compared with competition.
The diagram below, taken from Intermediate Microeconomics (2003, p428), shows that Monopoly with a linear demand is inefficient by the definition above; by showing a Pareto improvement can be made. The diagram shows a particular monopoly situation, the monopolist will choose to produce where profit is maximised, marginal cost = marginal revenue. If this was a competitive market the firm would produce at (p c, y c), in a monopoly the firm would produce at (p m, y m). In this situation the monopolist has chosen output at MR = MC and chosen the maximum price that consumers will pay at the quantity y m, this is given by the demand curve. In order to find a Pareto improvement, consider the monopoly situation between the two equilibriums, at output y m. There will be a consumer willing to pay some p between the monopoly price at y m and the marginal cost at y m. Clearly, the monopolist firm will make more profit, as long as the monopolist continues to produce y m at the monopoly price, and the consumer will have paid a price lower than the monopoly price, this means that both consumer and firm are 'better off', therefore, a Pareto improvement. This shows that a monopoly is Pareto or economically inefficient.
However, the extent of the inefficiency needs to be examined. This can depend on many factors; vertical integration is one of them. The analysis above describes a very general situation; markets tend to have several stages of production. Vertical integration happens when firms at different stages of production combine, creating a vertical monopoly. To determine whether a vertically integrated market is more efficient than a vertically disintegrated market, with a monopoly firm at each stage, the expression for profit and output can be analysed for both situations. Firstly, assume that consumer demand is linear and given by
Where p is price, y is output and a and b are positive demand parameters. Assume Firm A, upstream, has marginal cost, c, and Firm B, downstream, has marginal cost, d ( + t if the firms are not integrated). In the case where upstream and downstream firms are autonomous, Firm B will buy units from Firm A, at cost t, per unit determined by Firm A, assuming that each unit from Firm A will be used to produce each unit from Firm B, hence y A = y B = y. Firm B will choose its output given the value of t chosen by Firm A. The values of output and profit are shown as follows.
B will maximise its profits as follows,
To maximise, find First Order Condition with respect to y and put equal to 0, (or substitute MR = MC)
and
Firm A will maximise profits by determining t given
Substituting y and maximising 
A gives
Now profit, output and price can be derived in terms of the marginal costs and the demand parameters.
Now compare with a vertically integrated firm. In this case, there would be no charge between the firms, t = 0. The marginal cost would be c + d.
Maximising this gives a monopoly output, price and profit of
It can now be seen that the vertical integration doubles the output of the autonomous firms. As both situations are constrained by the same demand curve the price given by the vertically integrated firm is lower. This implies a greater consumer surplus. The profit of the vertically integrated firm is 25% higher than the summation of the autonomous firms' profit, an increase in the producer surplus. The increase in both consumer and producer surplus is a Pareto improvement, as both consumer and producer are better off. A Pareto improvement implies greater economic efficiency with a vertical monopoly. In this case the extent of economic inefficiency is reduced with a type of monopoly. However, the model is simplistic and as real markets do not tend to follow such models exactly, the extent of the improvement would be affected by other factors, particularly the demand parameters. For example the change in consumer surplus will depend on the elasticity of the demand curve and, therefore, the extent of the change in efficiency. The model also assumes there is an existing monopoly on each stage of production, or Bilateral Monopoly, this is only a specific example of vertical integration.
A contestable market is a market where there are no barriers to entry and exit, in particular, low sunk costs and easy access to production techniques. If a market is horizontally competitive and already contestable, a monopoly is unlikely to develop because charging a higher price would lead to losing market share, as consumers would choose to buy from the other firms, assuming homogeneous products. If a monopoly market had high barriers to entry then it would be likely to stay a monopoly as no firm will risk losing money by entering the market, this will cause the monopoly to remain inefficient.
However, the theory of contestable markets states that a monopoly will be forced to be efficient if faced with a contestable market to avoid new entrants. This implies that potential competition is as important as real competition. An incumbent firm will fear 'hit and run' competitors who take advantage of the supernormal profits and exit the market again when normal profits are restored. This encourages the incumbent to keep prices low in order to stop potential entrants from noticing supernormal profits. However, there is nothing to prevent the incumbent from making supernormal profits until a new competitor enters, the incumbent firm must decide whether short term supernormal profit is worth the longer term risk. If the firm chooses to produce at the competitive level of profit and price, the monopoly will be more economically efficient than if the market was incontestable. However, if the monopolist chooses to keep making supernormal profits the market will remain inefficient until a new firm enters the market, when it will become more economically efficient. The extent to which the efficiency increases depends on how long the competitor remains in the market or whether the two firms cooperate and form a duopoly. If the competitor exits quickly, the monopoly inefficiency would resume. If the competitor remained in the market, either the market would become efficient with the entry of more new firms or a duopoly would form, which would still be economically inefficient if the firms cooperated.
New technology can increase efficiency by improving methods of production, and creating new products. An economy will rely on firms to research and develop technology in order to make greater profits. However, if a firm develops a new technology, in a perfectly competitive markets it competitors would be able to use the development. There is no incentive for each firm to spend its profits on research and development when all firms share the benefits. Patents are implemented to solve this. A patent creates a short term monopoly to provide firms with an incentive for innovation. The firm will then directly benefit from the invention in the form of supernormal profits. This causes economic inefficiency in short term. However, in the longer run, when the patent has expired economic efficiency will resume as all firms take advantage of the new technology, competing with the original firm. If, however, there were no patents, this long term gain in efficiency may not have taken place. This is an example of a short term monopoly creating efficiency. The extent of the efficiency depends on the length of the patent. A patent that is too long will create a longer period of monopoly and will cause greater inefficiency; however, a short patent is not a big enough incentive for firms to innovate. The optimal length of a patent has been researched by William Nordhaus who researched the optimal life of a patent in terms of the length of time that maximises consumer surplus, therefore the least inefficient. This is dependent on the elasticity of demand, the importance of the invention and government taxation among other factors. (''The Optimal Life of a Patent'', William Nordhaus)
Marketing has many influences on the efficiency of monopoly, the main two are creating brand loyalty and marketing costs can be a large part of a firms sunk costs when entering a relatively incontestable market. Companies such as The Coca-Cola Company can afford to charge a higher market price from their soft drink than competitors. This is brand loyalty, created by successful marketing. A company with strong brand loyalty will be able to act as a monopolist in the market they create for their individual product. This will lead to a lower consumer surplus, supernormal profits and consequently, economic inefficiency. The monopoly is created because the marketing makes the consumer believe the product is differentiated from the other products in the market. Whether this is due to the image of using a particular brand, or a difference in quality, the firm gains market power. Other firms can compete by marketing their own product in order to steal market share. This can restore efficiency but incurs considerable costs.
It is the high costs of marketing that contributes to high sunk costs, a barrier to entry in an established monopoly. A firm will not want to risk entering a market if it will have to spend a lot on advertising. This prevents competition from increasing the economic efficiency and encourages an existing monopoly to advertise, deterring potential entrants.
As a monopolist is the single seller in a market, price and quantity can be chosen by the firm, as there are no competitors to undercut the chosen price. Therefore, the point of production where profits are maximised is constrained by the demand curve and the demand elasticity. Assuming the monopolist operates to maximise profit, the equilibrium output will be where marginal cost is equal to marginal revenue. At an given output, y, marginal revenue can be expressed in terms of demand elasticity (Intermediate Microeconomics, 2003, p278)
Where p(y) is the price function of demand and (y) is the elasticity of demand at output, y. At profit maximisation output, MR(y) = MC(y)
Elasticity of demand is generally negative giving
The value of (y) affects the monopolist's choices in the following ways. When |(y)| < 1, demand elasticity is inelastic, 1/|(y)| > 1, this gives a negative marginal revenue, which will never equal marginal costs without government intervention. Therefore a monopolist will not choose to operate in the market, avoiding the economic inefficiency caused by monopolies. However, if the elasticity is greater than 1, 1/|(y)| < 1, and there will be a point where MR(y) = MC(y), where 0 <  < 1. It can be seen that when the demand curve is perfectly elastic, |(y)| = , then 1/|(y)| = 0 and MR(y) = MC(y). This is the competitive case which is economically efficient. It can then be concluded that a monopoly will only operate when |(y)|  1. Therefore the monopoly induced inefficiency will only occur when |(y)|  1. It should also be remembered that the demand elasticity will affect the extent of the price distortion that a monopoly creates, which will in turn, affect the extent of the inefficiency caused by the monopoly.
In conclusion, the factors examined above all contribute to the extent of the inefficiency that a monopoly causes. Generally vertical integration of monopoly firms will reduce inefficiency, along with horizontal contestability. Marketing will increase monopoly power and patented technology will cause a short term monopoly, but may cause a long term increase in efficiency. Elasticity of demand can affect whether a monopolist will even operate.
The factors have been examined singularly; however, in a real market it is likely that all these factors, and others, will affect the market situation together. Then, the extent of the inefficiency will be a balance of the outcome of each factor. The interaction of, for example, marketing within a contestable market can make the market less contestable. A monopoly may use this to protect the monopoly status of the firm prolonging the inefficient state. Therefore, while the conclusions have been drawn about the effects of single factors, the combinations may affect economic efficiency in different ways.