The initial agreement to commit theft is conspiracy, between Amy and Felicity, contrary to the section 1(1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977, "if a person agrees with any other person that a course of conduct shall be pursued [which if would amount to the commission of an offence] ...he is guilty of conspiracy to commit the offence in question". The offence of carrying weapons falls under the second class of weapons of the Offensive Weapons Act 1996; "any article intended for such use [as a weapon]", which would encompass use of rulers to imitate a gun and threaten.
Theft involves the actus reus of "appropriating property belonging to another". Appropriation is defined under section 3(1) as "any assumption by a person of the rights of an owner". McPherson
 clarified that this does not require property to be taken off the premises. Putting a bottle of whisky in a bag amounted to appropriation whilst still on the shop premises; therefore the fact that Felicity and Amy have not left the train will not exculpate them. The actus reus is fulfilled by their unauthorised assumption of the owners' "right to make use of a physical thing".
The wide definition of assumption encompassing any interference with the owner's property appears to be within the ambit of attempts, since it is not necessary that the accused successfully leaves with the property. This broad categorisation under the offence of theft reduces the significance of the actus reus, thus increasing the emphasis upon the mens rea of dishonesty for imposing liability.
The mens rea elements of theft require "dishonesty" " and "intention to permanently deprive. Although intention to permanently deprive is relatively unambiguous, the concept of dishonesty is vague. Section 2 creates a list of exceptions to dishonesty but where undefined, it is left to the jury as a question of fact to assign to it its ordinary meaning. A two-fold test was developed from Ghosh
; first requiring the jury to objectively judge the behaviour with regard to the standards of ordinary and decent people; and secondly a subjective test requiring that the defendant was aware of his or her dishonesty. It is unequivocal that Amy and Felicity's behaviour would satisfy the Ghosh test in addition to the intention to permanently deprive; therefore Amy and Felicity are guilty of two accounts of theft as co-principals.
Judicial perceptions of dishonesty may vary creating uncertainty, exacerbated by the emphasis placed upon mens rea. Implementing a definition of dishonesty would restrict the scope of the offence, although it is dubious whether absence of a definition broadens the offence of theft.
Robbery requires violence "immediately before or at the time of [theft]"; therefore it has no relevance to the events since force was used only after the final theft attempt was complete. Violence was not inherent to the acquisition of mobile phones, but merely part of the aftermath of theft.
Amy is also guilty attempted theft, requiring the mens rea of intention and the actus reus of committing "an act which is more than merely preparatory to the commission of the offence". The actus reus cannot be fulfilled due to the non-existence of a mobile phone. Issues arise as to whether prosecutions can ensue from an impossible attempt. The case of Haughton v. Smith
 involved the handling of 'stolen goods' which were not actually stolen. The House of Lords exonerated the defendant since "to convict him of attempting to handle stolen goods would be to convict him not for what he did but simply because he had a guilty intention." This affirmed the view that legal impossibility negates liability for an attempt. Partington v. Williams extended its application to physical impossibility, although DPP v. Nock held obiter that the limits of Haughton should be confined to legal impossibility to avoid exonerating pickpockets such as Felicity and Amy.
The Criminal Attempts Act sanctions that attempts can still be prosecuted in cases where theft is impossible, where "if the facts of the case had been as he believed them to be, his intention would be...regarded as having amounted to an intent to commit an offence" . Despite this, in Anderton v. Ryan
 the House of Lords proceeded to reinforce Haughton, swayed by the ostensible innocence of the act isolated from intention. Shivpuri reconciled case law with relevant legislation. A defendant was convicted of attempt to receive and distribute illegally imported drugs and pass on to third parties, notwithstanding that the true substance was in fact a "harmless vegetable matter". It is now widely accepted that impossible attempts are punishable; "innocent and guilty acts considered 'objectively' and independently of the state of mind of the actor cannot be sensibly maintained".
Amy has the requisite mens rea of intention and her actions are sufficiently proximate ('more than merely preparatory') to the commission of the offence, in fact the attempt is complete, failing only due to an extraneous factor. The law of attempts is currently too narrow, allowing the acquittal of attempters sufficiently proximate to merit conviction. Fair labelling demands differentiation between offences of attempt according to degree of culpability. An attempt that fails due to police intervention is more reprehensible than an offender choosing to abandon his crime, which the current law fails to acknowledge. The American Model Penal Code 'substantial step' is more favourable corresponding with the principles of maximum certainty and fair labelling by classifying offences according to the degree of culpability.
It needs to be addressed whether injury to Caroline warrants liability beyond section 47, that of mere "actual bodily harm". Next up the hierarchy are the more serious offences of section 18 and 20 necessitating "wounding or causing/inflicting GBH". The case of DPP v. Smith
 defines GBH as anything considered by the jury to be "really serious harm" although Saunders
 held that "serious harm" is sufficient. Loss of a sensory function is evidently an example of this type of harm rather than actual harm for which bruising may suffice. The principal issue is whether Felicity could be convicted under section 18, "maliciously wounding or causing grievous bodily harm with intent" ; or section 20 for which the Cunningham
 test of advertent recklessness fulfils (awareness of foreseeable risks). Felicity could escape liability for section 18 if intent cannot be proved.
Purcell
 confirmed that the Nedrick test of intention for murder applies to GBH. This held that "intention is sufficient if death or serious bodily harm was a virtual certainty... and if the defendant realised this was the case". It must be proved that Felicity was subjectively aware that serious bodily harm was virtually certain. The use of a ruler could provide "objective evidence of premeditation", although it is not an obvious weapon and was not intended to be used as a weapon but merely to frighten. The CPS could argue that serious harm is virtually certain from stabbing a ruler into another's eye, but the bluntness of the instrument does not provide conclusive evidence. As the risk of blindness was not acute, the possibility of lesser injuries would eliminate 'virtual certainty'. Woollin
 modified Nedrick with the substitution of entitling the jury to 'find' rather than 'infer' the necessary intention. The replacement of 'find' affords to the jury more scope, or "moral elbow room" to allow a judgment either way. Woollin does not extend to every context of criminal law, thus creating uncertainty as to whether intention will be inferred more broadly, or whether the Nedrick test will be assumed.
It is likely that Felicity would be convicted under the lesser offence of section 20. Mowatt  held that "there is no need to prove recklessness as to wounding or GBH so long as D was reckless as to some physical harm to some person...albeit of a minor character". This was affirmed by Savage and Parmenter
, reinforcing the application of the Cunningham test interpreting 'maliciously' to necessitate foresight of the particular harm. Extending the law to include advertent reckless is constructive liability, contrary to the principle of fair labelling that there "must be a close match between the label attached to a crime and the nature and gravity of what D has done".
Section 18 is also not entirely consistent with fair labelling. It could be argued that it is too wide; accumulating liability intention can be inferred from virtual certainty to the ordinary person but no direct intention is necessary. Conversely, section 18 could be perceived as too narrow, enabling defendants to escape full liability for the consequences of their actions, where some degree of harm was intended but it is ambiguous as to the extent. This allows the crime to be dealt with within the scope of section 20. The gap between section 20 and 18 is too wide: a conviction under section 20 imposes up to five years' imprisonment compared to life imprisonment for section 18. The disparity in sentencing is disproportionate to the similarities of the two offences, inconsistent with fair labelling.
Felicity's act of punching would normally only constitute common assault or assault occasioning actual bodily harm but further liability is constructed owing to the resulting death. The fault element falls short of murder because death or GBH was not virtually certain, hence intention cannot be inferred. For a conviction under unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter, it must be established that the act was unlawful; that the act was objectively dangerous; and that this crime caused the victim's death.
The unlawful act can be identified as common assault, entailing technical assault and battery. Felicity deliberately punched Delia, fulfilling the mens rea for assault which necessitates recklessness or intention. Church
 clarifies the second requirement; "the unlawful act must be such as all sober and reasonable people would inevitably recognise must subject the other person to, at least, the risk of some harm". This was backed by the House of Lords in Newbury. It is clear to the reasonable person that Felicity's act would present some risk of harm to Delia, thus it is objectively dangerous.
Causation issues transpire when ascertaining whether the act was causally related to the victim's death. It is apparent in this case that 'but for' Felicity's act, Delia would not have fallen and hit her head and died. Williams
 is analogous to the facts of this case. Williams pushed and slapped a woman, causing her to fall, hit her head on a wall-mounted heater, damage her neck and die. He was convicted of unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter. The fall and subsequent events are consequential to the assault and not independent, hence no 'novus actus interveniens' can be said to have occurred to break the chain of causation.
The three criteria can be established; therefore Felicity is guilty of unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter. This offence is too broad, ranging from acts that may amount to little more than inadvertence up to acts falling little short of murder. The Law Commission proposes the abolishment of the offence. It should be divided into discrete offences to assign just labels and sentences proportionate to crime. Constructive manslaughter takes the scope of liability beyond what D would have contemplated, contrary to the principle of fair labelling which advocates that difference in context and culpability associated with the killing should be marked by a separate offence. Public opinion reinforces this notion; a survey of people in England and Wales revealed that ordinary people recognise considerable variations in gravity between homicides.
The subject of complicity arises regarding Amy's involvement. Accomplice liability is derivative of the principal's offence combined with the fault element of intention to assist. It requires the actus reus of "aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the commission of an indictable offence". The accessory must have the mens rea of intention to assist as well as mens rea in relation with respect to the acts of the principal. Amy assisted Felicity as co-principal in committing theft, embarking upon a joint unlawful enterprise. Similarly, Felicity is Amy's accomplice to the offence of attempted theft. Amy's 'aiding and abetting' could also be extended to the offences of GBH and manslaughter. The issue is whether liability is constructed out of her involvement in the joint enterprise, or whether Felicity's acts were outside the scope of the joint enterprise.
For acts to extend to accomplice liability, Bainbridge
 held that the accomplice merely has to foresee the typology of offences that could be committed with the relevant mens rea. It could be argued that the typology of offences was foreseeable to Amy for two key reasons: Her knowledge of Felicity's violent temper and previous convictions of assault enabled her to foresee possible violence. Most significantly, their prior agreement to use the rulers to appear as armed in the event of disturbance takes the joint enterprise within the ambit of robbery, using force "or seeking to put any person in fear of being then and there subjected to force". Robbery is a crime of violence and from this it is possible to extend the scope of the enterprise to GBH or constructive manslaughter. Maxwell
 introduced reckless knowledge as sufficient accessorial mens rea, requiring that the defendant could be convicted so long as he contemplated the alleged offence as one of the possible offences.
Powell
 held that an accessory who foresees a risk that the principal offender might kill the victim with the relevant mens rea for murder will also be liable for murder. This applies to other offences: "If the principal were charged with constructive manslaughter ... the accessory will also be liable for manslaughter if he foresees a risk that the principal offender might intentionally or recklessly (the mens rea of battery) hit the victim." Recklessness is sufficient mens rea for imposing liability upon the accomplice for battery or section 20 for events taken outside the scope of the joint enterprise; therefore Amy would be liable for manslaughter and GBH under section 18. This attributes liability to the accessory for advertent recklessness as sufficient the mens rea as to whether an offence will take place, which seems disproportionate regarding Amy's involvement merely preceding the offence.
The derivative approach, attributing liability to any offences contemplated as possible with the essential mens rea, is too broad and at variance with fair labelling. There is a moral distinction between recklessness and intent which should be reflected in sentencing and labelling. It is undesirable that law should impose responsibility for something outside the accessory's control and contrary to the doctrine of individual autonomy that the accomplice should take responsibility for the principal's action. The American M.P.C. requires the higher degree of mens rea that the accomplice acted with the purpose of facilitating the offence. The Canadian Draft Criminal Code proposed that the maximum penalty for an assister with mere knowledge should not exceed half the maximum term provided for the perpetrator. Germany also imposes a maximum of three-quarters of the principal's sentence. These jurisdictions acknowledge the distinction between the blameworthiness of the accomplice and the principal that English practice ignores, consistent with fair labelling.