A claim for judicial review is defined as "a claim to review the lawfulness of a decision, action or failure to act in relation to the exercise of a public function". For a claim to be considered it must first meet the procedural requirements. X, Y and Z must all bring their claims within three months of the incident occurring. The applicants must have sufficient interest in the subject matter; this can be affirmed since all three pupils are adversely affected by the outcome of the Board's decision. The institution must also be sufficiently public, which can be satisfied in the case of a local state secondary school. Additionally, the pupils require leave to apply for judicial review which will be obtained if the court considers that the claimant has a prospect of succeeding.
The GCHQ case identified the three grounds upon which judicial review will take place: illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety. The relevant heads of review will be considered in relation to each pupil's dispute.
The school's policy provides for automatic permanent exclusion upon a second positive test. Policy does not predetermine every outcome, but should be used as guidance. "Policy should be the most important factor that will be applied in the absence of good reason shown by applicant (a) either to change the policy or (b) not to apply it in the particular case". In Gangadeen
, it was held that the Secretary of State's policy should be viewed as an extra statutory concession and a wide discretion was conferred for its application. This is analogous to the school policy; thus it was open for the school to depart from the policy. The issue turns on whether the school panel erred in strictly applying the policy to the exclusion of the medical report.
The factual basis of the decision may be incorrect; by refusing to consider the medical report, the court failed to ascertain whether X had in fact taken drugs a second time. In ex p. A
, failure of the police to release the doctor's report to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board was deemed to amount to a material error of fact. Nevertheless the decision was rendered ultra vires on the ground of natural justice. In ex p. E
, Carnwath LJJ affirmed that an appeal may be made based on a separate heading of unfairness due to "misunderstanding or ignorance of an established and relevant fact" where the mistake played a material role in the decision.
Natural justice and fairness demand the procedural right to have the opportunity to state one's side of the case, audi alteram partem. In Ridge v. Baldwin
 the House of Lords declared the Watch Committee's decision void for dismissal of an employee without hearing, thereby breaching the rules of natural justice. Opportunity to have the medical report heard would have cast doubt on X's culpability. X's case is contrary to the general principle asserted by Lord Reid that, "a man is not to be dismissed for misconduct without being heard". I would thus advise X to challenge the decision upon the new ground of unfairness based on error of fact.
In Re Racal
 Lord Diplock expressed his view that the distinction between errors of law and fact was blurred. In X's case, the decision could be categorised as either. An error of law can be established by unreasonableness. In Wednesbury
, Lord Greene created a test of whether a decision is "so unreasonable that no reasonable authority could ever have come to it". He stated that failing to regard the matters which he is bound to consider is sufficient to satisfy the test of unreasonableness. Hence, the panel's decision could be rendered ultra vires for ignoring the medical report; this can be seen as a matter the panel was bound to consider because it contested the reliability of the evidential basis of the decision.
Alternatively X could challenge the decision for illegality. Prior to Anisminic
, only an error of law on the face of the record could render the decision ultra vires. Since the school panel had the authority to make the decision, it would have been immune from judicial review. Anisminic abolished the distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional errors, making both susceptible to judicial review. Lord Reid identified a number of errors of law that went to the jurisdiction notwithstanding that the tribunal had the right to enter on the inquiry. One of these errors was refusing to take into account something that it was required to take into account. The effect of this would be to render the decision a nullity.
It therefore appears that the panel's refusal to consider the medical report could be rendered ultra vires based on any of the grounds of procedural impropriety, irrationality or illegality.
In Venables
 it was held that "the policy must not be so rigid that it does not allow for the exceptional case which requires a departure from the policy". The blanket policy of automatic expulsion is rigid and fetters any discretion by preventing the opportunity for X to state his case. The GCHQ case laid down the test for irrationality (developed from Wednesbury) defined as whether the decision "is so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it".
X has a right to receive education at the ABC College unless he acts in breach of the school's behaviour policy. Failure to allow a hearing prevents the school from legitimately establishing that X breached the drugs policy. This may constitute a violation of X's Article 6 rights to a fair trial. In Daly
 Lord Steyn considered the need to adopt a different intensity of review for the Wednesbury test in light of the Human Rights Act 1998. Where Convention rights are in play, the court is required to follow the proportionality approach which subjects the policy to greater scrutiny. I would therefore advise X to pursue his challenge under the head of proportionality. Proportionality goes further than reasonableness and considers the relative weight to be accorded to interests and considerations, ascertaining whether the harm created is disproportionate to any benefits which accrue. De Freitas laid down a three-fold test to determine whether a rule is excessive:
The policy's objective is to remove pupils who have repeatedly used drugs. The fundamental right at issue can be identified as X's right to a fair trial. The measure of automatically excluding pupils testing positively a second time is rationally connected to the objective. However, it is difficult to see how allowing a hearing to go ahead following a second positive test would hinder this policy objective; hence the measure goes further than the objective requires. Its blanket nature excluding all considerations shows it to be disproportionate.
Y's allegations invoke the rule against bias, another tenet of natural justice. Article 6 rights to impartiality and independence also come into play. However, in Alconbury
 it was held that judicial review was sufficient to cure any Convention incompatibility and therefore I would advise Y to pursue the claim based on natural justice.
The Pinochet case extended the notion of bias beyond pecuniary interest to include any personal interest in the decision. The House of Lords overruled itself because of Lord Hoffman's connection with Amnesty International, a key petitioner for Pinochet's extradition. This rendered him "a judge in his own cause" contrary to the maxim nemo iudex in sua causa, operating to automatically disqualify him from hearing the appeal. Lord Hope identified other factors which could automatically disqualify a judge:
The teacher involved with the anti-drugs campaign could be regarded as having some "strong commitment" to his anti-drugs campaign. This would automatically exclude him from the hearing without need to regard whether there was any "likelihood or suspicion of bias" since he would also be considered to be a judge in his own cause.
Lord Hope's analysis could also encompass the teacher who Y complained about. "Association" includes some direct or indirect relationship, experience or contact with a party to the proceedings. If the complaint had led to hostile relations between Y and the teacher, this could bring about his automatic disqualification from sitting as judge.
It is contentious whether the teachers would merit automatic exclusion; thus I will consider the second application of the rule against bias articulated by Lord Browne-Wilkinson. This applies where there is no financial or personal connection to either party, but "in some other way his conduct or behaviour may give rise to a suspicion that he is not impartial". In R v Gough
 the test inquired as to whether there was a real danger the defendant had not had a fair trial. However the leading case of Magill v Porter  amended the test to:
Walker LJ distinguished between possibility and probability of bias, preferring the lower threshold test. However, in AMEC Capital Projects
 the Court of Appeal asserted that only a properly arguable objection would suffice. Under this test it would be more difficult to demonstrate an arguable objection or any real possibility of bias bearing in mind that the complaint was subsequently dismissed. The arguments appear stronger for the anti-drugs campaigner who has an interest in the decision for striking down on drug abuse; however, the outcome will have little impact on the second teacher. It could be argued that the teacher would want to secure Y's exclusion to prevent further complaints but this is unlikely bearing in mind that the complaint was subsequently dismissed.
The third teacher falling asleep and not listening to Y's defence raises further issues of procedural impropriety. As well as the requirement that one has the opportunity to state his case, a legitimate expectation arises that the case will be heard, thus invoking the rules of natural justice. A legitimate expectation arises from the policy's provisions that pupils will have the procedural protection of a hearing before four teachers with the assumption that they will be awake in order to actually hear the case.
Coughlan
 established a three-fold classification of legitimate expectations with a variable intensity of review. In Y's case a legitimate expectation arises from "promise or practice" and must be adhered to, "unless there is an overriding reason to resile from it". In GCHQ, there arose a legitimate expectation for trade union members to be consulted on the decision to ban membership; however, national security concerns superseded the requirements of natural justice. It is difficult to envisage any overriding public interest to justify departure from the duty to provide four vigilant judges.
Y can successfully claim that his hearing breached the principles of natural justice by virtue of one teacher's bias and another's breach of his legitimate expectation. The likely result of this is that the case will be remitted to the panel, replacing the anti-drugs campaigner with an impartial teacher and wide awake colleagues.
Z's first argument is that the panel wrongly considered his grades in deciding to expel him. A certain amount of discretion is conferred by the policy; however the matters to be taken into account relate to the class of drug and the surrounding circumstances. In Wednesbury, Lord Greene categorised consideration of irrelevant matters as meeting the unreasonableness test. He cited the example of a teacher dismissed for having red hair as "so absurd that no sensible person could ever dream that it lay within the powers of the authority". Z's intellectual ability has no relevance to his use of the drugs, thus it would fulfil this high threshold of unreasonableness. Alternatively, Lord Greene envisaged that extraneous considerations could also come under the ground of illegality. In Anisminic, the Commission's decision was rendered a nullity because it was based on misinterpreted statutory considerations which it had no right to take into account. This is analogous to Z's case; it can be said that the policy did not authorise the consideration of grades and the decision would therefore be ultra vires.
The issue of terminating the specialist course to save money is more contentious. In the case of Barry
, it was held by a majority of three to two that the availability of resources was a relevant factor in assessing the needs of disabled people. The eligibility criteria varied according to the Local Authority's financial position. The justification advanced was that Parliament's intention could not have been to ignore the issue of cost. Similarly in International Traders' Ferry Limited
, the police protection of live animal exporters from protestors was considered to be a discretionary decision which could take into account the availability of resources. Conversely, in Tandy
 the court struck down the Local Authority's decision based on the availability of resources to reduce the hours of education for a child. It was held that the local education authority had a statutory duty to consider educational needs; considering additional criteria would downgrade this statutory duty to a discretionary power.
The distinction between these two approaches appears to rest on whether the source of authority conferred an absolute duty or a power of discretion on the decision-maker. Where there is a strict duty, Tandy illustrates that cost/benefit analysis cannot be taken into account. The issue therefore turns on the nature of the school policy. Although it permits flexibility as to the circumstances, this does not extend beyond regard to the use of drugs. The decision to expel a pupil should not raise issues of cost, and the policy-makers could not have intended this interpretation. Therefore, the decision is likely to be decided in line with Tandy as ultra vires for considering irrelevant factors.
Judicial review must be sought only as a last resort where alternative remedies are exhausted. Therefore if there was an appeals procedure which was not employed, leave for an application for judicial review would be refused.
If the appeals procedure was used successfully X, Y and Z would have no need to resort to judicial review. On the other hand, if the appeals were dismissed, much depends on the nature of the appeal as to whether judicial review can be sought. Calvin v. Carr
 addressed the question of whether an appeal could cure an initial decision. The Privy Council concluded that, "Since the committee had given P's case a full and fair consideration at the appeal stage, a failure of natural justice at the inquiry stage was irrelevant". Although some cases require a fair hearing at the initial and the appeal stage, an appeal which consists of a full rehearing as to the merits of the case is sufficient to cure any initial defect.
For a reassessment of the merits in relation to X, the appeal will need to take into account the medical report. For Y, the Local Authority board should comprise of independent and impartial awake judges for assessment of the length of suspension appropriate. Finally, Z's appeal would have to exclude extraneous matters from consideration. If the appeals adhered to these requirements in conducting a rehearing, judicial review would not be available since the initial defects would be cured.