Euthanasia encompasses a wide range of acts and omissions between which I will differentiate. Voluntary euthanasia requires a competent patient's explicit request for death to be brought about. This includes active voluntary euthanasia, which involves a third party bringing about death of the patient himself or assisting in the final act of death ('physician-assisted suicide' in the context of the medical profession). Passive voluntary euthanasia entails the withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment at the request of a competent patient. Involuntary euthanasia, on the other hand, is absent of any request. The decision is made on the patient's behalf regarding his best interests. Involuntary active euthanasia can be distinguished from involuntary passive euthanasia in that the moment of death is caused by an action and cannot be attributed to natural causes.
Currently the law in England and Wales prohibits assisted suicide under section 2 of the Suicide Act 1961. Omissions, however, do not fall within the scope of this legislation. Bland
 illustrates the legal distinction between acts and omissions. The House of Lords held that it was lawful to withhold artificial nutrition and hydration as well as antibiotics by categorising the cessation of such treatment as an omission. Mercy killing by omissions is considered lawful on the basis of the patient's life no longer being worthwhile.
This essay will focus on the arguments surrounding physician assisted suicide (PAS).
The principal argument against euthanasia rests on the sanctity of life principle. This can be linked to religion; many see human life as God-given and therefore sacrosanct. It follows that to intentionally bring an end to life is an affront to God's intention. However, the decline in religion over the last century reduces its significance. Alternatively, Keown proposes that the foundation of the principle derives from the intrinsic human dignity, inherent because of the radical capacities possessed by humans such as understanding and rational choice.
If the sanctity principle is given theological substance, human life is absolute and cannot be derogated from. However the law on abortion and self defence demonstrates that the sanctity principle alone does not carry sufficient weight to prohibit all intentional acts of death. If the sanctity principle is given its secular interpretation according to Keown, justification for upholding the value of life rests on human capacity. Therefore it cannot be absolute, since human life will not always have such intrinsic value. Lord Hoffman asserted in Bland:
This 'qualified' sanctity doctrine takes into account quality of life considerations, ascertaining what is in the patient's best interest. This has been consistently applied to numerous cases involving passive euthanasia. It therefore appears anomalous that courts are reluctant to erode the sanctity principle for cases of active euthanasia, leaving the law in a "morally and intellectually misshapen state". Justification for such reluctance rests on the act/omissions distinction.
The legal justification for distinguishing between acts and omissions is that the author of an act has a causative input on the outcome, whereas "the agent who fails, through omission, to prevent death is allowing the completion of a pre-existing causal set for that outcome". It is perhaps more difficult to perceive a moral distinction in cases of euthanasia. Harris criticises as problematic the judgment that it is morally preferable to withhold treatment causing a protracted death rather than killing quickly and painlessly.
Those in favour of active euthanasia contend that the act/omissions distinction is untenable and should be abolished. Support for this is merited by the dubious classification as 'omissions' of acts such as the switching off of ventilation machines, and removal of feeding and hydration tubes.
Williams asserts that classification of life-support machines as omissions is correct: if the life-saving apparatus was required to be restarted every 24 hours, deliberate failure to restart it would be an omission. Thus;
Conversely, the two scenarios can be seen as the very distinction between acts and omissions. Rachels demonstrates the absence of any moral distinction between acts and omissions in his scenario of the child drowning by itself and with the assistance of an adult, both with the same culpable intention. Yet this does not deny the causative value of the author's input. Neither should it in Williams' scenario: the case where the respirator ceases by itself is causally distinct from the case that requires a positive act of turning off the respirator and cannot be used to generalise acceptance of switching off a ventilator as an omission. The positions of the two doctors are more analogous to the two adults; one merely watching, the other taking active steps to ensure that the child drowns.
In Bland it was accepted that even though the medics were placed under a duty to act by providing artificial nutrition and hydration, this duty terminated when it became within the patient's best interest to die. The duty to act in certain situations is comparable to the duty not to interfere. "The act/omission distinction ceases to be of legal significance where there is a duty to act". It logically follows that if the quality of life approach is applicable for passive euthanasia, it should be extended to active euthanasia; despite this, courts have upheld the distinction. This has led to the judicial invention of the principle of 'double effect' to exonerate perpetrators of active euthanasia who would otherwise fall within the scope of the Suicide Act.
In R v. Bodkin Adams
, the judiciary directed the jury to acquit a doctor for increasing dosage of medication which resulted in the death of an elderly stroke patient. Lord Devlin distinguished between acting with the primary intention of causing death and acting with the primary purpose of relieving pain and suffering, with death as a side effect. The latter was regarded as exculpable since "no act is murder which does not cause death".
This approach has elicited much criticism and does not rest easily with the judgment of Woollin
 that a defendant will be regarded as obliquely intending a consequence and thus be liable if he knows it to be a virtually certain outcome of his actions. The flaw in the double effect approach is exposed by applying it to a case where the patient is not terminally ill but suffers from a recoverable condition. Administering lethal doses with the intent of 'relieving pain' is unlikely to be a persuasive line of defence. The double effect doctrine subverts the true issue of whether it is in the patient's best interests. However, if the courts were to abolish the act/omissions distinction altogether and relied on this approach, it would provide a defence not just for physicians, but for all authors of mercy killings.
Cases of acquittals remove the deterrent effect created by the legal prohibition of assisted suicide. The case of Moor
 involved a GP allegedly administering a lethal injection to a terminally ill patient causing death (again invoking the doctrine of double effect). The judge nevertheless directed the jury to acquit him. This sympathetic approach was reiterated in Chard
 where the jury was directed to find the defendant not guilty of aiding and abetting suicide by supplying paracetamol at the deceased's request. Pownall QC held that this had merely provided the deceased with an option of taking her own life and did not constitute assistance.
Research from other jurisdictions confirms that physicians are participating in active euthanasia despite its illegality: a US survey recorded 20% of physicians being involved in active euthanasia. A comparable 19% of nurses questioned in a Southern Australian survey had taken active steps which had brought about the death of a patient. Furthermore, of the 55% of nurses who had received requests from patients for active euthanasia but refused to comply, only 39% stated illegality as a reason for that refusal, whereas for the remaining 61% it was not a factor in the decision-making process.
Although it is not a convincing argument that behaviour should be legalised because it occurs anyway (since this could be argued for almost any crime), its justification for prohibition lacks reason when it can be seen that the judiciary are devising grounds to subvert such legislation. Discrepancies occur between legal theory and practice evinced by the acquittals of defendants in cases of clear-cut statutory defined murder. It could be argued that legalising PAS will subject such practice to the regulation and scrutiny of a professional body.
The Human Rights Act 1998, incorporating the European Convention on Human Rights, has strengthened arguments in favour of euthanasia, particularly Article 8 conferring a right to 'respect for private and family life'. The case of Ms B
 emphasised the importance of individual autonomy by making a declaration of unlawful trespass and awarding nominal damages to a patient for failure to comply with her request to be disconnected from a ventilation machine.
The case of Diane Pretty triggered debate about the implications of Article 8. The Strasbourg Court accepted that Article 8 encompassed the act of dying itself and that the Suicide Act 1968 infringed this right, but nevertheless held that it was justified under Article 8(2) as 'necessary in a democratic society'. A margin of appreciation is granted to Member States, and policy reasons outweighed the right of the individual to end her life without interference by the State.
A major contention against active euthanasia was that it would fail to protect vulnerable people such as the elderly or disabled. The UK Government submitted that legislation proscribing suicide was necessary for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others: "Law must be stated for the generality of cases". The interests of the individual cannot be extrapolated from the interests of society. It was of the opinion that to allow euthanasia would send a message to society encouraging the vulnerable to seek death by pressurising them into relieving others of their burden.
Pretty's case epitomises the immense suffering endured by those wishing to end their lives. Dworkin criticised the above perspective for failing to recognise that other people could be harmed by a refusal to permit the practice. This is supported by figures revealing that only 0.3% of deaths in the Netherlands are attributed to PAS. Furthermore, two-thirds of patients requesting assisted suicide are refused by their doctor, which suggests that safeguards against abuse are effective. This challenges the state's need to protect the vulnerable members of society, since safeguards would allow a compromise to be reached between the two groups.
Another policy concern is that legalisation of euthanasia would hamper the development of palliative care by exhausting resources and offering an alternative to enduring suffering. Improving palliative care would diminish fears of unbearable pain and undignified deterioration, reasons cited as central to the decision to request PAS for 24% of patients. A counter-argument is that euthanasia is supplementary to palliative care and not an alternative. However, evidence has revealed the problem of patients changing their minds and withdrawing their request once their depression and pain were treated, portraying palliative care as a substitute for euthanasia. Conversely, it is submitted that active euthanasia could prevent premature suicide; patients would have control over the time and manner of their death and could therefore delay the event of death until life becomes completely unbearable.
To prevent unnecessary suicide, safeguards could target against such practice by refusing euthanasia to patients with psychiatric conditions or where there are other remedies available. The Netherlands confronts this problem, legislating conditions to be fulfilled. These include that the doctor is satisfied that the suffering is unbearable with no prospect of improvement; and that there is "no reasonable alternative in light of the patient's situation". Research has shown practice to be consistent with this, showing that patients whose requests were refused were more likely to have depression as a predominant complaint, were less likely to be suffering "hopelessly and unbearably" and were more likely to have access to alternatives for treatment.
Another aspect of controversy arises from conferring upon doctors the role of God by placing them in control of other's mortality. There is concern that PAS will undermine confidence in patients because it conflicts with the doctor's role in healing. It is a doctor's duty to adhere to the Hippocratic Oath:
However, the two roles can be reconciled if doctors are permitted to assist in suicide only to alleviate unbearable suffering, consistent with the patient's best interests. Manga defends the position of doctors in assisting suicide, since they are skilled in carrying out diagnosis, prognosis and assessing alternative treatments which are important procedural safeguards. However, research in Spain revealed that doctors' decisions are subjective, shaped by their own cultural upbringing and life experiences. The Netherlands responded to this concern by introducing the requirement of an approval by a second independent physician to impose an empirical standard.
Because ethical considerations are involved, there is doubt whether doctors are any more qualified in making decisions of life and death than anyone else. This could lead to the acceptance of active voluntary euthanasia as a defence to the public at large. This is linked to the 'slippery slope' argument that once one form of euthanasia is legislated it will open up the way for further abuse. The case of Harold Shipman illustrates the possibility of individuals seeking to control the mortality of their patients, and their potential to do so would be fostered by a regime such as the Netherlands'. However the current system is not impervious to abuse as the case of Shipman illustrates. Legalising PAS may even improve the system by introducing a regulatory body to control and detect abuses.
Despite the safeguards implemented by the Netherlands and the institution of a Regional Review Committee to scrutinise every case, research reveals that these precautions are not strictly adhered to but there is "widespread disregard among doctors...of the formal requirements". Almost 60% cases of euthanasia went unreported to the local medical examiner, thus avoiding the inquiry of the reviewing body. Contrary to section 1(a), doctors have failed to satisfy themselves that the patients' request is "voluntary and carefully considered", 22% of cases obtained only one request, where another 30% had an interval of between an hour and a week for the first and last requests. Research also indicates that euthanasia has been practised without the consent of some patients, fuelling the 'slippery slope' argument.
Despite the artificiality resulting from the upholding of the act/omissions distinction, it is unlikely that changes will be effected to apply the 'best interests test' to active euthanasia even as a limited defence for PAS. Although the rise of human rights attaches great weight to the personal autonomy argument, policy reasons remain compelling, particularly in light of the Netherlands' futile attempts to combat the contingency of abuse.