Researchers have argued that road crossing skills in children depend on attentional skills and ability to concentrate on a task during a distracting event. Dunbar, Lewis and Hill (2001) found that children showing greater attention switching skills were more aware of traffic when observed crossing roads and that maintaining attention throughout distractions might indicate a greater likelihood of crossing roads in a safe manner. Previous studies had used attention switching tasks such as reporting letters and numbers heard in either of two auditory streams, i.e. attending to the left or right ear (Pearson & Lane, 1991), to assess differences in time taken to move attention between the streams. It was found that younger children took longer and showed higher error rates when switching attention than older children, suggesting that attention skills improve with age. This study aims to test the idea that attentional skills improve with age, using the test of everyday attention for children, whereby children must inhibit their natural responses while a distracting event occurs. The study also aims to test earlier findings that primary school age boys have more road accidents than girls of the same age, by comparing attentional performance between the two gender groups. There are, therefore, three main hypotheses; firstly that responses in the task will be slower where a distracting event occurs than where there is no distraction, across all groups, secondly, that the response speed will improve with age in both distracting and quiet conditions, and thirdly, that boys will perform more slowly than girls during the distracting event.
Two difference scores were calculated for each child by subtracting i) the baseline response from the quiet condition response, then ii) the baseline response from the distraction condition response. The figures indicated the time taken to inhibit the salient response for each condition so could be compared with each other directly to give a measure of the difference in inhibition times. Poor performance, indicated by a larger inhibition time, would suggest poorer attentional skills.
A clustered box plot revealed three outliers which could not be explained, two in the 4-5 years group (both girls) and one in the 6-7 years group (a boy), however, reanalysis with these excluded yielded the same pattern of results so the outliers were included in all analysis. Scatter plots of the mean difference scores against their standard deviations showed no obvious relationships, suggesting the homogeneity of variance assumption was not violated, therefore the data was not transformed but used in its raw form. The results were then analysed in a three way within groups analysis of variance (ANOVA), of sex (2) x age (3) x score (2), with difference score as the dependent variable. ANOVA outputs showed a significant main effect of distraction condition on inhibition times, F(1,90) = 83.465, p<0.05 and a significant main effect of sex, F(1,90) = 6.342, p<0.05. However there was no significant main effect of age, F(2,90) = 1.809, p>0.05, no significant interaction between age and sex, F(2,90) = 0.235, p>0.05 and no significant interaction between age and distraction condition, F(2,90) = 1.261, p>0.05. The interaction between distraction condition and sex was significant at the 5% level but not at the 1% level, therefore further research would be desirable in order to make firmer conclusions, F(1,90) = 4.562, p<0.05. Despite ANOVA revealing no significant main effect of age, a planned linear contrast over age did prove significant, F(1,93) = 5.914, p<0.05 for the quiet condition and F(1,93) = 461.15, p<0.05 for the distraction condition. Post hoc comparisons between age groups (Tukey HSD) showed no significant differences except between the 4-5 group and the 8-9 group in the no distraction condition, but again, only at the 5% level, p=0.046, therefore this outcome will be disregarded in case of chance significance.
The mean inhibition times (differences between response times for baseline and inhibition conditions) and standard deviations for each distraction condition are given below.
Results show that all three hypotheses were supported by the data gathered. Analysis firstly showed a significant main effect of distraction condition, meaning that the inhibition times of children were significantly higher when a distracting cartoon was played than when the room was quiet throughout, suggesting that the distracting event did impair children's attention performance. More specifically, analysis confirmed that inhibition times of boys was significantly higher than that of girls in both distraction conditions, supporting the theory that boys were more distracted than girls by the cartoon and earlier findings that boys have poorer attention skills than girls of a similar age. Whilst initial ANOVA results gave no indication of age effects, a planned linear contrast over age was significant, suggesting that as age increases, attentional performance will increase so inhibition times decreased overall, this was particularly significant in the distraction condition (p=0.000 compared to p=0.017)) suggesting that age affects inhibition times more when a distracting event occurs, however there were no age-sex interactions found. Whilst an interaction effect between sex and distraction condition was observed, the significance level was not low enough to be completely confident (p=0.035) therefore further or repeated research would be advantageous to rule out the possibility of a type I error. Again, post hoc age group comparisons revealed a slightly significant difference between the 4-5 and the 8-9 age groups, but given that the probability level was 0.046 and the large number of comparisons made, a chance level of probability cannot be ruled out, therefore the result should be ignored until proven in further research. In general, mean scores were much as expected, with distraction scores higher than no distraction scores, and scores tending to decrease (improve) with age, however the mean distraction inhibition score for 8-9 year old boys was higher than expected (15.50) and was, in fact, the largest inhibition time found. Since there were no outliers in this group it is difficult to conclude why the times were this high, and a design problem can never be ruled out. Repeat experiments would be useful in determining any cause for this result. As expected though, the lowest inhibition times were generally found in the oldest girls tested, in both conditions.
Possible problems in the design of the study could account for odd results, although no firm conclusions can be made. Although the within subjects design removes between subjects variance, here the within subjects design may have affected the recorded response times. Practice of the opposite worlds test will clearly increase ability, so that even with counter balancing, the more practised second condition may lead to outliers in some cases. Other problems include the type of distraction - in this case a children's cartoon. It might be that cartoons appeal more to boys than girls, leading to greater distraction, and that another sort of distraction, such as a friend entering the room or a conversation starting, may distract girls more. The choice may also be criticised for its irrelevance to the road-crossing scenario, where a friendly conversation might be more appropriate. It should be noted, however, that the test of everyday attention, which was used as the stimulus, has been investigated by psychology professionals and is thought to be both reliable and valid, with high test-retest reliability and significant correlation with other measures of attention, suggesting that results can be generalised to various measures of attention performance (Robertson, Ward, Ridgeway & Nimmo-Smith, 1996).
As the findings here are in line with the hypotheses made and in accordance with previous research and theory in the field, it can be concluded that results of this study are both reliable and valid , with generalisability of findings should further research be conducted along these lines. It is strongly suggested that research in the area be continued, as there are many areas of attention and cognitive skills yet to be looked at in conjunction with road traffic awareness. The links are important to future training in road safety with children, and a thorough understanding of the cognitive and motor skills involved in road crossing will improve our ability to teach children affective road skills. Whilst this study does not in any way prove links between attention and traffic skills, it is still useful in addressing possible areas for further research and understanding children's attention levels. Results from this experiment could lead to better training for children and the possible implementation of video or computer games involving abstract tasks to train attention skills. These results also bring to light the vulnerability of younger children and of boys compared to girls. For both parents and those working with children, boys should be made especially aware of the importance of concentration at the roadside and of possible dangers. For younger primary age children, supervision should be stressed when near roads, and roads surrounding schools should be adapted to younger pedestrians, perhaps with warning signs, speed limits and pavement barriers.