Dworkin responded to the American Realist critique of formalism by incorporating both formalism and natural law into one theory. Realists challenged the conservative conception of law as an independent, autonomous body. They argued that external factors influence decision-making causing uncertainty and allowing the exercise of discretion. This undermines the rule of law, creating indeterminacies due to there being "no agreement about the correct rule or principle to apply to a particular case". The certainty provided by the rule of law protects against political manipulation. Although flexibility is essential for justice to operate in exceptional cases, it must not compromise the need for certainty which prevents manipulation. Dworkin produced a sophisticated theory to refute the contention that the rule of law is undermined. He proposed that judges are not faced with a choice of rules to apply, but they are directed to one right answer, alleviating any discretion.
Hart purported that there are two types of legal rules. Primary rules are obligations, and secondary rules are concerned with the application of these. The rule of recognition is a secondary rule which validates the existence of primary rules. The positivist approach accepts the scope for discretion in hard cases where legal rules do not apply, allowing judges to employ moral or political principles to resolve a case.
Dworkin extended Hart's theory by introducing principles and policies as "extra-legal standards" influential to a decision, departing from the positivism separation of law and morals. They are identified by "engaging in a moral or political discussion of what principles should be invoked to justify the black letter rules of law". Rules are absolute and apply consistently, whereas principles are weighed against each other to determine the most cogent. Principles are standards of a "dimension of morality" such as justice or fairness, consistent with natural law theory. Policies set out social, political or economic goals for the benefit of the community.3 Principles are individual rights which "trump" policies. The Human Rights Act 1998 confirmed the significance of "rights as trumps". It ordains that individual rights have supremacy and rules must be applied in a way that is consistent with these rights.
Dworkin held that principles and policies are binding due to their social acceptance as binding, rather than due to standards confirming their validity, by virtue of some master test such as Hart's rule of recognition. Positivists do not accept principles as part of the law, but accept that these standards do influence decisions in hard cases. Dworkin demonstrated how principles are employed more frequently, using the example of Riggs v. Palmer
 to show how "a court may create a new exception to the established rules...on the basis of legal principles". In this case, the rules applying to testamentary succession were subject to principles underlying the validity of this rule. Indeterminacies rise not only from vagueness in the open texture of language, but also from other contingent sources. Another example where well-established rules are disregarded in favour of principles is where courts depart from existing precedents based on changing principles (dictated by change in perception of moral and social values). Dworkin evinces how the positivist view of rules as absolute and binding is flawed, and that extra-legal measures are frequently drawn upon.
Dworkin's assimilation of morality into legal theory is, to some extent, similar to natural law theory. Aristotle expressed law as a means to an end; the end being justice. The concept of telos, "the end of things", and the ultimate purpose of law was to achieve the justice reflected in natural law. St. Aquinas aligned natural law with the divine. Natural law originates from God, and His morals govern the law. A teleological interpretation introduces justice to the legal system. Although this is the best approach, it can easily be manipulated, resulting in dictatorship. Dworkin's theory aims to compromise the natural law teleological interpretation with formalist qualities of certainty and predictability which remove the risk of manipulation.
Following the secularisation of Natural Law emerged the Social Contract Theory, presenting law as a consented contractual arrangement between citizens and the state. The concept of divinity was abandoned in favour of individual autonomy. The legitimacy of the state was limited by 'natural rights'. This theory of natural law is close to Dworkin's theory in embracing individual rights as supreme. However, Bentham criticised natural law as "rhetorical nonsense" lacking objectivity by implementing social values to establish morality. He rejected the notion of rights, arguing that they could only derive from "ungrounded metaphysical speculations about God or an intrinsic human nature". These criticisms can be transferred to Dworkin's theory, although Dworkin purports to eliminate subjectivity by restricting the selection of principles.
Dworkin asserts that the open texture of language which makes up law creates ambiguity. In hard cases, rules are uncertain, and principles must be adopted to reach a decision. Principles and policies confer discretion on judges which undermines the certainty, predictability and consistency that makes up the rule of law. Dworkin sustains the rule of law by limiting the discretion afforded to judges. Dworkin describes law as a chain novel, developing over time and modifying according to changing social practices. Each chapter must be consistent with previous decisions: "The judge's decision must be drawn from an interpretation that both fits and justifies what has gone before." "Law as integrity" encompasses a "dimension of fit" and a "dimension of political morality". There is a duty
 to follow precedents, selecting principles that correspond with social conventions.
Dworkin created Hercules, an ideological character, "a lawyer of superhuman skill, learning, patience and acumen". "Hercules must turn to the remaining constitutional rules and settled practices to see [which principles] provide a smoother fit with the constitutional scheme as a whole"7. Hercules constructs "a scheme of abstract and concrete principles that provides a coherent justification for all common law precedents". This leads to one right answer, obtainable by using principles in light of wider social practices and policies to attain a just decision that fits the legal history.
Dworkin's theory aspires to negate criticisms of formalism with the defence that law as integrity restores the predictability, impartiality, consistency and certainty of the rule of law. Hercules is intended to typify the actual function of judges adhering to formalism. "Dworkin intends him seriously as a model of what lawyers and judges actually do when they consider issues of law." Hart's perception of law as a gapless system of rules is undermined when rules are inapplicable or create ambiguity, affording discretion to judges. Dworkin endeavours to justify the use of discretion with the notion that it is not liberated but limited to fit past precedents in the chain novel and consistent with social practices, always leaving one complementary justification.
Critical Legal Studies contends that "past law does not provide any determinate guidance as to how cases should be decided - by cleverly manipulating precedents and statutes; a clever judge can 'find' textual support for almost any decision." Lord Denning is a clear example of this: in Errington
, he took an unprecedented step by elevating the status of a contractual licence with the "infusion of equity" to make it irrevocable. This example of manipulation exemplifies law as "a means to an end outside itself such as political and economic goals", criticised by the American realists as "making law" outside the orthodox formalist conception. Denning's view of the role of the judiciary contrasts directly with Dworkin: "I never say, 'I regret having to come to this conclusion but I have no option.' There is always a way around. There is always an option by which justice can be done" Denning was motivated by what was just; more reflective of natural law than Dworkin's theory limiting discretion to law which "fits" legislative history.
Fish opposes Dworkin's contention of law as a chain novel, arguing that its existence relies on the "distinction between the first author and all others". However, the last author is in the same position as the first, "both free and constrained". He is free because "the accumulation of chapters merely extends the scope of [interpretation]", yet constrained by "novel ways". The collapse of Dworkin's distinction demonstrates the judge's scope for flexibility rather than 'duty' to choose one justification.
Dworkin argues that even in hard cases there will be sufficient reasons to justify any question of substantive law. He claims that "either a contract is valid or not" and the same applies to principles. "Such concepts leave no room for middle ground." His "no no right answer" thesis purports to prove the rarity of cases to which the applications of principles are ambiguous. The thesis that "' is ' is neither true nor false" asserts that is not true and asserts that it is not false, eliminating indeterminacy. In this case, ' is ' will simply not apply. However, in saying "' is ' is neither true nor false", Endicott submits an additional, external negation that V is declining to assert that ' is ' is true and declining to assert that it is false. This negation fails to dispense of indeterminacy altogether, as Dworkin initially achieved. Dworkin's thesis was the basis for his claim that there must be one right answer, even in difficult cases of uncertainty. Endicott's alternative interpretation weakens Dworkin's argument, posing a problem for interpretive theory. The risk of indeterminacy increases the need for judges to rely on policies, thus illustrating wider discretion.
Dworkin's theory fails to explain how varying judgments can be reached at different stages of trial. If there is one right answer in light of current conventions, why are judgments reversed and later re-established?
Hercules is widely criticised for being mythical. In response Dworkin argues that Hercules is merely a reflection of the "hidden structure" of judgments, and that Hercules is "more reflective and self-conscious than any real judge need be". However, in practice, judges do not aspire to Hercules' idealised standard. There is lower ability to correctly assess and identify pertinent principles and policies consistently with Hercules' methodology, due to less skill, perception and time; therefore human beings have to resort to using a wider discretion than Dworkin anticipated. The case of Brown
 illustrates that Hercules is irrelevant to legal practice:
The House of Lords by a majority of three upheld the defendants' convictions for sadomasochism. Despite the weight of the principle of individual autonomy and freedom of sexual expression favoured by the two dissenting lords, the majority based their decision on policy reasons in favour of public protection: "An individual cannot by...consent destroy the right of the Crown to protect the public and keep the peace." This is contrary to the Herculean judgment placing individual rights "as trumps" rather than arguments of public policy. The judges referred to the behaviour as "barbaric", demonstrating ethnocentrism, a prejudice Hercules would not possess. Judges cannot detach themselves from society in a way accessible to Hercules. Dworkin condemns the use of "reliance upon personal convictions about fairness or justice" by anyone other than Hercules. Basing a decision on variable social standards due to perceptions of sadomasochism highlights the contingent nature of law.
Dworkin uses the example of dissenting opinions to illustrate how principles are weighed to produce the correct answer, with one side having "the better case". Surely divided opinions rather highlight the uncertainties and scope for discretion? Brown shows to the contrary how the majority abandon the weight of principles, basing their decision on policy grounds.
Dworkin held that answers produced by integrity are not objectively right, but "are right because a judge's political convictions lead him to believe that the answer is right". It seems absurd that another judge could reach a different decision, "that would have been right too in the eyes of the second judge" and therefore be valid law. This removes any element of predictability or certainty. Harris argues that Dworkin's process is of "law-discovery", a "smokescreen behind which judges can impose their moral and political choices" rather than a method of selection dictating one right answer.
Hercules can be criticised as a fraud because "he pretends he has discovered what the law is, but he has only discovered what it should be". This is similar to Hume's contention against naturalistic fallacy; leaping from the factual "is" to the normative "ought" is grammatically incorrect. Dworkin rejects this argument as theoretical rather than empirical, disputing unimportant features rather than the fundamental aspects of the theory, alleging that critics suffer from the "semantic sting" warranting unnecessary criticism. However, this fails to negate the compelling positivist argument responsible for the decline of natural law theory.
The Critical Legal Studies movement opposed the irrationality of legal reasoning, aligning law as "virtually coterminous" with politics. Similarly to the Realists, they portrayed the law within its social context although CLS arguments are more central to Dworkin's theory. "CLS rejects the 'fetishism' associated with the concentration of liberalism upon civil rights." This contends that fixation with individual rights hinders the development of society, undermining Dworkin's view that "'trump rights' should override government policies". Liberalism neglects the stare decisis requirement of "a separation of the social role from the functional impact of the decision-making process" This criticism is applicable to Dworkin's theory which does not extricate the social role from jurisprudence.
CLS contested the formalism view of a coherent legal system with the argument that where different groups of people represent counter principles, inconsistencies exist and discretion is required. The "integrity of law is always an illusion because it involves the marginalisation of other principles and policies that do not fit." CLS adopts the technique of "trashing" to uncover the foundations of legal reasoning as "unconscious, unreasoned, superficial choices". Linguistic deconstruction also exposes an "underlying incoherence of thought". These revelations exemplify the role of principles in practice, far removed from Dworkin's Herculean ideology and closer to the realist view of judges making law.
Dworkin omitted to address these strong criticisms of formalism, simultaneously discarding the Realist and CLS arguments without apt consideration. Dworkin is criticised for "paying insufficient attention to CLS work" and dismissing the significance attributed to political influence. Conversely, Altman asserts that, even if there is a theory which determines correct legal outcomes as Dworkin submits, "It will make no practical difference because a judge will interpret his favourite ideology as essentially constituting that theory". Hercules has no application and is merely representative of an idyllic world, far removed from our jurisdiction.
Dworkin's amalgamation of natural law and formalism is akin to Hegel's system of dialectics; synthesising a resolving theory from antithetical concepts. Rather than reconciling the two theories, Dworkin's objective is to restore confidence in formalism by characterising it with features of natural law. However, as well as taking the advantages of combining two theories, limitations of both theories are attributable to this new thesis. Dworkin is criticised for attempting to overcome aporia. It seems paradoxical to assert that one right answer (i.e. certainty) can be attained through discretion that permits flexibility. It is evident that law is used instrumentally and Dworkin's claim of weak discretion is flawed. The conflict between certainty and flexibility continues to exist, undermining the existence 'one right answer' in every case.