"Logically, we have already reached a point at which, rather than discussing which remedies should now be extended to the unmarried, we should be considering whether the legal institution of marriage continues to serve any useful purpose." How far do developments since 1979 affect that conclusion?
This essay will consider the changes- both legal and demographic- that affect Brenda Hoggett's conclusion. Preceding Hoggett's conclusion, she states that "Family law no longer makes any attempt to buttress the stability of marriage...the piecemeal erosion of the distinction between marriage and non-marital cohabitation may be expected to continue". The first part of this essay will focus on the extent to which legal remedies have been extended to unmarried couples in light of the changes since 1979. I will then debate whether marriage serves a useful purpose.
The institution of marriage is threatened by diminishing numbers of couples getting married, escalation of the number of divorces, and greater numbers cohabiting. The median length of marriage has been calculated at 9.6 years, contradicting its portrayal as 'life-long'. First marriages peaked at almost 390,000 in 1970, but by 2000 had fallen by over half to only 180,000. The numbers divorcing have trebled so that now a third of marriages end in divorce. Cohabitation has risen from 11% of non-married women under 50 in 1979 to 30% in 2000-2001 which has been linked to the reduced number of marriages, supporting that cohabitation is an alternative to marriage. Cohabitation was previously seen as a stepping stone to marriage; however research indicates that cohabitation is increasingly becoming accepted and employed independently. Research reveals that cohabitation is four times more likely to end than marriage; about half of cohabiting unions end within a year.
Glendon suggests two interrelated causes of such changes: as cohabitation becomes increasingly common, it becomes increasingly accepted. The more it is accepted, the more it is employed. There has become an increased focus of the younger generation on individual needs and more inclination to terminate marriages which are not beneficial whereas the older generation felt that they had obligations towards each other. Women have become increasingly independent due to higher incomes and contraceptive technology, reducing their reliance on marriage. The vast majority of petitions for divorce are by women.
Demographic changes illustrate that marriage is increasingly becoming seen as outdated and is being supplanted by cohabitation. This implies that the public perceive it as having no purpose. Conversely, analysis of the legal consequences of marriage indicates that cohabitation is not an effective substitution and that perhaps marriage does serve a useful purpose.
Cohabitation is defined as "living together as husband and wife without having legally married" . Cohabitation is difficult to extract from the concept of marriage without reference to the legal ceremony. This legal ceremony should not be trivialised because it triggers many legal effects, conferring rights on married couples distinct from cohabitants.
One difference between married and unmarried couples is apparent upon intestacy. The Administration of Estates Act 1925 provides for the remaining spouse's entitlement to the deceased's personal chattels and residuary estate, depending on what kin are left. The position is somewhat different for the bereaved cohabitant, who upon death has "no automatic right to receive anything from the estate of the deceased".
Section 2 of the Law Reform (Succession) Act 1995 improved the position of cohabitants, implementing s.1A of the Inheritance (Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975; allowing cohabitants "living as husband and wife" in the same household as the deceased for at least two years prior to death to make an application for "reasonable financial provision". Before this was introduced a cohabitant could only bring a claim as a dependant, reliant upon "being maintained either partly or wholly by the deceased". Nevertheless, the positions remain unequal, permitting the spouse to inherit as much as the entire estate, whereas the cohabitant is merely left with "reasonable financial provision".
Married couples also benefit from tax advantages. Assets can be transferred between a husband and wife if one of them falls below the CGT threshold to avoid Capital Gains Tax (CGT) liability. Inheritance tax is another benefit to married couples: whereas unmarried couples and relatives are liable to pay 40% inheritance tax on assets passing on death in excess of 263,000, there is an unlimited exemption on transfers between husband and wife. However, there have been efforts to reduce these advantages: Married Couples Allowance has been abolished for those born after 1935; and in April 1990, independent taxation of married couples was introduced for Income tax and Capital Gains tax.
The Children Act 1989 and Adoption and Children Act 2002 introduced changes to the law on parental responsibility. Prior to these developments, an unmarried father had no parental rights. Now there are three ways for an unmarried father to acquire parental responsibility: by parental responsibility agreement endorsed by the court; a court order of parental responsibility; or joint birth registration. The law maintains the distinction between unmarried and married fathers, since married fathers automatically acquire parental responsibility. Nevertheless, the new legislation marks a shift towards equating the legal position of married and unmarried couples. There is emphasis upon the concept of 'parenthood' and away from the status of marriage. This is also illustrated by the extension of income tax allowances for married couples to cohabitants with children.
The Adoption and Children Act 2002 harmonises the law on adoption for married and unmarried couples. An application can be made by a couple, which includes "two people (whether of different or same sexes) living as partners in an enduring family relationship". This fully extends rights of adoption to unmarried couples.
The Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 provides married women with various methods of financial relief upon relationship breakdown including periodical payments, lump sum provisions, property adjustment order and maintenance provisions. The Matrimonial and Family Proceeding Act 1984 has effected three amendments to the MCA 1973:
One modification was the removal of the "minimal loss" principle replaced with the welfare of the child as "first consideration". This enables spouses to claim greater financial relief. However, first consideration does not denote paramountcy and may be overridden by other factors. Another amendment is section 25, delineating eight matters for the court to observe in awarding financial relief. This confers considerable discretion on the courts and has assisted claims like Parlour
 in which the court has taken into account future earnings to calculate periodical payments. The third amendment facilitates a "clean break", presumably restricting the scope of claims; yet the case of Parlour illustrates that this can be overridden.
The MCA amendments will make a court finding in favour of a spouse seeking financial relief more likely. This indicates a trend for treating spouses more favourably, showing a back-track since 1979 to support the institution of marriage. The Child Support Act 1991 and section 15 of the Children Act 1989 impose an obligation of maintenance for any children upon relationship breakdown which applies to unmarried couples; yet there are no corresponding provisions for cohabitants.
In the absence of joint legal ownership, matrimonial rights confer on the spouse without ownership a right not to be evicted, or a right to enter and occupy the family home; this can also be enforced against third parties. Unmarried couples have no statutory protection and have to turn to property law for assistance. This would appear to support that marriage does serve a useful purpose: it distinguishes between rights conferred upon married couples and those not applicable to cohabitants. However, reflection of property case law reveals an incremental extension of rights to cohabitants:
A beneficial interest may be established by express, constructive or resulting trust. Case law in the 1970s applied orthodox trust principles: In Pettitt
 and Gissing
 it was held that financial contributions and decorating work were not attributable to the acquisition of the property, hence a common intention for a shared beneficial interest could not be inferred. In Lloyds Bank v. Rosset
, Lord Bridge propounded that any express agreement "however imperfectly remembered and however imprecise their terms may have been" would make it necessary only to find detrimental reliance in support of this to give rise to a constructive trust or proprietary estoppel. This suggests a more flexible approach encouraging applicants to 'remember' a possible agreement. However, in line with the earlier cases, the House of Lords reiterated that the mere fact of detrimental reliance by expending money or effort in the hope to gain an interest in the property will not suffice in absence of such agreement. In this scenario it would only be possible to establish an interest by way of direct contribution to the purchase price.
Ten years later Le Foe
 asserted that indirect contributions (better enabling the man to pay the mortgage) would suffice to establish a beneficial interest in the property. Midland Bank v. Cooke
 adopted a generous approach to quantifying the value of an interest once that interest can be established, considering the "whole course of dealing". Rowe v. Prance
 established that a respondent's representations to his partner of her having a share in the boat amounted to an express trust, entitling her to a half share notwithstanding that she had made no financial contribution. These cases highlight the unpredictability of judicial interpretation, but indicate a sympathetic trend towards finding in favour of the weaker party. Although there is much discretion and great complexities surrounding the property law route, the same outcomes can be achieved, hence the legal position of married and unmarried couples is made more analogous.
The FLA sought to buttress the institution of marriage. It responded to the Daily Mail lobbying against the bill in its original form for 'undermining' marriage. Part I established some general principles underlying Parts II and III of the Act namely (a) that the institution of marriage is to be supported and (b) parties are "encouraged to take all practicable steps...to save the marriage". Although Part II allowed for a no-fault divorce, it requested mediation and a period for "reflection and consideration", attempting to reduce the divorce rate. Pilot studies were unsuccessful and Part II was never implemented. This leaves section 1 with little scope for interpretation into the law but nevertheless marks a shift in legislation to accord marriage special status. Part IV could also be interpreted in this way:
In the event of domestic violence, any court has the power to make a non-molestation order or occupation order. While married and unmarried unions are placed on equal footing with respect to a section 42 non-molestation order (both falling within the "associated persons" category) the court procedure for an occupation order distinguishes between the two. Applicants are divided into two subcategories: entitled and non-entitled. The former encompasses people who are entitled to occupy the home "by virtue of a beneficial estate or interest or contract" or have matrimonial rights (i.e. spouses); the latter enabling a non-entitled former spouse, cohabitant or former cohabitant to apply.
An occupation order for entitled applicants empowers the court with a number of options. There is a significant restriction on the court's powers under s.36: an occupation order may only last six months, although it may be extended for one further period not exceeding six months. An occupation order applied for by non-entitled former spouses, although subject to the limitation of six months, may be renewed by the court "on one or more occasions". This again highlights the weight attached to marriage.
The other distinction rests on the factors the court is required to take into account when determining whether to make an order. For entitled applicants, s.33(7) introduces the "balance of harm" test: the harm likely to be suffered by the child must be greater than that suffered by the respondent if the order were not made. Chalmers v. Johns
 establishes this as the principal consideration for entitled applicants. If significant harm is not a factor, the court has discretion to consider additional factors including the housing needs and resources of the family and conduct of the parties. For non-entitled cohabitants, the balance of harm test plays a less central role and is just one of a long list of factors to consider. The nature of the parties' relationship, its duration and any pending proceedings become relevant, making it less likely for the court to conclude that an occupation order is necessary. This is reinforced by section 41 which obliges the court to "have regard to the fact that [the cohabitants]...have not given each other the commitment involved in marriage", thus demonstrating that cohabitants have less protection from domestic violence than that accorded to spouses.
It can be observed that the FLA maintains the distinction between the legal position of married and unmarried couples. Justification for such a distinction is that an occupation order empowers considerable interference into family life, and in the case of cohabitants who have not opted for a state-regulated institution, this is perceived as unnecessarily intrusive. Non-molestation orders merely prohibit specific behaviour but do not interfere with property rights.
It is arguable that cohabitants "have come to a conscious and informed decision that they wish to live together without marriage and without entering into financial responsibility for each other". Marriage affords rights for the protection of the weaker party on the foundation that the parties have publicly endorsed their commitment towards each other, and the law will intervene to uphold certain obligations. This resolves the competing values of respect for individual choice and protection that cause tension for cohabitants.
The force of the argument that married couples have elected to effect legal changes is diminished by research exposing ignorance of these legal consequences: in a sample of 172 individuals planning to marry, 86% declared that they had not at all been influenced by the legal consequences; and 41% thought that marriage would not change their legal relationship. This removes the logic of conferring legal consequences on those who have 'opted in'. If the law seeks to protect the weaker party, this paternalism should be extended to unmarried couples. Although it is difficult to justify imposing obligations on unsuspecting cohabitants, many spouses are also naive.
Legislation enacted after 1979 has generally expanded legal rights to cohabitants, thus bridging the gap between married and unmarried couples. However, provisions are often qualified with a limitation on the extent of these rights: only reasonable financial provision to be claimed upon a cohabitant's intestacy; and unmarried fathers do not have the same automatic status conferred upon married fathers but can acquire parental responsibility through fulfilling a number of criteria. While property case law exemplifies a growing trend to treat cohabitants more favourably it has the potential to regress, and is still more difficult for unmarried partners to access financial remedies upon relationship breakdown than their married counterparts. The FLA characterises legislative recognition of the importance of marriage; and Part IV offers more protection for married couples experiencing domestic violence than cohabitants. These changes support that marriage does continue to serves a useful purpose: it effectively distinguishes between married couples who are subject to the legal consequences flowing from marriage; and those who are not.
Demographic changes indicate that the legal importance of marriage is overlooked by social factors. Cohabitants should be made aware of their limited rights to enable them to make an informed choice. This would recognise the importance of individual autonomy, supporting that state intervention should only be contemplated where consent is given.