The Child Support Act is based on the premise that "each parent of a qualifying child is responsible for maintaining him". Parental responsibility or contact with the child is immaterial. Mick's child fulfils the section 3 criteria for a "qualifying child": Mick is a "non-resident parent" and his child has his home with Sophie, a "person with care". It follows from this that Mick will be subject to a child support maintenance assessment. The Child Support, Pensions and Social Security Act 2000 amended schedule 1 of the 1991 Act introducing a new formula for assessing maintenance. Mick will be assessed in accordance with this new legislation. As a general guide Mick would be expected to pay 15% of his weekly net income in periodical payments, subject to considerations of any relevant children's welfare and whether his income level is exceptionally high (in which case maintenance will be capped at 2000) or below 200 for which a reduced, flat or nil rate will be substituted.
I would advise Mick not to contest the paternity of the child unless he is uncertain that the child is his. Section 26 operates the assumption that a man is a father of a child where either: the alleged parent has refused to take a DNA test; or the result of a DNA test shows that he is a parent of the child but he refuses to accept it. His paternity of the child can thus be easily proven and Mick would have to bear the cost of the DNA testing.
From a legal perspective, I would advise Mick to cooperate with the CSA requests. Section 14A proscribes the provision of false information or refusal to give information without reasonable excuse. Offenders are liable on conviction to a fine of up to 1000. Following maintenance assessment, legislation endorses a range of methods to enforce payment. The CSA (exercising the power of the Secretary of State) can make a "deduction of earnings order" to recover arrears or even future amounts payable; however if this is of no avail, an application may be made to the magistrates' court for a liability order. This authorises wider measures such as distress, garnishee proceedings or a charging order to retrieve the disputed sum. If this is still unsuccessful, the 2000 Act sanctions more intrusive measures such as disqualification from driving and prison sentencing for cases of wilful refusal or culpable neglect .
Additionally I would inform Mick that his liability will be likely to cease within the next two to six years, since his child is around the age of thirteen or fourteen and the definition "child" refers to individuals below the age of sixteen, extending to nineteen if he or she stays in full time education. However, an exception to this is if his child fulfils certain prescribed conditions.
From a practical perspective, I would advise Mick differently. Research demonstrates that the CSA is not effective at using its enforcement powers: "only 54% of cases are fully compliant, and in a quarter of cases no maintenance is being paid at all". Furthermore, there is a backlog of cases to be assessed; two-thirds of assessments take over six months, during which time maintenance is not payable. Delays can be attributed to IT difficulties and problems created by operating under both the new and the old systems. Therefore it would be in Mick's financial interest to delay assessment and payments for as long as possible.
The present scenario invokes section 28 of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990. Section 28(6)(a) provides that a man who donates sperm is not to be treated as the father of the child if he had consented to its use for the purpose of fertility treatment. The issue of Mick's paternity turns on whether he effectively consented to Delia's use of his gametes. In U v. W
, Wilson J asserted that the "technical" father of the twins would be the anonymous donor if he had not given "written and informed consent to the use of his sperm pursuant to Schedule 3 to the Act".
It is implicit from the wording of section 28(3) that where insemination occurs outside a licensed clinic the sperm donor will be regarded in law as the father. An officially licensed centre "is bound to follow certain prescribed procedures in relation to the giving of donors' consents and otherwise" in accordance with schedule 3 of the Act. In Re R
, Hale LJ asserted that "the sperm provider would only have been excluded from parenthood by virtue of s.28(6)(a) if he had given the statutory consent". This entails compliance with statutory requirements that the procedures occur within a licensed clinic. Where treatment is unlicensed it falls outside the scope of subsection (6); thus Mick will remain the legal father at common law.
I would advise Mick to try and reach an agreement with Delia about contact with Edward. There appears to be no hostile relations between the two friends, therefore this should not be a problem. However, if Delia refuses to allow contact I would advise him to resort to court proceedings.
Prior to the Adoption and Children Act 2002, the only means by which unmarried fathers could obtain parental responsibility was by court order or formal agreement made with the child's mother. It is unlikely that either of these means have been adopted since Delia intended to raise her child alone. Therefore it will be assumed that Mick currently has no parental responsibility. It is unnecessary for Mick to apply for a court order for parental responsibility because his real objective is to re-establish contact with Edward. Therefore a contact order would be more appropriate. Section 8(1) defines a contact order as "an order requiring the person with whom a child lives, or is to live, to allow the child to visit or stay with the person named in the order, or for that person and the child otherwise to have contact with each other".
Mick is "entitled to apply" for a section 8 order by virtue of his legal status as a Edward's parent, thus it is unnecessary for him to apply for leave under section 10(9). There are several principles which guide the courts in determining whether to make an order, one of which is the principle of "no order" that the court "shall not make the order unless it considers that doing so would be better for the child than making no order at all". Another relevant principle is that the child's welfare is paramount.
The welfare checklist delineates factors which the court should consider. Not all of them relate to the facts of this case, thus only relevant issues will be discussed. The first matter regards the "ascertainable wishes and feelings of the child concerned (considered in the light of his age and understanding)". Gillick
 highlights that variable weight will be attached to the wishes of the child appropriate to his age. Edward will be around the age of eight; the case of Re S
 demonstrates that his wishes will bear minor influence on the decision; despite the twelve year old child's express reluctance to maintain contact with his father other than limited telephone calls, the court made a contact order providing for contact on alternate weekends. His older siblings' (aged 14 and 16) wishes were respected. Expert opinion sets the age of above ten as carrying considerable weight whereas the ages between six and ten are deemed to be an "intermediate stage". Nevertheless in Re M
 opposition to contact with their mother by children aged seven and eight was decisive in refusing to make an order, since forcing contact would have caused long-term emotional damage. These cases demonstrate the variable ages at which the child's wishes become decisive. Family law cases are decided on an individual basis and confer considerable discretion on the judiciary; thus it is uncertain what weight will be attributed to Edward's wishes. This factor is merely one of several to consider, and its significance will be downplayed if it is held to be within the child's best interests to order contact.
The next consideration is of the child's physical, emotional and educational needs. This will ameliorate Mick's chances of obtaining a contact order because Mick can offer Edward the role of a father-figure which will be increasingly important in meeting his emotional needs as Edward reaches puberty. This is of particular advantage because of the absence of a father-figure in his life owing to Delia's sexuality. Mick could also enhance Edward's education by offering different experiences and knowledge.
The likely effect of any change in circumstance is another matter for the court to consider. This could be considered as unfavourable to Mick because a contact order will disrupt the status quo; however it is likely to be outweighed by the benefits Mick can bring.
Mick's case would have been strengthened had he maintained some degree of contact with Edward. They have not had contact for over seven years, and it is unlikely that Edward will remember him or have had chance to build up a meaningful relationship by brief contact before Edward reached the age of one. However, in Re H
 it was held that "in general, it is in the interests of both parent and child that they should have contact with each other, unless there are cogent reasons to the contrary". Contact was awarded despite the four year-old believing her mother's fianc to be her father. Subsequent case law has affirmed that long-term absence of contact does not prevent contact orders from being made and that it was "a fundamental right of a child to grow up with some knowledge and, if possible, contact with his natural father".
To return to the no order principle, it appears more beneficial than detrimental to Edward to award contact. It is important that children are listened to but at the age of eight the court will be persuaded more by Edward's best interests, shown in this case to be the making of a contact order, as the views of young children are likely to merely echo the voice of their carers.
As Fran is the gestational mother she will also be the legal mother; it does not matter that Gina is not genetically related to her. I would advise Mick to try to reach agreement with Fran for him to have contact with Gina. However, Fran may be unwilling to allow him to interfere with her new family. I would warn Mick against bringing an application for a court order because he is unlikely to succeed. I will proceed to explain why.
Mick's case would have a greater chance of success if he can establish paternity. Without this he would have to apply for leave of the court before bringing an application for a contact order. For Mick to be Gina's legal father he must fulfil the requirements of section 28(3); however, this is subject to subsection (5), whereby any child of the parties to a marriage as is treated as legitimate by virtue of the common law rules. By marrying before Gina's birth, Fran and Hal invoke the common law presumption, 'Pater est quem nuptiae demonstrant', that any child borne by the wife is a child of the couple. Another presumption of parentage arises from entering Hal's name as father on the birth register. However, if the couple are married at the time of the birth this procedure is unnecessary. Like all presumptions, these can be rebutted. DNA testing can be used to show that Gina is not genetically related to Hal.
Because this common law presumption can be disproved, section 28(5) will not remove the application of subsection (3). In Leeds Teaching Hospital NHS Trust
, Dame Butler-Sloss stated that the presumption from section 28(5) was "displaced by the DNA tests which established that Mr B is the biological father of the twins ".
To return to the requirements of section 28(3), the issue turns on whether the course of treatment was carried out "together by a person to whom a license applies". The element of togetherness can be disputed since the final treatment which resulted in pregnancy occurred after Mick and Fran's separation. This case is analogous to Re R where the Court of Appeal held that "the time at which legal paternity is created is the time when the embryos...which subsequently result in the birth of the child are placed in the woman". At this particular time the woman was being treated alone and not "together" with the man, thus the man was not deemed to be the legal father.
Mick's case would therefore fail on the solitary fact that there was no treatment together. The Act places a more stringent test on unmarried couples than on married couples. For married couples, consent is sufficient and is even presumed. One option for Mick would be to challenge the compatibility of the legislation for treating married fathers more favourably: had he been married, he would not have had to meet the requirement that treatment was together and would be deemed to be the legal father. This invokes his Article 8 right to respect for private and family life in conjunction with Article 14 discrimination. However, I would advise Mick against bringing such action: In Re R a similar challenge failed because the putative father's convention rights were not held to be engaged: "where there is neither a genetic link nor a personal relationship of a family nature, there is no family life to respect". Keegan v. Ireland
 and Leeds Teaching Hospital NHS Trust adopted more generous approaches. Yet these can be distinguished from the present case because either a genetic link with the child was established or the father had formed a close relationship on which to found 'family life'.
It follows from this that Mick is not the legal father and cannot apply directly for contact under section 10(4)(a); he must first obtain leave of the court. In determining whether to grant leave, the relevant considerations in Mick's case are his connection with the child and any risk of disrupting the child's life. As explained above, Mick has no connection to Gina except for the fact that she is the daughter of his ex-partner, conceived after their separation. There are no ties by blood or marriage; hence his connection is very remote, particularly as there is no mention of any previous contact between Mick and Gina. As for the risk of disruption, Gina is already part of a close family unit with a mother and father and to impose a third party into this could have adverse consequences. It may create tension and undermine Hal's role in the family and confuse Gina's sense of identity. In Re R it was the view of the Official Solicitor that "risk to the stability of the family unit would outweigh the benefits to the child". It is very likely that the court will refuse to grant leave for application for a contact order because Mick has no connection and it could create hostility and damage family relations. There is a bleak outlook for Mick, and bearing in mind the expense in terms of cost and time, I would advise Mick not to pursue court action.