This paper will consider research findings into the causes of false confessions before turning to discuss whether PACE provisions address these concerns and eliminate the problem.
Research identifies three types of false confessions. Voluntary confessions are obtained without interrogative pressure. Gudjonsson identified a pathological desire for notoriety and attention as the cause for Henry Lee Lucas's false confessions to over 600 murders. Other psychological explanations are delusional beliefs or self-punishment for previous behaviour. Psychologically 'normal' people may falsely confess to protect the real perpetrator, or for other personal reasons, for example, to cover up an extramarital affair.
'Coerced-compliant' confessions occur where, although suspects know that they are innocent, the custodial process induces a confession. Social impact theory explains that suspects make this type of confession where they perceive the short-term benefits to outweigh the long-term costs. They may be induced by threats, explicit promises or implicit rewards, which attach preferable consequences to a confession. Certain personality traits are particularly vulnerable to coercion.
The last category of confessions are 'coerced internalised' confessions, whereby innocent suspects "actually come to believe that they committed the crime". Research reveals that some suspects even create false details consistent with their guilt through a process of 'confabulation'. The interrogation process distorts reality through social isolation, imagination exercises, the presence of an authority figure, or false conclusive evidence of guilt. Another factor linked to this type of confession is vulnerability caused by suggestibility, youth and naivety, fatigue, stress, or the influence of drugs or alcohol.
These three categories explain psychological factors and coercive interrogation techniques as two principal causes of false confessions; it is often a combination of both.
Psychological vulnerabilities divide into three further categories: mental disorders; those induced to a mentally abnormal state by severe anxiety, phobic reaction to the confinement or drug withdrawal; and thirdly, those prone to give unreliable accounts due to personality characteristics of compliance, suggestibility and inability to handle pressure. Juveniles are particularly suggestible and compliant, and primarily concerned with their immediate predicament rather than long-term consequences; therefore the risk of false confessions is significantly higher. Kassin's laboratory experiment showed the incidence of false confessions rose from 59% amongst adults to 78% amongst 12 to 13 year-olds.
Compliance is brought about by an eagerness to please, and a desire to avoid confrontation and conflict with others. Gudjonsson devised a test to measure compliance, finding a positive correlation between confessions and high compliance scores.
Interrogative suggestibility is "the extent to which within a closed social interaction, people come to accept messages communicated during formal questioning, as a result of which their subsequent behavioural response is affected". Gudjonsson found that people shift their memory in response to misleading questions and negative feedback. Higher suggestibility scores were linked to sleep deprivation, poor memory, high levels of anxiety and low self-esteem. Suggestibility was highest amongst internalised false confessions. Eysenck found that introverts were particularly suggestible. As methods of interrogation are devised to deal with typically extrovert criminals, introverts are put under considerable pressure.
Features of the interrogation process exacerbate individual vulnerabilities, rendering unreliable and false confessions more likely. Physical isolation heightens anxiety, and lengthy periods of detention increase the need for escape. Uncertainty about the future and lack of autonomy increase anxiety. Fatigue and sleep deprivation impair decision-making abilities and heighten susceptibility to influence.
The adversarial structure of interrogation instils a sense of helplessness. Interview tactics, such as disputing alibis, interrupting explanations, and presenting ostensibly incontrovertible evidence of guilt, convey a sense of inevitability of conviction. Another tactic is minimisation, providing excuse or justification or downplaying the seriousness of the crime to encourage confessions by implying that lenient sentencing will ensue.
PACE has codified and expanded upon Judges' Rules and Administrative Directions previously governing police behaviour. The provisions carry greater force because they have parliamentary endorsement. Additionally, PACE enacted provisions dealing explicitly with the admissibility of confession evidence.
Section 56 entitles an arrestee to inform someone of their arrest and whereabouts. This may "lessen the psychological pressures associated with isolated confinement". Section 58 provides for access to legal advice. This includes free independent legal advice from duty solicitor. A legal representative "brings reassurance and emotional support to suspects who may be frightened or disorientated", as well as supervising the conduct of an interview. These benefits may be removed where legal advice is delayed pursuant to subsection (8). However, this is arguably "very, very rarely used". Its impact is almost negligible when judged in light of the key source of an absent legal adviser: the detainees deciding themselves not to exercise their right to legal advice. Zander and Henderson found only 53-56 % exercised this right, much lower than the 80% estimated by Dean. This reduces the scope of section 58 for tackling false confessions.
Another reason for the low take-up could be "various ploys" devised by police officers to delay or avoid legal advice. This is inconsistent with Dean's claim that "coercion tricks can't happen now with PACE". Dean's positive outlook on the availability of legal advice can be contrasted with Roberts and Zuckerman, who criticise the proficiency of duty solicitors when they are called upon. This questions whether the presence of a solicitor really does much to diminish pressure and safeguard against improper interview conduct. In the case of FC, the presence of a solicitor did not protect his client's interrogators from coercing a false confession.
Failure to inform a suspect of his right to legal advice has nevertheless led to a confession being inadmissible. This contributed to the quashing of a conviction based on an unreliable confession in Blackburn
. In Samuel
, access to legal advice was refused prior to several interviews, one in which the defendant confessed to burglary. The confession was excluded on grounds of fairness under section 78, since a solicitor would have advised the defendant to remain silent. In Alladice
, the defendant was familiar with the criminal justice system. Absence of a legal adviser did not deprive him of his right to silence since he was already aware of this right; therefore his confession was admissible. Alladice demonstrates that the right to legal advice is not absolute.
Code C provides guidance for 'Detention, Treatment and Questioning of Persons by Police Officers'. Codes of Practice must be readily available in police stations for detainees to consult their rights. A poster advertising the right to legal advice must be displayed prominently in the charging area of every police station. The increased awareness of legal rights will help alleviate pressure and feelings of helplessness which lead to coerced compliance.
An 'appropriate adult' must be present for juveniles and the mentally ill. A rebuttable presumption in favour of assignment of an appropriate adult arises where an officer is told in good faith "that a person may be mentally disordered or otherwise mentally vulnerable", or where suspicion arises. Failure to observe these formalities can render confessions inadmissible. An independent GP assigned the role of police surgeon may be called to examine interviewees suspected of suffering from psychological vulnerabilities. Extensive risk assessment, including the checking of medical databases, provides further methods of identifying this.
Section 77 imposes a judicial obligation to caution the jury where a case relies wholly or substantially on a confession of a mentally handicapped person which was not made in the presence of an independent person. This prevents disproportionate weight being attached to their confessions by the fact-finder. Section 77 can be criticised for conferring discretion on the court to act where "appropriate to do so", and for not extending to other psychological vulnerabilities. However, Dean describes police practice of routinely appointing appropriate adults for all psychologically vulnerable suspects. An independent adult will often be legally inexperienced and unfamiliar with the interrogation process; therefore it is doubtful whether they can adequately safeguard against manipulation of suggestibility and compliance.
Paragraph 1.1 outlines a general objective: "All persons in custody must be dealt with expeditiously". A continuous 8 hour period of rest must be provided in any period of 24 hours, subject to limited exceptions. Cells must be adequately heated, cleaned, ventilated and lit, and the same applies to interview rooms. Seating must be provided and refreshment breaks at two hourly intervals as well as breaks for recognised meal times. These guidelines improve situational factors which contribute to interrogative pressure. Making detention as free from trauma as possible reduces its coercive effect. The provision for 8 hours rest alleviates the side-effects of high levels of suggestibility as a result of sleep deprivation, particularly problematic for internalised false confessions.
The length of detention is another contributor to coerced-compliant confessions: "the longer a person is detained, the less reliance can be placed on any confession, and the greater the oppression, because of the very fact of being detained in the unpleasant surroundings of a police cell". A number of PACE provisions are directed towards expediting the investigation process and limiting the period for which suspects can be lawfully detained. The custody officer must review the detention of the suspect after the initial 6 hour period, and subsequently at intervals of no less than 9 hours. PACE permits up to 24 hours' detention without charge; this can be extended to 36 hours, where circumstances permit, by an officer of the rank of superintendent or above. Detention beyond 36 hours must be authorised by a magistrates' court, the maximum period curtailed at 96 hours from arrival at the station. However, these provisions may not prevent unreliable confessions being obtained, given that the mean interrogation time for inducing false confessions is 16.3 hours. Even a 24 hour detention may be sufficient to provoke the mentality associated with false confessions.
Paragraph 11.5 provides that "no interviewer shall indicate, except to answer a direct question, what action will be taken by the police if the person being questioned answers questions, makes a statement or refuses to do either". This controls interrogation tactics, prohibiting the use of inducement or promises to elicit a confession. However, proscription does not altogether eliminate the practice. In Barry,
 Code C was breached by the offer of assistance with requesting bail if the suspect complied.
Code C does not preclude all tactics conducive to false confessions. Some tactics described by Dean adhere to PACE yet they increase pressure on the defendant, inconsistent with confessions being entirely voluntary. The 'five Ws', make the interviewee "feel obliged to give an explanation". Requiring suspects to give an exhaustive account before confronting them with a bundle of inconsistencies, refuting their alibis and attacking their memory carry strong assertions of guilt which contribute to coerced-compliance. PACE does not adequately address the full extent of the research on psychological vulnerabilities and the effect of different interrogation techniques.
Section 36 provides for the presence of a custody officer at designated police stations. A fundamental role is to ensure compliance with PACE. This includes asking the detainee if they would like legal advice or to inform someone of their detention, and determining whether an appropriate adult or medical treatment is necessary. The custody officer is entrusted with the task of determining whether there is sufficient evidence for the suspect to be charged with the offence and detained. Additional evidence must corroborate any confession, representing a further obstacle against reliance on false confessions. He must also ensure that all matters required to be recorded are entered on the custody record. This makes coercion more easily detectable, thus deterring behaviour likely to induce a false confession. The custody officer will be held accountable for any breach of his duties; Dean asserts that this provides an effective means of enforcing PACE.
McConville's article reveals complicity between custody officers and the police, which questions the independence. The custody officer breached his duty to record all interactions between the police and suspect, facilitating deviations from PACE. Consequently, this impedes the subsequent proof of such inducements. This seems far from Buck's ambitious expectation of the role as "that of a quasi-independent guardian for the care and treatment of all detained persons, and indeed the protection of individual police officers". It appears that the custody officer's position is defective in protecting against false confessions.
Section 60 introduced mandatory tape recording of formal interviews. Recordings must be "carried out openly to instil confidence in their reliability as an impartial and accurate evidence of the interview". The analysis of recordings can confirm or reject allegations of inducement or threats. Tape recording does not altogether eliminate oppression; however, it has enabled oppression to be more easily detected and therefore deter such behaviour. The practice is not without criticism. McConville conveys the discrepancies between on and off-camera communication between a suspect and a police officer. The recorded interview depicts gentle questioning producing an entirely voluntary confession. This masks the previously unrecorded abusive language, aggressive tone, and the use of bail as an inducement. Dean concedes that the chance for off-tape coercion arises, but asserts that this will be detectable in the taped interview, and the possibility of cross-examination deters any manipulation. However, it does not appear to effectively deter officers in the videotaping experiment. Furthermore, contrived pleas only became apparent by covert filming. If video evidence can mask prior coercion or inducements, it follows that tape recording will be an even less effective safeguard against oppression, because non-audio cues are absent.
McConville concluded from the videotaping experiment that "the elaborate system of internal supervision and accountability introduced by PACE and its attendant Codes of Practice have failed to penetrate police working practices and relationships". This conflicts with Dean's contention that, "there is no room for manoeuvre under PACE".
The above discussion shows that PACE has instilled values into police practice which improve the reliability of evidence. However, its success depends upon police compliance. McConville demonstrates how police-generated 'working rules' may be adopted if it is thought that the job "cannot be done by the book" . If police can bend the rules, adherence must depend on the integrity of the individual officer. There are inadequate methods of enforcement of PACE and accountability for breach. The Codes of Practice are only taken into consideration where they are relevant to any question arising in proceedings. A breach does not necessarily lead to inadmissibility of evidence. Disciplinary actions were possible under section 67(8); however this was subsequently repealed because proceedings were rarely instigated. Now, breach of the Codes can only lead to criminal or civil proceedings if they are also a breach of the criminal or civil law.
Section 76, 77 and 78 deal with the consequences of a breach of PACE upon confession evidence. These reinforce that false or unreliable confessions continue under the law of PACE.
Where section 76 is raised by the defence or by the court of its own motion, the burden of proof shifts to the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the confession is obtained by oppression, or by circumstances rendering a confession unreliable. This is disputed away from the jury in a 'voire dire' hearing. Roberts and Zuckerman expose the overlap between the two grounds: meal breaks, sleep and adequate cell conditions are necessary requirements for safeguarding against oppression as well as ensuring reliability, since poor conditions would make detainees more prone to making false confessions.
Section 76(2)(a) adumbrates the first ground for exclusion, where it is represented that the confession "was or may have been obtained... by oppression". Oppression is defined to include "torture, inhuman or degrading treatment, and the use or threat of violence".
Fulling
 is widely cited as leading authority on the concept of oppression. Notwithstanding the definition provided by section 76(8), the Court of Appeal selected the test of "exercise of authority or power in a burdensome, harsh, or wrongful manner; unjust or cruel treatment of subjects..." from one of six of the Oxford English Dictionary definitions of oppression. Upon this definition, it rejected the defence contention that telling the accused of her partner's affair with a woman held in the adjacent cell amounted to oppression. Lord Lane expressed that it would be difficult to conceive of an incident of oppression which "[did] not entail impropriety on the part of the interrogator". This high threshold test indicates a restrictive approach for finding oppression.
Conduct triggering hallucinations in a paranoid schizophrenic, and shouting and swearing have been held not to be oppressive. Nevertheless, in another case, vigorous, loud interruptions, and use of obscenities to indicate that the defendant was lying were sufficient to fulfil section 76(2)(a) and render the confession inadmissible. In a pre-PACE case, Miller, a borderline mentally ill, was "bullied and hectored" through repetitive accusations by police until a confession was elicited after more than 300 denials. This conduct was held to amount to oppression and rebuked by the court: "Short of physical violence, it hard to conceive a more hostile and intimidating approach to a suspect".
There is a grey area falling between behaviour regarded as proper, and that which is perceived as oppressive. This was emphasised by Mitchell J in Heron
 in which police were held to have acted oppressively: "Persistence must not, however, develop into bullying; robustness must not develop into gratuitously demeaning questions, nor must robustness be an acceptable label for what, in truth, is no more than a repetitive verbal pounding alleging the certainty of a suspect's guilt". This uncertainty could conceivably deter police actions which venture into this grey area. Conversely, it could have the opposite effect, making police think they can get away with borderline oppressive behaviour.
Section 76(2)(b) provides a hypothetical test of unreliability resulting from "anything said or done", irrespective of the actual veracity of the statement. Although this may lead to acquittals of defendants making truthful confessions, it promotes adherence to the Codes of Practice in future cases, thus enhancing the overall reliability of confession evidence.
Personal characteristics of the accused are relevant to the test, incorporating a subjective analysis. "Circumstances existing at the time" has been interpreted to include suggestibility or mental abnormalities. Where safeguards devised to protect vulnerable suspects have been breached, the court has been prepared to interpret this as something "said or done which was likely...to render any confession unreliable". In DPP v Blake
, a child's confession was excluded because her estranged father could not fulfil the duties of an appropriate adult. In Trussler
, failure to permit the prescribed rest periods to a drug addict in custody sufficed to exclude the subsequent confession under section 76(2)(b). These cases recognise the effect of psychological vulnerabilities upon on the reliability of confessions for persons not suffering from mental illness, but who are particularly suggestible or compliant, or induced to a mentally abnormal state.
"Anything said or done" has been interpreted to refer to police misconduct, rather than interpreting the concept of reliability independently from fault. In R v Crampton
, drug withdrawal influenced the suspect to make a confession, yet the police-initiated interview was held insufficient to meet the threshold of section 76(2)(b). This leaves unaddressed confessions rendered unreliable, not by coercion, but as a consequence of situational factors attributed to the interrogation process when coupled with vulnerability factors.
Section 78 provides a general residuary exclusionary discretion that applies to all prosecution evidence which has "such an adverse effect on the fairness of the proceedings that the court ought not to admit it". This provides an additional safeguard against confession evidence. Section 78 has been successfully invoked to acquit the defendant where police have failed to observe interview formalities, to allow access to legal advice, and to provide an appropriate adult. However, these same factors have been rejected under section 78 in other cases, showing that each decision is fact-specific. Zander acknowledges that "there remains - and will always remain - a significant and irreducible degree of pure discretion left to the court, which, by definition, means that it could go either way.". Evidence may be admissible notwithstanding a breach; this undermines the deterrent effect of PACE.
The court has discretion also in relation to section 76: in Barry
, the inducement of assisting with the suspect's request for bail resulted in exclusion of admissions under section 76(2)(b). However, in Howden-Simpson
, police threats of bringing more than two charges against a suspect if he did not confess did not render the confession unreliable. Dean believes that the risk of having a case dismissed after the "endless paperwork" is a sufficient deterrent; however, where this consequence will not inevitably follow a breach, the risk is somewhat reduced.
As conceded by Dean, false confessions will still occur, but PACE should limit these to voluntary confessions. PACE lays down numerous safeguards which reduce situational factors conducive to coerced confessions. PACE also addresses psychological contributors by reducing interrogative pressure. However, there is need for increased recognition of the types of psychological vulnerabilities particularly conducive to unreliable evidence. The lack of accountability for breaches of PACE could impede its success. The prevalence of cases invoking section 76 and 78 highlight that it has not altogether eradicated coerced false confessions. Furthermore, the uncertain approach taken by the judiciary is likely to undermine the deterrent effect of having a case dismissed. PACE is often contingent upon 'working rules' and the integrity of the individual officer, ultimately leaving the level of interrogative pressure to the interviewer to decide.