The ratio decidendi of the case is that the keeping of fingerprints, DNA samples and DNA profiles as permitted in s64(1A) of the Police and Criminal Evidence (PACE) Act 1984 did not contravene Art 8(1) of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950, which is concerned with the interference with respect to the private life of individuals. Therefore, the Chief Constable's policy to keep fingerprints and DNA samples in all cases was lawful. Moreover, if it were to interfere with the rights of an individual to privacy, it was objectively justified under Art 8(2) of the Convention as far as public authorities are concerned. The retention of those personal materials was also not in breach of Art 14 of the Convention as to the discrimination of the subsequently acquitted suspect. Therefore, s64(1A) of PACE Act 1984 was compatible with the Convention.
The main reasoning was given in the judgment of Lord Stern. The majority decision involved all the Lords except from Baroness Hale of Richmond who disagreed on only one point: that s64(1A) of the PACE Act 1984 did not interfere with the private life of individuals. She thought of the contrary as the individual cannot exercise any control over the use of the samples, but finally concluded that the merits of an extended database largely justify such interference.
In brief, there were mainly three principal issues which were being discussed:
whether s64(1A) was interfering with the right to respect for privacy as per Art 8(1) and if it did interfere, was it objectively justified under Art 8(2);
whether retention was discriminating the appellants as per Art 14 and if it were so, was it objectively justified; and
whether s64(1A) is compatible with the Convention and if not, can a declaration for incompatibility be made.
As far as the first issue is concerned, the majority found that s64(1A) did not engage Art 8(1) at all and thus there was no need for an objective justification under Art 8(2). The reasons being that as far as Art 8(1) is concerned, cultural traditions in the UK should not be taken into account as Sedley LJ suggested. Since the Convention comprises all the member states which have agreed to it, there must be a uniform interpretation irrespective of each individual member state's cultural tradition. Also the fear expressed by Liberty that such information could be misused in the future, especially with the rapid pace at which science is developing, is not relevant. This concerns the future and decisions will be taken as and when this happens. But so far as the present is concerned, the retention of fingerprints and DNA samples is compatible with the Convention as any misuse or abuse of such data is being prevented by rigorous measures (as explained in Dr.Bramley's affidavit). Besides, for such data to be useful, samples need to be available for comparison or else they are useless. Another argument used by the Counsel for the appellant's was that the words 'for purposes related to' in s64(1A) could mean other uses apart from those stipulated within the same section. But it was clearly demonstrated that 'for purposes related to' was limited only to the prevention and detection of crime, the investigation of an offence and the conduct of a prosecution.
The majority also considered the other way round that is, taking into account the possibility that there might be some interference with Art 8(1). However, they were of the view that such interference was objectively justified as per Art 8(2). As per the submissions of the Counsel for the appellants concerning this matter, it was said that retention is indeed provided by law as its purpose was to prevent crimes and thereby protect the interests of society as per Art 8(2). It is also worth mentioning that this is being reflected in Parliament's decision to enact s82 of the Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001. Moreover, there was no disproportionality as to the fact that the retained samples conferred the idea that the presumably innocent is suspicious. Such data will help in investigating future offences, not past offences. Besides the advantages of an extended database outweighs the contention in this issue.
Concerning the second issue, it was held that there was no breach of Art 14 since the facts of the case was concerned as far as Art 8(1) applied. As Lord Stern puts it: "If my conclusion is right that art 8(1) is not engaged, it follows that art 14 is not trigerred ". Nevertheless, he also considered the possibility of a breach of Art 8(1) and directed his speech towards the elimination of any possibility for a breach of Art 14, in other words, why retention was objectively justified against discrimination.
First, he explained that the word 'ground' in Art 14 was limited because if it were the contrary, it would be unnecessary to mention 'and other status'. The difference in treatment claimed by the appellants was not on any forbidden ground as stipulated within Art 14. Nor could such treatment be considered as a 'status' within the meaning of Art 14- that is personal characteristics. The appellants are "as fully entitled to the presumption of innocence as the general body of citizens". Moreover the appellants cannot compare themselves to others who have not given their fingerprints or samples during investigation. They are clearly not in the same situation since the former has already provided the fingerprints and samples, whereas the latter was not required to do so. The relevant group of persons against which they should have compared themselves was those who had their fingerprints lawfully taken. They cannot also claimed that they are being treated as being in the same group as the convicted because it must be borne in mind that the database also contains the profiles of pure volunteers.
Finally concerning the last issue, since s64(1A) did not engage Art8(1) and, there is an objective justification under both Art 8(2) and Art 14 if it did engage Art8(1), it can be concluded that s64(1A) is compatible with the Convention.
The reasoning behind the dissenting opinion was that s64(1A) did not engage Art 8(1) of the Convention because the cultural traditions of UK was irrelevant to the question of whether Art 8(1) should be understood in this context, that is taking into account the characteristics of the culture of each country as already explained above. Also, misuse of data, which would amount to an interference with an individual's private life, is strictly prevented through the set up of rigorous safeguards thus, implying that retention can in no way affect the private life of individuals. Moreover, the policy of Chief Constable, a public authority as for the purposes of Art 8(2) of the Convention, to store data in all cases is consistent with Art 8(2) which permits interference of a public authority for the prevention of crime. Therefore, the question of incompatibility of s64(1A) of the PACE Act 1984 with the Convention does not arise.