The doctrines of consideration and intention to create legal relations are two essential elements in the formation of contracts. Consideration can be defined as the act or promise to be performed by the promisee when accepting an offer and this act or promise must be asked for in the offer. The reason why it is very common to find that "the courts will be looking for a request in the offer". Such act or promise is usually in the form of the promisee incurring some detriment by giving away something in order to get in return what is being promised by the promisor in his offer. This is where the Detriment and Benefit Analysis stems from: a benefit to the promisor and a detriment to the promisee. Intention to create legal relations, as the term itself implies, is simply the state of mind of the parties as to their willingness to be bound by the terms of the agreement. In general, the importance of these doctrines is that they are both tools used by the Court in determining the validity of a contract, the enforceability of the contract terms and the liability of the parties under that contract. But there has been much criticism around both doctrines particularly about their reliability, usefulness and effectiveness.
Consideration is used to distinguish between those promises which are enforceable from those which are not. In other words, once the Court has been able to find consideration we are already in the realms of liability. But how far is this doctrine a perfectly adequate test of liability thus undermining the doctrine of intention to create legal relations? Let us take the example given by J.C Smith of the purchaser of a fish from a local fishmonger. He points out that "the truthful shopper might admit under cross-examination that it had never crossed his mind that, when he bought fish, he was making a contract". Indeed, in such types of transaction where consideration is the act of effectively purchasing the commodity, liability is immediately established when the seller accepts payment. If such cases are assessed subjectively, we will obviously not find any intention to create legal relations because it is impossible to say, as to the buyer's state of mind at the time of purchase, whether he has given some thought to the possibility of taking actions against the seller in case the fish was not of satisfactory quality. But we will still have a binding contract here because consideration provides adequate proof of liability. Intention to create legal relations can only be inferred on an objective basis that is, in the mind of the reasonable man.
It is often said that consideration often evidences an intention to create legal relations. The latter can be inferred from the former, thus making it superfluous to have a separate doctrine of intention to create legal relations. Liability can be established as soon as consideration is found. In the case of Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball Co
 the promise of the 'money compensation' (if I may called it so) contained in the advertisement was inducing people to use the smoke ball and as A.L Smith LJ said: "this was an offer intended to be acted upon". Thus, the purchase and the inconvenience of using the product was enough consideration given by Mrs.Carlill in response to the offer. And from this, an intention to create legal relations can be inferred because she would not have purchased and gone through the trouble of using the smoke ball (in other words, consideration) if she had not intended the advertisement to be a binding one.
In Parker v Clark
, the plaintiffs' consideration- giving up the occupation of their own residence to move in and share the residence of the defendants- provides sufficient evidence of their intention to be bound by the agreement's terms contained in the letters. Undoubtedly, had they not acted in reliance to the promise made by the defendants, they would not have suffered such a detriment as the dispossession of their own house. Although such type of consideration is being supplemented by the concept of promissory estoppel.
However, the doctrine of consideration does not always fulfil the doctrine of intention to create legal relations. The latter has proven to be a distinct element of a contract. In the case of Balfour v Balfour
, there is the existence of consideration in the form of the monthly allowance of 30 being a gain to the wife and a loss to the husband. But though consideration has been found, it does not automatically lead to an intention to create legal relations. In the judgment of Atkin LJ, he was of the view that when the arrangement was made by the husband to pay a monthly allowance to the wife, both parties have "never intended that they should be sued upon". Indeed in such type of arrangement, it is only when (at a future time) one party fails to respect his promise that the other party will contemplate the fact as to whether the agreement was meant to have legal effects. But at the time they did make the agreement, they had not thought about that aspect of the agreement.
In the case of Esso Petroleum Ltd v Commissioners of Customs and Excise
, Viscount Dilhorne was of the view that the buyer's consideration- entry into contract to purchase four gallons of petrol- to the offer of 'free' coins with every four gallons of petrol by Esso did not lead to any intention to create legal relations concerning the supply of the 'free' coins. Such an intention only exists as to the supply of the four gallons of petrol although the coins might induce the buyer to come back. Besides, if it were also a contract for the supply of the coins, it must be borne in mind that the buyer may not be willing to take the coin because, let's say, it is of no value to him. Hence, he has no intent to create legal relations as far as the supply of coins is concerned. However, a case might also arise where the coin has value to the eyes of another buyer, but it would be unrealistic to make Esso liable on the basis of who considers the coin to have value. We cannot have one contract and varying results for different buyers.
In a nutshell, consideration may as well as may not give evidence of an intention to create legal relations. "Consideration is cogent evidence of the existence of such an intent, but it is by no means conclusive proof that it is present". Besides, "In a liberal society intention is necessary: no person may be contractually bound against his will" or else, everyone will be bound by the thousand of promises we make in our everyday life and this is unrealistic. To tackle the problem of whether consideration is an adequate test of liability in contract, it is important to look at the facts and circumstances of each case. Nevertheless, we cannot but agree with the fact that at present, our English Legal System requires both consideration and an intention to have legal consequences.