On 14 th March 2000, the Defendant, Mrs Vivien Marie Kay, acquired a Property, which was transferred and registered in her sole name, for the purpose of a Holistic Healing Centre. Between 24 th May and 25 th September 2000, the Claimant, Mr Servan Keondjian, contributed a total of 62,000 paid in seven separate instalments which he alleges was in respect of the renovation and refurbishment of the Property. According to him, an oral agreement had been made between them before the acquisition (around Christmas 1999) in which they agreed that:
the Claimant would enter into a written guarantee of 100,000 with Northern Rock Plc, which would provide the Defendant with a mortgage of 650,000 in respect of the Property;
the Claimant would provide such funds from time to time as required by the Defendant for the purpose of either developing the Property or repaying the mortgage instalments, and in return the Claimant would obtain a beneficial interest in the Property.
However, in summer 2003, owing to financial problems, the Claimant was prepared to convert the original terms of the agreement into a loan in order to recover his money back. The Defendant initially accepted to repay the money but eventually failed to do so. Since no repayment had been made, the Claimant claimed that their original agreement had not been altered and he was therefore still entitled to a beneficial interest in the Property under a constructive trust held by the Defendant for the two of them.
The Defendant, on her part, argued that the monies represented a part repayment of a debt owed to her by the Claimant and that they had never agreed that the latter should receive a beneficial interest in the Property. Therefore, the issue for the judge in this trial was to determine whether at the time of purchase such a trust was brought into existence so as to give the Claimant a beneficial interest in the Property.
Based on the facts of the case, the judge held that there was no constructive trust but that the fund provided was by way of loan repayable on demand. Since the claim based on constructive trust had failed, the Claimant was allowed to plead in the alternative that the monies were advanced by loan. The Claimant was therefore entitled to the repayment of his money plus interest.
In brief, we can see that oral agreements are greatly problematic and under the law of trusts, the courts have to make many inferences as to common intention and detrimental reliance, which is undeniably not an obvious and easy task. Indeed, "there is little guidance in the authorities on constructive trusts as to what is necessary to prove that the claimant so acted to her detriment". As suggested the well-established doctrine of propriety estoppel might be the best means of dealing with such cases.