The European Council is an organ which did not exist when the Communities were first created. It originates from the existing Summit Conferences of the Heads of States which have been held since 1969. It was created in 1974 as a response to a growing feeling by European leaders that the European Economic Community needed stronger leadership to overcome the stagnation in Community legislation and, the financial crises of the early seventies, which showed that "the Western currencies were so closely intertwined such that national governments could no longer preserve their national economic autonomy". The urgency to reaffirm the position of Western Europe in an increasingly economically interdependent world confirmed the critical importance of the European Council in shaping Community legislation in a clearer direction. The question, however, is how far-reaching is the scope of the activities of the European Council in the formal Community decision-making process and, what is its position vis--vis the institutional framework of the Community.
We shall discuss three interrelated aspects of the European Council namely: its role within the Union, the status of its decisions and their impact on Community law.
In a nutshell, views about the European Council vary from some seeing it as conferences of government reaching unenforceable political compromises, to some seeing it as playing a formal role as the main political dynamo of the Community and, to others who consider it as the decision-making, initiative-taking and even proposal-creating body enjoying the highest authority. For most, it is already considered to be an institution of the EU owing to its deep involvement in Community matters, although legally speaking it is not. Last but not least, from a political perspective, the European Council is at the top of the hierarchical ladder as the key political forum. From a legal perspective though, the European Council shares the power with the other institutions, particularly the Council. Although it defines the broad policies of the EU, it cannot be denied that it is dependent upon the Community institutions to give them a legal status. With the possible ratification of the Constitutional Treaty, some views are likely to be altered since the European Council will be finally institutionalised.