In the House of Lords judgement of R (S) v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire it was deemed that the retention of fingerprints, DNA samples and DNA profiles taken lawfully from individuals who had not been convicted of a criminal offence was compatible with Article 8(1), that everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence. By following the persuasive authority of the European Commission of Human Rights in the case of McVeigh v UK [1981] 25 DR 15, it was deemed that the retention of such information did not interfere with the life of a private individual because it was not used to extract personal genetic information about a person. Instead the safeguards in place to prevent such misuse ensured that the information was used to facilitate the policy aims of the prevention and speedy detection of serious crime. Furthermore the retention was not discriminatory under Article 14 of the convention because the necessary 'status' requirements were not in accord with the position of the appellants.
Lord Steyn, in his leading judgement, argued that, in the interpretation of s64 (1A)a of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 in reference to its accordance with Art 8(1) of the convention, it was important to take account of McVeigh v UK , so as to reflect the view of Strasbourg. This is because, in the words of Lord Bingham of Cornhill, 'the meaning of the convention should be uniform throughout the states party to it." Thus the Court of Appeal should not have referred to the 'strong cultural unease in the United Kingdom about the official collection and retention of information about individuals' as a determinant to whether the retention was an infringement of Art 8(1) because 'in formulating its decision the court considers the spectrum of attitudes across the contracting states in order to determine the contemporary content of rights under the convention.'
Baroness Hale of Richmond also agreed that the House's decision should reflect the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights and the European Commission of Human Rights. However, she believed that the 'general tenor of [their] jurisprudence' was different to that of which was established by the majority. In reference to Kinnunen v Finland App No 24950/94 she noted that the Commission made a distinction between the 'character' and thus effects of the availability of different information. She argued that the character of DNA samples and profiles was such that its mere availability was an interference with art 8(1). This is because it was the storage of important and unique personal information which in the wrong hands could be misused. The majority decision however believed that the safeguards explained by Dr Bramley to prevent such misuse were sufficient to demonstrate that at present there was no engagement with art. 8(1) and that 'judicial decisions can be made, when the need occurs, to ensure compatibility with the convention." However Baroness Hale argued that such safeguards presented a justification for interference rather than a removal of the principle.
Baroness Hale developed the reasoning behind her dissenting judgement by demonstrating the difficulties produced if retention was not seen as engaging with art 8(1). She suggested that discriminatory discretion would be legitimate because the authorities would not have to justify why they were holding some samples but not others:
In her dissent, therefore, Baroness Hale believed that the retention of fingerprints, DNA samples and profiles engaged with art 8(1), but was justified by art 8(2):
The justification for the interference (i.e. the reasoning behind Baroness Hale's dissenting view) was developed in Lord Steyn's obiter dicta. The first requirement that he cited was that the interference should be 'in accordance with law." This means that the permitted discretion should have some sort of identifiable boundaries. However, too much 'certainty in the framing of laws... [can cause] excessive rigidity' and thus the interpretation of many laws are a 'question of practice." Therefore the majority saw the retention of such information 'in accordance with law.'
A further requirement for the justification of such interference is that the power of retention must not be disproportionate. In light of this, Lord Steyn emphasised the significant benefits derived from the retention of such information. For example, it would mean that compelling evidence that was lawfully obtained could not then be dismissed in future cases. Furthermore it could be used to eliminate the innocent, correct miscarriages of justice and detect the guilty: 'The Home Office statistics show that there is a 40% chance that a crime scene sample will be matched immediately with an individual's profile on the database." However the appellants believed that it was disproportionate, and in agreement with Sedley LJ in his dissenting judgement of the Court of Appeal hearing, argued that the authorities should use their discretion to decide whether to retain evidence. However, Lord Steyn argued, and the others agreed, that retention of information was proportionate to the aims of public policy. One reason given in support of this was that the person (from whom the samples were obtained) would only be detected again if the authorities had found a duplicate match. Moreover the legislation in place restricted the use of the information so that it only dealt with the policy aims of reducing crime and increasing detection rates. Therefore, even though Baroness Hale dissented from the majority in terms of whether the retention of fingerprints, DNA profiles and samples engaged with art 8(1), she still came to the same conclusion that the retention of such information is compatible with the article as a whole.
The appellants also however appealed on the basis that retention of such information was incompatible with art. 14:
There was a unanimous verdict that the retention was compatible with art 14. Lord Steyn explained that by following the Euisdem Generis Rule there is no basis for discrimination of this type under this article. This is because the class of personal characteristics referred to in the article, such as sex or race, did not reflect the position of the appellants nor anyone else who has had their fingerprints, DNA samples and profiles retained after a criminal investigation. On the contrary it was 'simply reflecting historical fact'. Thus the lawful retention of the applicants' information did not produce a status that gave ground for discrimination under art. 14.
Thus it was deemed that the retention of fingerprints, DNA samples and profiles was compatible with both articles 8 and 14. However there is some substance to the reasoning behind Baroness Hale's dissent depending on how much importance you place on the availability of personal genetic information and the amount of faith you have on future judicial decisions to be able to deal with the misuse of such information. However at present it seems reasonable to deem the retention of such information as fair and proportional both in consideration of the protection of the public as well as the human rights available to every individual.