The development of modern case law has questioned the suitability of consideration and intention to create legal relations as essential elements of a contract. This essay will consider the validity of their purposes; their accordance with the themes of contract law (e.g. freedom of contract; public policy), their consistency; and the impact of developments on the future of the doctrines.
Gratuitous offers will therefore not be enforced because there must be a bargain, and so the parties must have acquired either a benefit/detriment. However, this must merely be sufficient, and thus by not considering their 'comparative value', freedom of contract is upheld.
The assumption is that anything of economic value is sufficient. In Chappell & Co v The Nestle Co Ltd (1960) AC 87, Nestle argued that the requested wrappers were of no economic value because when received they were thrown away. However, Lord Reid in the majority decision deemed them sufficient because Nestle had good commercial reasons for requesting them. This liberal approach can also be seen in an uncle's unilateral offer in Hamer v Sidway 124 NY 538 (1891) where he owed his nephew money for promising not to smoke, drink or swear. This reflects the more adaptable definition of consideration:
Thus a detriment can be established 'legally' even if not in 'fact', and by doing so recognises that contracts may be more than a bargain, but can also still be distinguished from a gratuitous offer (which does not require anything in return).
However, there are contracts in which a 'legal' benefit/detriment is not required. In New Zealand Shipping Co v AM Satterthwaite [1975] AC 154 168 'a pre-existing contractual duty owed to a third party constitute good consideration for a promise given in return,' even though the promisee was doing what he was already obliged to do and the promisor, receiving something he was already entitled to. This is inconsistent with the principle that consideration is not sufficient if a pre-existing duty is owed by law. The recognition of a practical benefit in the former but not the latter seems to be based on public policy. In Ward v Byham (1956) 1 WLR 496 and in Glasbrook Brothers Ltd. v Glamorgan County Council (1925) AC, both the mother and police, respectively, were held to have performed beyond their legal duty. It seems however that this distinction was quite artificial and that the courts were actually recognising the practical benefits of purchasing a public duty. They were however weary of accepting this as they were concerned with the impact policy issues such as duress and the inability of some to afford a public duty could have on future cases. However Lord Denning suggested we should be willing to accept the practical benefits of a pre-existing duty if it is not 'contrary to public interest', and is parallel with the developments concerning pre-existing contractual duties.
In Williams v Roffey Bros & Nicholls (Contractors) Ltd (1990) 1 All ER 512 the courts recognised the practical benefit in continuing with a contract at a different price even though nothing extra was given. It has been criticised for not recognising the 'defendants' right to performance under the original contract." Furthermore, it was argued if consideration was deemed necessary then future parties would have less incentive to seek a modification. Yet this does not take account of the fact that consideration need only be sufficient. Thus it has been suggested that it should be the responsibility of the doctrine of economic duress to deal with fears of coercion. However at present the doctrine is unstable and, 'as Stilk v Myrick demonstrates it can be a difficult task to ascertain whether or not duress has been applied on the facts." Nevertheless there are already circumstances in which the courts have to determine the probability of whether an event occurred and hence it seems that more consideration should be given to the fact that at present the doctrine is incapable of dealing with economic duress without undermining the true intentions of the parties.
Furthermore, the doctrine does not seem to be a strict requirement and is emphasised by the variation in its need (i.e. the remedy of promissory estoppel) and interpretation. McKendrick noted, for example, that there will always be a practical benefit in a part-payment of a debt, yet this was not recognised in Foakes v Beer (1884) 9 App Cas 605. This inconsistency therefore, places great importance on the affirmative application of other doctrines.
The intention to create legal relations is one such doctrine. Contracts, in the words of Lord Stowell,
However 'serious legal, administrative and economic problems could result if, in every dispute concerning a contract, an intention to create a legal relationship had to be proved." Therefore the courts have made the presumption that if agreements are made in a social/domestic context then there will be no intention, and the reverse will be true in commercial contexts. However, these presumptions may be rebutted by evidence to the contrary.
It is rare for these presumptions to be rebutted in commercial contexts. Furmston suggested that this may be because the rules of offer, acceptance and consideration already deal with intention. For example, the distinction between an 'offer' and 'invitation to treat' already considers whether it was intended to be legally binding. However, the doctrine was important in Edwards v Skyways Ltd (1964) 1 WLR 349 where the interpretation of an 'ex gratia payment', was specific to the presumptions of intention.
The doctrine of intention is also important in social/domestic contexts, because the presence of offer, acceptance and consideration will not always amount to legal intent. For example, in Coward v Motor Insurers Bureau (1963) 1 QB 259, it was impractical to allow for the social agreement of offering a friend a lift to work in return for transport costs to be legally binding. This point was also made in Balfour v Balfour (1919) 2 KB 571, where a husband promised to support his wife whilst he was abroad. The courts recognised that in an agreement between husband and wife 'the terms may be repudiated, varied or renewed as performance proceeds or as disagreements develop." It also makes economical sense because otherwise the 'courts ... would have to be multiplied one hundredfold'. This suggests that contract law is not suitable in social/domestic spheres and far from being superfluous the doctrine plays a vital role in filtering it from unnecessary claims.
However, some have argued that it is too narrow as it does not reflect the agreements in a modern family. Freeman argued that the development of the family, as one that is concerned with its own private ordering, in terms of property, money and disputes about children, should be reflected in contract law. However, the fact that this presumption can be rebutted gives the doctrine enough flexibility so as not to ignore the intention of parties who really do wish to create legal relations. For example, in Merritt v Merritt (1970) 1 WLR 1211 the courts recognised that a couple who were separated, could be distinguished from parties who were living in 'amity', as the former did not rely on 'honourable understandings'. Furthermore, the presumption can also be rebutted if parties rely on an agreement to their detriment, as was seen in the case of Parker v Clark (1960) 1 WLR 286, where it was deemed that the Parkers had taken a 'drastic and irrevocable step' by selling their house to move in with the Clarks. Therefore, by not ignoring the facts of individual circumstances, the courts are still able to deal with these situations without having to create an unbearable burden on their limited resources.
It seems therefore that the doctrine of intention to create legal relations plays an important role in the law of contract and should not be dismissed as 'superfluous.' Its role is further emphasised by the widening interpretation of consideration. Thus the doctrine of intention must also develop in its own right so that contract law is of practical use in the commercial world.