Qualitative research is theoretically research that leads to dichotomous results, i.e. data values of zero or one; however in psychology qualitative findings are usually those not arrived at by statistical methods, (Grohol, 2005). Methods are usually naturalistic and involve observing behaviour without manipulating variables. Qualitative methods are often thus considered less scientific than quantitative methods, yet they play a vital role in understanding behaviour in its natural environment and are frequently used to develop hypotheses and theories, giving exploratory analysis which can aid quantitative experimental design. Due to the inductive nature of qualitative research, however, it can only be a useful medium when explored in sufficient detail; therefore validity and reliability are critical to its utility.
Since qualitative research differs so greatly from quantitative study, researchers have developed non-quantitative criteria for assessing reliability and validity. For instance, Guba and Lincoln, (1994), proposed four criteria for judging the soundness of qualitative research, e.g. as repeated observations of the same events are impossible (reliability), qualitative methods must show dependability and the research must account for how changes in context produced changes in observation. Instead of internal validity, qualitative methods need credibility; to establish that results are credible from the participants' perspectives. In place of external validity the research should show transferability, i.e. that results can be generalised to other settings, and where objectivity cannot be proven, the results must show confirmability so that other researchers could corroborate results. While some argue that the criteria are still subjective rather than realist in nature, at least these alternatives try to establish some soundness to research and remind us of the importance of quality in all methods.
In situations of naturalistic observations Neuman and Wiegand, (2000) suggested some quality assurance measures when taking field notes. Firstly to take notes immediately after any observations, without analysing, and to write quickly but in great detail, avoiding evaluative judgements or summaries. To ensure results are objective, counts should be made of key words, phrases or behaviour, records should be made of order or sequence of events and where possible maps or diagrams could be used to note specific locations or movements. This advice, however, is very limited in context and does not give general ideas of validity or reliability as required in other areas of research.
As Silverman, (1997), suggested, reliability and validity take on different forms in different methods, but some general necessities apply to most studies. Validity must be ensured by allowing other researchers and the general public access to field notes, tape recordings, transcripts and materials relevant to the method. In general, Silverman argues that accurate tape or video recordings can be more reliable and valid than field notes, as the content can be repeated and analysed fully, detailed content is assured and importantly, the recordings can be reviewed by other researchers to ensure validity. There can be a number of problems with recordings though, where tapes can lose aspects of social interaction such as gestures. Even video can miss movements and temporal processes therefore should be set up very carefully and trialled to ensure quality. Silverman suggests longitudinal studies to gain perspective on behaviour patterns over time, ensuring technical quality of data and adequacy of transcripts, for example in detail and length.
An example of a study using videotape analysis is Aldert Vrij's study on detecting deceit via analyses of verbal and nonverbal behaviour, (2004). Here subjects were videotaped and their behaviour and speech analysed from the tape. To increase validity of any conclusions made, 196 participants were used to take a 'mean' response. Lengths of responses were given and content was coded and analysed according to a set of pre-established criteria (CBCA scoring), for example specific words and phrases were looked for. In this way the results are free of bias and personal evaluations and the study could, in essence, be repeated.
In terms of reliability of such studies, traditional tests can be used in some cases, for example test-retest reliability can be taken from the same questionnaire given to large samples on different occasions. A correlation coefficient can be calculated between the two sets of data and the results classed as reliable if giving over 0.8 correlation. Also increasing the sample size and variability of a study will increase reliability as mean values obtained are more accurate, (Hayes, 1997).
Once results have led to conclusions it I important to validate these in any discussion, to improve the quality of the research. One concept is that of reflexivity, where the researcher reflects on and evaluates the method design and even personal perspective, (Merrick, 1993). This has been used in a study by Vigil, Hodges and Klee (2005) about parental language input. In the introduction and discussion the researchers examine their own theories and expectations, gender, age, culture, political beliefs and therefore possible bias. They then consider ways to counteract this and evaluate the possible input of such bias, an idea known as triangulation, (Merrick, 1993).
It can be seen that with detailed and careful analysis of results and evaluation of possible weaknesses, quality research is possible and is not only useful nut necessary in gaining a deeper understanding of behaviour in its natural environment. Qualitative research can be influential in developing psychological theory but must be looked at with caution. When conducting qualitative research, as many measures as possible must be employed to ensure that conclusions are more than just inferences, and have a sound methodology behind them.