The judgement, that Somerset County Council was in breach of its duty to an overworked teacher, Mr Barber, was "fairly close to the borderline." This is a clear indication that the standard of care that an employer owes to his employee is still in an unstable condition, and thus it is necessary to consider whether the House of Lord adequately balanced the constraints upon the employer with the interests of the employee. This essay will therefore focus on the developments in the workplace over the last thirty years, especially in the educational sector; and the extent to which an employer should be able to rely on the realities of modern work to determine the standard of care they owe to their employees.
Support has grown for policies that encourage competition, increase efficiency and prioritise the market economy, especially in light of advancing technology and globalisation. In the education system, for example, the introduction of Ofsted inspection and the production of league tables have encouraged competition between schools, whose funding is now based on enrolment numbers. However, schools which tend to have children from disadvantaged backgrounds do not do as well as their competitors, and so their enrolment and thus funding declines. Some teachers therefore work at a wage much lower than their experience would dictate. Such changes have encouraged some people to take on work beyond what they can cope with and a few, for whoever's fault it may be, have suffered psychiatric harm.
Lord Scott argued that "In under funded institutions providing vital social services there is often very little that the employers can do about stress problems." He questions the practicalities of the school being able to afford a supply teacher or the fairness of asking colleagues to do extra work. Furthermore, those things that were out of the control of the school, such as the timing of the Ofsted inspection, may have meant that the whole school was under a lot of strain. Therefore, it can be argued that the majority of the judges did not take adequate account of the practical burdens that the wider structure of society may place on employers.
It may further be argued that if society believes that the psychiatric health of its citizens is more beneficial to society than efficiency and competition, then it is the role of policy makers to change things on the macro level, by, for example, introducing a comprehensive system of education, rather than making it the responsibility of employers to relieve stress of individual employees. Therefore from an employer's point of view it can be argued that the House of Lords judgement did not consider the changes that have occurred in the workplace over the last thirty years. If however the employer accepts that the huge technical advancements throughout the world may make it impracticable for policy makers to change direction in the global market, then the employer may instead argue that in this ever-changing society it is for the individual to be responsible for their own mental health.
This individual responsibility was advocated by Lord Scott when he asserted that employees "are all adults" who choose their profession, and that it is their responsibility, as adults, to make mature decisions in assessing their personal mental health, as "Mr Barber had done so in the summer term." This view is supported by Kelly and Colquhoun who reflect on the work of Foucault (2000) in assessing the responsibility of teachers. Foucault argues that 'to be a professional means to be a person capable of making choices and accepting responsibilities that are framed by a duty of care to manage one's health and wellbeing to maximise organisational performance and effectiveness." Thus for a teacher to consider themselves as 'a professional' they "must maintain balance in the midst of change, uncertainty and risk." Therefore it can be argued that the House of Lords did not take account of the realities of modern work because they chose to ignore the individual responsibility of 'a professional' (who in this case was a teacher) to take care of themselves for the benefit of the organisation they work for.
In addition to individual responsibility, there is a strong argument for adherence to contractual responsibility. Lord Roger suggests that it would be unfair on the employer to expect anything less than that which the employee has promised to carry out. The judgement has made the standard of care that is owed by the employer very unclear because it does not examine to what extent the employee can escape from fulfilling his contractual obligation and thus does not take adequate account of the realities of modern work which has a heavy reliance on contractual agreements. However it is very difficult to see how an employer could prevent psychiatric harm without actually interfering with contractual obligations. In the past, when the industrial sector was developing, it was quite straightforward to impose a duty to try and prevent physical harm as this simply meant ensuring that reasonable precautions were taken, without having to interfere with the contract. However, over the past thirty years the service sector has expanded quite significantly and thus the emphasis of health and safety has now shifted to psychiatric harm. Thus it has been argued that this shift has placed an unfair burden on the employer who cannot now depend on the rights of his contractual agreement.
Furthermore, Lord Scott recognises that it is very difficult for an employer to predict who among their workforce will be able to cope with the stresses of a job, especially if the employer is not fully informed of the problems that their employees are encountering. It may therefore be argued that the guidelines set out by Lady Hale in the Court of Appeal judgement were more practical in terms of the realities of the modern work because even though it recognised psychiatric harm, and thus the way changes have affected the work of employees, it did not place upon the employer an impracticable duty of care. Furthermore lowering the standard of care from that prescribed by the House of Lords judgement to that presented by the Court of Appeal may give rise to an argument in favour of interfering with contractual obligations as this would therefore balance the employer's rights, by taking account of the modern realities of work, with that of the employee's.
However, Lord Walker did not accept that the standard of care offered to Mr Barber was satisfactory. He believed it was reasonable for Mr Barber not to inform the head teacher of his circumstances as frequently or in as much detail as was set out in Lady Hale's guidelines. This is because as Lord Walker explained
Furthermore in light of what was known by the head teacher and the two deputy head teachers, that is, that Mr Barber had taken three weeks off school for stress and depression, and had approached senior management with his concerns, he argues that positive steps should have been taken to limit the damage possible and improve the situation so as not to lose such a conscientious and dedicated teacher. An employer who chose not to undertake these duties was neglecting the health of his employees and thus falling 'below the standard to be properly expected of a reasonable and prudent employer." He did not accept that the strains of modern work or changes in the workplace placed too higher burden on the employer from doing so.
However, the House of Lords decision did not seem to look at much more than the interaction between the employer and employee- singled out from the rest of the world. The majority decision looks at the employer's duty of care without taking into account the general circumstances of the organisation, in this case a struggling state school, or the contractual practicalities of carrying out such a duty. In balancing the two conflicting interests, it seems that the House of Lords gave a lot of consideration to the pressures placed on individuals in terms of the risk of psychiatric illnesses due to modern work and not enough to the employer who has to juggle the very many constraints placed upon them through the realities of the workplace. Lady Hale's guidelines in the Court of Appeal judgement were, in my view, a lot more realistic as they recognised the practical constraints imposed on employers in the working world today.