Strategic management is the key to success and standing out from the crowd under the competitive business. It is therefore necessary for a business to implement the appropriate long-term strategic plans whilst having the flexibility to tackle developing changes. The discussion which follows will address on the execution of long and short term strategic planning. The importance of the two will critically analyze.
Long term strategic planning generally means an idea is developed in a structured, formalized process as well as the organization will use it in the coming 5 years. In the process of executing the planning, organization should first familiar with the internal situation of the company like structure, systems, resources (e.g. people and money). Managers may find that information with the help of the SWOT analysis. This analysis studies the strength and weakness of the company as well as the opportunities and threats they may have. Besides the internal audition, it also has external audit. PEST analysis could be used to understand the general environment in the areas of politics, economy, socio-culture and technology. Predictions help the organization to have a better view on what are likely to happen in the future or what they should pay attention on. Therefore, in preparing the long-term planning, there are many predictions. If a company is inability to predict, they are inability to plan. "Predict and prepare" (Ackoff, 1983:59) became a motto for a business.
With reference to the data analyzed, an organization will set the long-term strategic planning which align business objectives and is in favor of the benefits of the company as a whole. As suggested by Steiner, "all strategies must be broken down into sub strategies for successful implementation" (Steiner, 1979:177). Evaluating the strategic planning is crucial because managers can make the adjustment before it is implemented. If everything is fine, the strategic planning can be launched.
During setting the long-term strategic planning, firm will keep updating the information to beware of the sudden changes in market. To trace the fashion and the latest taste of the customers, they may hold the target group discussions, do surveys on the street, and telephone interviews. Participating in different kinds of social or exhibition let organization update the movement of the industry. For the rest of the changes, for example the government policy, economic, politics or other factors which affect them. They may depend on the media globally for example the Financial Time (FT), British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) or others and some critics or scholars who familiar with particular area.
Once changes emerge, managers will reconsider and set their short-term direction immediately. Wit mentioned and used the Fig 1 to explain that strategic renewal which constantly enacts strategic changes to remain in harmony with external conditions; it can transform for the firm to stay up to date and competitive (Wit, 2005:74).
To make the firm competitive, it is essential for a business to implement business strategies which demand both discipline in the execution of long-term strategic plans and flexibility to address emergent changes. The first reason behind this statement is the long-term strategic planning provides a clear picture to staff and the flexibility leads the firm aligning with market demand. During drafting the long term planning, managers need to undergo the internal analysis which illustrates the strength and the weakness. It provides an opportunity to know more about the company which help in distinguishing the organization from its rivals and strengthening its competitive advantage. At the same time, they may find the "critical success factors" (Boddy, 1998:165) as Boddy mentioned. Besides the main long-term strategic planning for the entire company, there will be other tailor-made sub strategic planning in the area of multinational, organizing, production, marketing, human resource management, political risk and negotiation in order to provide a clearer goal to the different parties within the company. When staff members acknowledge the present and future situation of company, they can straightly go ahead. If there is any unpredictable changes appear they can still work towards the planning with their flexibility.
In reality, most companies are using both long-term planning and flexibility. However, part of them may rely more on the flexibility than on the planning while the others may be different; it may due to the difference of companies or industries. Legal and General, a company in FTSE 100, is an example of demanding more on flexibility. Legal & General provides insurance to protect their clients from the risks as a "consistent aim" (Legal & General, 2005). Over many years, they have extended their range of services and products to meet the market needs and take a strong role in developing the economy, technology and even the satellites in space (Legal & General, 2005). As one can notice, Legal & General is truly responsive and flexible to the external environment change. On the other hand, British Airway (BA) obviously aims to bring travellers around the world with comfort and safety and BA has put lots of effort on advancing the airport and in-flight service, e-ticketing and other business or first-class service. However, it is still relying more on long term strategic planning than the flexibility relatively.
One may ask which discipline is more important to the company; it is still a controversial argument. Actually, each company has its own practice; but if an organization aims to bring the most value for their shareholders. It can be considered that flexible to the emerging changes is more crucial for their success.
It is hard to be a good "Fortune teller" but is easier to be flexible or find some parties to help in changing .To undertake strategic planning; an organization has to predict the future to provide a general trend which the society is moving to. While the certain repetitive pattern (e.g., seasonal) may be predictable, the forecasting of discontinuities, such as technological breakthroughs or price increases, is "practically impossible" (Makridakis, 1990) according to Spiro Makridakis. As well as, not all alternatives can be listed in the planning in advance. If one does not flexible, rivals may catch up or grow even faster.
According to Dean R. Fowler, one of the characteristic which contribute to the successful family business strategy is flexibility because they can respond to the market, make decision quickly and "speed to out-maneuver the competition" (Fowler, 2001).Therefore, if an organization can take this example as learning material, they may also can respond to customer orders quickly, provide a broader product range quickly. "Flexibility has been recognized as an important competitive priority in manufacturing strategy literature". (Dangayach, 2001).
Flexibility does not mean to change the whole strategic planning. It can be just a "fine tuning", whereby existing procedures are upgraded, activities are improved and people are reassigned. Operational changed are directed at increasing the performance of the firm under the existing system and the current basic setup (Wit, 2005:73).
Asda is one of cases and precursors in changing their strategies so as to cope with and grow along with the external environment. During the 1980s, the development and usage of computer increase. Asda, the major food retailer, not only developed strategies of opening new stores, refurnishing the existing stores and changing the product variation but also pursued strategy of using information technology and streamlining their distribution system (Thompson, 1993:22).Virgin group's directors aim to develop company into the leading British international media and entertainment group and they are confident that by recognizing changes in consumer tastes Virgin can expand successfully and profitably in this field (Thompson, 1993:26-28). From the about 2 cases, they tell the importance of flexibility.
Mintzberg mentioned that strategy 'need not always be a conscious and precise plan'. Indeed, he argues, 'strategy can emerge as a pattern from a fits-and-starts stream of entrepreneurial actions' (Mintzberg, 1982). He also argues that organizations should be structured and managed to ensure that formulators of strategies have information, and that implementers of strategies and changes have the appropriate degree of power to ensure that the desired changes are brought about (Mintzberg, 1989).
By some means, there are many uncertainties in the markets; they should have an emergency plan to cope with while go along with the long term strategy plan. Manager should be flexible and need to foresee the obstacles in the future. Always reviewing the strategy is needed. It would be true especially for the business which concentrate on the long- term strategic planning only and neglect about the changing markets. At the same time, if they only focus on the instant varying market situation and do not have a broad vision, it is not easy either for the organization to be succeed in the long-run.