Science is a means for discovering what works, or what will solve problems in practice (Lundberg 1947) "Scientific management", set up by Taylor (1967), an engineer, was applied to design the most efficient performing method for any tasks on the shop floor. Taylor (1967) also assumed that workers were lazy and needed money to motivate them. By the 1930s, the legitimacy of bureaucracy and scientific management was questioned as assets and people were left idle in the Depression era (Clegg et al 2005:24). Taylor's rational approach was criticised by the human relation school, and it highlighted that social relationships were a more significant determinant of employee productivity than simply money.
There is no more urgent problem than establishing sound and cooperative relations between workers and management (Johnson 1949). Human relations theory (HRT) was generated through a series of experiments and interviews. As Schoen (1957) indicated, similar to the field of medicine, human relations is a field of research, teaching and practice. HRT is regarded having its origin in the Hawthorne studies, in which Mayo was actively involved. Although the methods and findings of this experiment are highly controversial, the significance of the Hawthorne studies is recognized. Firstly, social science is engaged with industry formally, and secondly, the core of HRT and subsequent managerial practices are built (Thompson and McHugh 2002:45). Mayo (1946) identified the meaning of human factor in organisations. Workers, as human beings not robots, have different needs besides economical reward demand. Their personal feelings and attitudes towards social interest and supervisory relationship have an influential affect on their performance in the workplace.
The implications of HRT spread to a broader context in terms of psychological, sociological and political areas. Based on the essay question, I will discuss the implications of HRT in the organisation of work domain. Three main propositions will be examined in terms of conceptual contribution and practical examples. Initially, the importance of satisfying employees' social needs and consideration of social relations will be analysed; secondly, I will evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of adopting teamworking in organisations; thirdly, the control mechanism issues referring to manipulation, justification and efficiency will be discussed. Finally, a summary on the implications of HRT, the interrelation among the previous three propositions, as well as further advice to organisations will be given.
After the interpretation of Hawthorne's data, Mayo (1946) argued that workers seek for recognition, satisfaction and a sense of belonging to a social group, which is vital for productivity. He also indicated that lacking of awareness to human relationships and too much attention was paid to technical relations at work than social relations was a key defect in other management theories. In addition, Cleggal. (2005:26) identified that many of Mayo's ideas emphasis on the failure of management to consider social relations, social orders and the collaboration to maintain them as fundamental parts to contemporary enterprise.
Organisations are increasingly concerned about how to satisfy employees' social needs and making full use of the potential power in order to bring a positive effect to productivity as well as avoid unnecessary conflict inside and outside of organisations. According to Collier (2002), corporations, both large and small, continuously insist that they seek managers who can work "with and through" people, rather than experts who only have technical knowledge of the business.
Professional interpersonal skills are required for managers and supervisors, to whom large organisations give training in the arts of intensive communication, social skills and leadership. Additionally, as Mayo (1946) suggested, remedial interviews as a managerial tool were used to create better adjusted workers, and training in consultation and personal interviews was recommended as an essential management skill. Personnel departments, later becoming human resource departments, grew further, in which human resource managers are responsible for both the physical and mental states of workers.
One criticism on Mayo's HRT is that we have learnt clarification of what was not true about behaviour in industry, like workers should not be treated as machines, rather than what was true, and maybe that is why we have abundant conclusions, but "found in blind alleys" (Whyte 1951). One implication of HRT having for organisation of work is that workers have social needs and managers ought to be aware of and respond to it. Whereas, to what extent their needs affect organisation productivity and how to deal with informal social power are not explicitly mentioned by Mayo.
Unfortunately, the management action of fostering collaboration within informal groups and focusing on social relations does not seem to bring the predicted outcomes. For instance, managers assume that a two-way communication attachment could promote co-operation with workers, while employees treat it as information which management can use to eliminate misunderstanding (Bendix, 1963). Similarly, Perrow (1973) argued that organisational change through managerial grids, training, and job enrichment is ineffective for all but a few organisations. Furthermore, personnel department try to build an image of helping, encouraging and taking care of workers, as well as restructure the employment relationship away from low-trust relations to increase motivation and performance. However, they seem to reach less than promised and give lip-service to employees on formal social involvement and decision-making participation.
The well-known Hawthorne Effect shows that when a group realizes that it is valued and forms social relations among each other, productivity rises as a result of group cohesiveness. Informal groups have great effect on the worker's temperament and well-being. The "bank wiring room experiment" suggested that workers were not merely driven by economical factor, but the informal side (i.e. informal norms, peer pressure) of the organisation was even more important than the formal rules and hierarchy side.
One of the essential elements of human relations, identified by Schoen (1957) is a conviction that you can understand the social process of group behaviour provided that you are committed to it with a clinical viewpoint. In detail, if they are parts of the group, cooperative action will be easier, understanding will be improved, unnecessary conflict will be minimized, and useless frustration will be reduced. Another crucial aspect of human relations is a fundamental belief that the person who is responsible for getting the group work done can both facilitate cooperation and help group workers keep their own integrity. The individuals within the group will be able to serve the group's purpose without losing their own identity.
Workers are more likely to form their own groups, thus team work in companies has much broader influence than that implied by formal labour-management (Johnson 1949). In support of Mayo's opinion, Johnson stated that the group combination has important effect upon company programs. Group dynamics became an identifiable field at the end of the 1930's in the U.S and grew rapidly since then. The thought that internal dynamics of small group could gain a degree of self-governance is favoured by management (Thompson and McHugh, 2002:52).
The idea that teamworking could build up consolidation and value consensus is demonstrated by Barker (1998), based on a manufacturing case. Team workers formed normative rules which brought their new substantive rationality into social actions. Team members contributed more in terms of time and energy to the whole production process, and put more personal responsibility to products. Their commitment to the company and teamwork increased since they developed a team's value consensus and turned it into social rules. Nevertheless, whether productivity and efficiency were affected or not by forming the team is not illustrated in the case.
A number of studies were conducted to find the relationship between small groups' activities and productivity. The study at the Western Electric plant showed the fact that workers respond "in the form of higher productivity to a simple overt recognition of their importance" (Schoen 1957). It makes sense that people who are participated in decision-making process will be more effective in carrying such decisions. On the contrary, by reviewing several studies, Rotemberg (1994) concluded that relation between group cohesiveness and productivity is uncertain, due to the mixed results. His explanation of why the relationship is ambiguous is that altruism toward fellow workers may lead them to work little or hard. Additionally, collusion is bad as employees exert lower effort, unless the firm can make compensation tied to group performance. It is true that in some situations, highlighting people's importance and teamworking spirit may lead to complexity and less productivity. A house may burn down if fire chief allows group discussion, for it is time consuming in an emergency.
The rational ideology of control (for example, scientific management and systems theories control) throws up problems such as absenteeism, high staff turnover, employees' resistance and poor quality. The human relations approach, claimed by some human relations writers, could provide a solution to the above issues. They presumed that control is unnecessary and outdated. "Democratic leadership and autonomous work groups have been seen as the basic precondition for job satisfaction and high productivity." (Thompson and McHugh 2002:102) These human relation theorists supposed that command and control was bad for business and empowerment and commitment should be adopted. In detail, team workers are delegated tasks and responsibility and they become self-managing. Values rather than rules become the means of co-ordination in organisations.
One implication of HRT is that it assumes a new form of control which brings queries. Some argue that whether the concept of human relations skill implies cynical manipulation on workers or not; whether we would be better off if we eliminate the notion of "participation", "group dynamics" and "development of social skills", and come back to the fundamental belief on "self-discipline" and "individual initiative and responsibility" of early days. (Schoen 1957) It is worthy analysing the implications of HRT on control mechanism compared to bureaucratic control, and exploring the fundamental nature of the two.
Bureaucratic control is run by incentive, which may generate conflict among workforces in terms of work rules and job guarantees. Control is externalised rather than internalised. In contrast, normative control, rooted in the human relations theory, works through informal process and value system rather than a formal mechanism (Ray 1986). Moreover, while traditional bureaucratic control is associated with tight supervisory attention and formulated rules, human relation control adopts teamworking and peer pressure to achieve management objectives.
The study of Roberts (1984) on two different managing approaches of two managers is highlighted on obtaining a deeper view on bureaucratic and human relation controls. One person is a scientific management type of manager and he avoids any human contract with employees, who are seen as "economically motivated automatons". Another manager takes a human relation approach and she talks and listens to employees and motivates them to work. No matter what approaches they use, Grey (2005:46) pointed the vital point is that they both want to control their employees: "one by avoiding human relationships and one through human relationships". In addition, Grey stated that human relations theory is a response to the "limitations of scientific management as a means of organizational control". It is not an alternative but an extension of scientific management.
Etzioni (1961) introduced three types of control, which are coercive control, remunerative control and normative control. Bureaucratic control is more related to remunerative control and human relation approach can be categorised into normative control. Control is essential in organisations, since managers are responsible for shareholders, whose concern is largely on economic performance. The constant conflict between workers and management also require control and surveillance. Johnson (1949) suggested, however, if managers can convince workers that higher production links to better standard living for all, without preventable risks to their jobs, management and workers could share the same goal, that is, a joint interest in increasing productivity. When workers are willing to cooperate, business will gain superior prosperity.
In summary, this essay has discussed the implications of human relations theory to organisation of work in three dimensions. Employees' social needs are influential and management could take advantage of the potential to form well-organised team work activities. Effectiveness and productivity would be improved in certain organisations under certain conditions. The underpinning management concept of encouraging teamworking and empowerment is to internalise control within and beyond the workplace, and to extract maximum commitment and endeavour from employees. One limitation of this essay is that the implications of HRT are mainly considered from managerial perspective rather than workers' point of view, which could be explored further. Likewise, criticisms are largely referring to management actions in adapting of human relations approach.
A critical feature of human relations approach, indicated by Barnard (1938), is the social engineering role combined with management through sustaining integration of the organisation. Though human relations are not concerned with making everyone happy, employees' needs and human side of business should no longer be disregarded and unity will be created and maintained through common norms and values. It is a defect to treat human relations approach as a solution to the problems brought by scientific management. Rather, connecting human relation patterns with structural and technological planning could be expected to solve the organisational and industrial problems. How to accomplish the aim is beyond the discussion of this paper.