Whether worker happiness leads to productivity is an old and controversial topic. At least since the Hawthorne studies, authors and managers have assumed that a happy worker is a productive worker (Roethlisberger and Dickson, 1939).However, many researchers (e.g.Brayfield and Crockett,1955; Vroom,1964) placed doubt on this form, indicating that happiness did not necessarily lead to productivity. Accordingly, the confused views brought what Schwab and Cummings (1970) called "the development of uncertainty" with regard to the happy-productive relationship.
It is worthy specifying the meaning of happiness. Most organisational researchers have used job satisfaction as a proxy as their measure of happiness. Job satisfaction, indicated by Organ (1988), is linked to citizenship behaviours over which the employees can control. Others authors from psychology areas have been developing measures of well-being, positive and negative effect and emotional state (Wright and Staw, 1999). Thus, the notion of happy-productive relationship is separately discussed with reference to two connotations of happiness. One refers to a satisfied state brought by work, and the other is concerned with individuals' optimistic traits, in other words, one tends to experience positive affect and emotion.
The essay consists of three main sections. In the first section, five models illustrating the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance are identified, three of which are emphasized. The second section turns to explain that why happiness causes productivity provided that happiness refers to personal dispositional. A summary as well as suggestions on future research are offered in section three. The essay investigates the contentious argument from different perspectives and attempts to summarize the situations where the statement that a happy worker is a productive worker could be acceptable.
The study of the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance is the most respected and classic one in the industrial-organisational psychology (Judge et.al., 2000). After the first research done by Kornhauser and Sharp (1932) on this relationship, substantial different views of point have been developed as to the nature of the relationship, based on both qualitative and quantitative investigations. By reviewing the literature, five main distinctive models regarding the relationship between satisfaction and performance are identified. They are: job satisfaction causes job performance; job performance causes job satisfaction; the relationship between the two is moderated by other variables; job satisfaction and job performance are reciprocally related and re-conceptualization of job satisfaction and job performance (see figure 1). While mentioning five of them, this section focuses on the first three models.
While some researchers treat happiness as job satisfaction, others (e.g. Wright and Cropanzano, 1997; Wright and Staw, 1999) regarded it as an affective construct when analyzing the happy - productive worker relationship. They indicated that when happiness was operationalized as emotional well-being, it seemed to demonstrate consistent relationship to job performance. That the statement "a happy worker is a productive worker" may be true in this context.
Some recent researches focusing on psychological affect show a moderate support on the relationship between a dispositional measure of well-being and work-related behaviours. Adopted expectancy theory, George and Brief (1996) illustrated that positive effect might improve individual's expectancy that one's effort could lead to performance and that performance would lead to positive outcomes. Moreover, a goal-setting model of motivation was used by Locke and Latham (1990), who reported that workers with optimistic propensities set more challenged goals and engage in higher performance. Similarly, According to Weiner (1985)'s attributional model of motivation, affect has a significant influence on task persistence. Optimists are inclined to perceive failure as a temporary obstacle caused by external environment (Forgas, 1992). Likewise, several studies found that people who have positive mood were more successful partly via the help of others in organizations. Since happy workers may be more fun to be around and are more easy-going, supervisors could provide more positive evaluation for them (Robbins and DeNisi, 1994).Thus, disposition affect is an important predictor of operational as well as interpersonal elements of performance.
In an empirical evidence level, Seligman and Schulman (1986) chose 103 new life insurance agencies and found that the optimists stayed on their jobs as twice as the number of pessimists and sold more insurance than the pessimists. Furthermore, after re-analyzing a longitudinal data, Staw et al (1994) highlighted that the measure of affect such as depression did predict the changes in salary, performance valuation and social support. In the contrast, Ledford (1999) placed the criticism towards Wright and Staw's proposition reporting dispositional rather than state affect the performance. Ledford (1999) pointed out that their studies neglected the significance of other factors such as rewards system, working conditions, job design, leadership styles and so on which might change the level of job satisfaction of workers and thus performance.
In conclusion, this essay provided a review and examination of the relationship between happiness and productivity. It stated two definitions for happiness and illustrated five models to explore the argument that "a happy worker is a productive worker". When happiness refers to job satisfaction, it could be concluded that a happy worker could be a productive worker provided that he is capable of accomplishing the task in certain context. These conditions are associated with, for example, well-established reward system, a self-perceived interesting job and relatively stable economic environment and etc. When happiness is defined as dispositional well-being, it is suggested that the people with positive traits have a tendency to performance better than those pessimists, attributed to their operational and interpersonal strengths. A number of researchers do not consider any positive relationship existing between happiness and productivity and some even hold the point that there is no relationship at all. Whereas, it does not mean that to maintain a high levels of worker satisfaction is not desirable. Neither, it is not used to justify that profitability can not be reached without happy workers (Silvestro, 2002). Employee satisfaction is vital for organisations triumph in a long run, since it matters to company reputation, long-run strategy planning, and corporate social responsibility and so on.
Since dispositional affect productivity is moderately supported, it is worthwhile to develop the researches on psychology area of personal attribute. Whether disposition is a personal trait, an attitude, cognition, or just a measure of state of mental health is uncertain (Ledford, 1999).More investigations need to be done in this psychological management scope. However, it is beyond the discussion of this paper.