Class definitions are always problematic (Morley, 1997). There is a lack of precision or agreement to its meaning. Although Marx did not provide explicit definition for class, in classic Marxist terms, it is indicated as the relationship of the exploiter and the exploited to the meaning of production (Havelkova, 1999). Warde (1994) preferred to link class to exclusion and deprivation than occupation and education, and claimed that it persisted over time even when occupation or household composition changed. On the contrary, Crompton (1998), without denying its influence by some traditional structures of inequality factors, tended to describe class as a modern phenomenon, which is "a major organizing concept in the exploration of contemporary stratification system".
In this essay, class has used to present, according to Crompton (1998), material structures and symbolic inequality, together with to illustrate social forces which are capable to transform society. Identity is often defined in the contrast to the other (Wilson, 2002), that is, distinctive ways of seeing themselves in relation to others. The class identity, has served to describe the economic and social positions an individual has with related to others. Furthermore, as Luttrell (1997) highlighted, women arrived at their class identity through contested community and individual relationships.
What construct human's class identity is debatable. While some authors (e.g.Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992; Wright, 1997) has long used the occupational structure as a substitute for class, others (e.g.Crompton, 2000; Reynolds, 1997) stated that there were a number of aspects, for instance, wealth holding and educational level, which cannot be categories into occupational classifications. Likewise, using occupational structure as proxy for class brings the problem of establishing class situation for the unemployed (Crompton, 2000), including housewives and dependents. It raises the question of how their class identities are constructed. More significantly, whether the occupational class schemes produce the same results when applied to male and female as well as whether the same job would provide same opportunities for men and women are greatly controversial. Thus, it is worthy analysing the factors that construct human's class identity and finding out whether it is differently constructed for men and women.
The essay consists of four sections. Initially, after attempted to figure out what aspects determining the class identity, question of whether the class identity of women is diversely built from that of men is answered. In the Second section, the possible reasons of why the class identities are dissimilarly established in terms of gender are examined, through three key themes. The third section emphasizes changes in the class identity brought by the increased women employment. In addition, due to these changes, implications to the conventional class structure are addressed. A summary is offered in section four.
Marx (1962), as a proletariat revolutionist and philosopher, identified that the economic base determined the political and ideological "superstructure" of human society. Likewise, he argued that human consciousness was depended on material being. Weber is regarded as an explicit methodological individualist (Crompton, 1998) and his account of the class structure of capitalist society is similar to that of Marx. However, Marx stressed that the sources of class structuring was production relationship while Weber identified it as market relationships. One criticism made to both authors is their overemphasis on economic significance and do not take into account of others competing sources such as nationality, gender and ethnic group (Crompton, 1998). They seemed to overlook the class identity of people who have no economic income, especially those women working in domestic sphere.
Guided by Marxist class theory, Wright (1997) took a static approach to the occupational structure. His location of jobs into particular classes is at an abstract level, which is pointed out by feminists for neglecting the household scope. Meanwhile, some Marxist theorists suggested that female labours doing domestic work contribute to the surplus value and pointed out that "the exploitation of women could be identified as an element in specifically capitalist production relationship" (Crompton, 1998). It implies that women as domestic labours fit into exploited class. Nonetheless, the orthodox class theory seemed to place limitations on analysing the class position of women.
In order to answer the question of whether women's class identity is dissimilarly constructed from that of men, the factors determining human's class identity need to be found.
The occupational structure has long been used by some authors such as Erikson and Goldthorpe (1993) and Wright (1997) as the fundamental representative for class. It is clear that a reasonable indication of "life chances" could be displayed by occupation schemes. Additionally, the well-established scheme may illustrate the relations of ownership and authority in paid work, as identified by Wright in his employment-derived class scheme. It is assured that work, in the sense of an occupation, "once provided a focus for the development of class-based identities in industrial societies" (Beck, 1992). Whereas, due to the complex reasons such as technological innovation, economic restructuring and insecurity and flexibility in the labour market, work as employment has become less significant in shaping the class identity. Offe (1985) argued that it no longer has a "privileged power to determine social consciousness and action". Likewise, Devine (1998) suggested that the theoretical formulation on social mobility provided by Goldthorpe focused largely on economic resources and excluded the importance of cultural and social dimensions.
Savage et al (1992) indicated an alternative asset-based approach for middle-class investigation, where the factors shaping human class identity could be generated. They argued that there were three resources labelling middle classes: property assets, organisational assets and cultural assets. Property assets are associated with wealth holding. Hence the issue that occupation can not provide reliable guide on wealth is avoided. Organisational assets, referring to employment, are characteristic of managerial groupings. In addition, cultural assets are concerned with education and training. Goldthorpe (1984) held an opposite stance to these arguments, by pointing out that differences in professional or property positions bring little impact to class analysis. To conclude, these three basis for classification maintaining income, occupation and education could serve to construct human's class identity more comprehensively than just employment.
The issue of class identity arises when a married couple hold different class positions, since the work situation and market situation, introduced by Lockwood (1966) do not necessarily coincide. Erikson (1984) suggested the way to build up family class position. In details, it compares the work positions of both spouses, and the class position to family members is based on an order of dominance. However, his family class position establishment is based solely on occupation and whether it is gender-neutral is doubtable. Thus, the two class concepts seemed to be needed. It is referred to one work-related class with individuals and one market-related with families as the unit of classification.
To be oversimplify, wealth holding, occupation and education could be three main factors which construct human's class identity, though there are issues and debates with regard to people's class position construction. The most significant argument is that whether gender difference is a crucial source of social identity and action. Some authors (e.g.Lockwood, 1981; Erikson, 1984; Goldthorpe, 1992; Wright, 1997 and Evans, 1987) favour the view that male and female differentiation is not a major source of collective class identity and social action. These kinds of thoughts are largely disputed by feminists (e.g.Crompton, 1998, 2000; Millett, 1970; Delphy and Leonard, 1992), who claim that employment, class and politics, rather that gender-neutral, is profoundly structured by sex differences.
According to Lockwood (1986), "it is the position of an occupation within some hierarchy of authority that is decisive for its status and not the sex of the person who happens to be in it". Erikson (1984) held the similar opinion as Lockwood by indicating that sex seemed irrelevant to the classification of work positions. Gender was unrelated to the classification of class positions of families. Likewise, he also admitted that it was profitable to take the occupation of both husband and wife into account. Similarly, both Goldthorpe and Wright insisted that gender and class are distinct causal processes (Crompton, 1998). By presenting the result of parallel pattern of social mobility rates for both male and female, Goldthorpe (1992) demonstrated that the impact of class for women and men was similar. Wright (1997), though being aware of gender, still did not incorporate it into the concept of class.
Compared to radical feminist, Marxist feminists argue that class is vital, and there is evidence of class factors (Parr, 1997). Marxist feminists regard themselves are at the same position as working class men, when facing ownership class. Radical feminists highlight that it is the patriarchal structure of society which causes the most unequal influences. Hartmann (1981) stated that "traditional Marxist categories cannot tell us who will fill which places. Gender and racial hierarchy determine who fills the empty places". It might be argued that the conventional male model of the occupational structure reflects the dominance of men within the structure of employment.
I have a propensity to agree the point made by feminists, supporting that the class identities of men and women are not identically constructed, since feminists' view is more convinced with reference to both theoretical and empirical evidence. Generally speaking, women were subordinate not only in the public area but also in the private sphere of family life. Furthermore, men's class identity is shaped mainly by their own occupation, income and education, and influenced little by conjugal relation. However, women's class identity seems to be determined by both her occupation and her husband's class position. Sometimes the latter become more decisive, when a woman is unemployed or her job is categorised at a lower level than her spouse's. As Crompton (1998) highlighted, an empirical convention justified that the class position of a woman would be allocated to the same class as that of the male "head of household". In other words, "a woman's partner's occupational class gives a better account of her political attitudes than her own".
Reasons that women's class identity is diversely established from that of men is discussed within three domains, historical ideology, citizenship and the process of class formation in Fordism period.
Gree Aristotle, an ancient philosopher, supposed that by nature the relation of male to female was that one was superior and the other was inferior, that is, one dominates and the other was dominated (Dahrendorf,1969). Feminists argued that patriarchy, which represented the domination of women by men, was more influential than class in determine women's situation (Crompton, 1998). In addition, other feminists pointed out that the foundation of patriarchy was basically ideological instead of material and that patriarchy ideology was deeply rooted in human culture (Mitchell, 1975). For instance, the dominant gender ideology in pre-colonial Botswana was patriarchal, mainly serving male interest. The ideology ruled the productive and personal relationships between men and women (Mannathoko, 1999).
Status is a difficult concept to define. It has been used to describe prestige and pattern of consumption, which do not directly rest upon power in property or market (Crompton, 1998). The interaction between class and status with reference to status claim, namely citizenship, is worthy analysing. It is to find out whether there are any differences between men and women in terms of their citizenship and the related implications. Citizenship is defined as full and participating membership of a nation state. Marshell (1963) classified three aspects of citizenship, civil, political and social. It is not necessarily possessed by everyone within a territory (Crompton, 1998). Take ancient Greek for example, only free adult males owned citizenship, while women, slaves and the young were excluded. In France, as another example, women were not considered to be citizen until after the Second World War.
The previous exclusion of women as permanent citizens would bring impact on their status and class identity even in the modern world. Feminists argued that citizenship had its earliest origin in a gendered concept which methodically excluded women; thus the rights of men over women were seen to be natural rather than political (Pateman, 1988). Moreover, men's ascendancy of women within marriage was commonly accepted. Women have been incorporated into the welfare state than workers or citizens, but as dependants, especially as wives and mothers. The traditional notion that women's responsibility lies in domestic sphere such as supporting husband and fostering children keeps them out of public working places. It could be explained that why a woman's class identity is mostly determined by her husband's class position.
The process of class formation was parallel to the process of gender differentiation in the stage of Fordism (Bradley, 1989). Fordism, according to Thompson (2005), stands for the system of mass production and consumption, featured the exceedingly developed economies during the 1940s-1960s. Relatively a large number of male workers were required than women in that production system partly due to their physical strength. Fordist was characterised by the "male breadwinner" model of the division of labour. Crompton (1998) identified that the Fordist occupational hierarchy became progressively masculine. It was assumed that women would return back to their natural role in the family. Married women tool the responsibility of domestic work and they were excluded from paid work. Even the British policy defined women's primary role as that of homemaker and childrearer (Coppockal. 1995). Women were dependent economically on their husbands' wage and were indoctrinated the assumption that the male breadwinner model was the norm (Pateman, 1989). It is understandable that the class identity of women is differently constructed from that of men, for one (women) is dependent on the other (men) economically as well as socially in most cases.
It is a momentous phenomenon that there are largely increasing number of women (re)entering the work place since the Second World War, and they also improved the level of their academic qualifications. The factors leading employment growth for women are related to the extension of welfare state-led service, improved levels of education and the growth of second-wave feminism. Other "pull" reasons, suggested by Crompton (1998) include the development of technology, the flexible labour market and expansion of service industry.
The rise of women's employment was basically accounted for by an increase number of married women. The amount of housewives has deceased dramatically during the last fifteen years (Erikson, 1984). In addition, women's growth of employment is highly concentrated in the service-type sectors. The post-Fordist service economies are increasingly dominated by women's employment (Esping-Andersen, 1993). As Havelkova (1999) presented, the horizontal gender segregation in the labour market has made women's labour irreplaceable. She provided the data from Czech Statistical Bureau in 1994 that women took up 77.8 percent of health care workers and 71.9 percent in the banking and insurance industries.
Paid employment is becoming crucial in women's lives and it gradually alters the male breadwinner model, which also brings issues to employment-derived and masculine-based class schemes. Women's own occupations, argued by Health and Britten (1984), were important element in addition to their husbands' occupations in explaining differences in fertility or voting behaviour. Moreover, they found there were many household where the husband held a blue-collar job and the wife a white-collar one. Crompton (2000), by showing the research result did in France and Norway, suggested that many women in managerial careers had no children and took less domestic work. Crompton (2000) claimed that the widespread entry of women into work has not only caused the problems of classification, but also stressed the limitations of conventional occupational class schemes. The persistence of traditional occupational segregation, failing to notice the increase in women's employment, would not be treated as gender-neutral any more. Nevertheless, case study shows that women continue to be excluded from some better-paid and high-level occupations, and that men will still be dominated the higher level of occupation structure (Crompton, 2000).
To what extend that women's class identity is influenced by their husbands' class positions is arguable. Likewise, it educes the question that whether the class identities of married women and single women ought to be dissimilarly established. Health and Britten (1984) assumed that "a married women's class interests and class identity maybe affected by the jobs open to her should she wish to enter or re-enter the labour market". Their argument is disfavoured by Goldthorpe (1984), who claimed that married women might unable to obtain a job. He addressed that commitment to work was different from having a chance to obtain it. To sum up, according to Havelkova (1999), concerning the improvement of status of women, it is open to discussion whether women will keep, develop or lose their present status. She also predicted that maybe there would be an increasing gap between qualified women and women with few qualifications who have less opportunity for good occupation.
In summary, this essay has discussed the class identity with reference to gender differences. It tends to support that the class identity of women is diversely constructed from that of men and provides some possible reasons of it. Furthermore, it identifies the changes in nowadays class identity caused by women's participation as work forces and its implications to conventional class schemes.
Due to overemphasising on occupation, Marxist and Weberian theories expose their limitation on women's class analysis, especially on those who are unemployed. Thus, the view of point that human's class identity is shaped by property assets, organisational assets and cultural assets is favoured. However, while men's class identity is mainly established by their occupations, income and education; women's class identity would be more influenced by their husband's class positions. In other words, women's conjugal situation is generally more important than her occupation in determining her overall class identity.
The potential basis for the difference lies in three scopes. Feminists argued that women were subordinated to men had its historical ideological root. Moreover, in terms of status claims, women had struggled to be entitled as citizens, which affect their civil, political and social rights even in the modern societies. Likewise, the class formation became more gendered in Fordist period as male were breadwinner and female were homemaker.
The increased large number of women (re)entering work place and their improvement on obtaining education and qualification raise the question on their class identity construction. To what extend their class positions relying on their husbands' class level is inconclusive. Bearing in mind Crompton (2000)'s indication that men still hold the higher level of occupation than women, and considering Goldthorpe (1984)'s doubt on women's capability of pursuing employment, we could not declare that women's class identity construction is undertaking a transformative change. However, women's employment extension not only leads problems to the traditional class schemes but also highlight the significance of reconsidering the class structure. One limitation of this essay is that it does not concern the different situations of women referring to different countries. In order to wholly understand the changes in the class structure brought by the increasing work of women, a series of researches are needed. How to accomplish the aim is beyond the discussion of this paper.