Corporate governance is concerned with the separation between ownership and the power to make decisions in terms of how business allocate resources and returns. Two classic models of corporate governance are the shareholder model and the stakeholder one. The former is linked to external market control exercised by shareholder and the latter refers to the internal control exercised by various stakeholders such as banks, employees and public institutions and so on. Due to historical reasons, there are large differences between international corporate governance systems (Witt, 2004). However, much attention has surrounded the issues on whether national corporate governance systems will converge and if occurs, which direction it is towards to. Without neglecting those matters, the essay emphasises on the factors which might be considered to undermine the national distinctive system of corporate governance, with a fairly deep reference to Germany.
The German corporate governance is a typical example of the stakeholder value orientation. It is worthy analysing the dynamic process of changes in Germany together with finding out the driven forces. The essay consists of four sections. Section one provides general arguments about the convergence of corporate governance and the possible reasons. Based on the German case, the second section turns to identity five factors leading those changes, in terms of the challenges of existing German corporate governance situation, pressure from global capital market and the rise of Government regulations. Section three takes up the issues of ownership and control to management caused by the changing system of corporate governance in Germany. The final section offers summary and further implications.
Many authors (e.g. O'Sullivan, 2003; Witt, 2004; Jeffers, 2005; Ponssard et. al.2005) suggested that the convergence of national corporate governance, driven by the economic globalisation does occur and is more likely to continue. What is in disagreement is the direction of the convergence of corporate governance. On one side, a number of scholars (e.g. Berger and Dore, 1996; Streeck and Hopner, 2003) claimed that the international diversity will be replaced by a unified, Anglo-American model of corporate governance. The corporate governance reform around the world, suggested by Jackson and Moerke (2005), is influenced by the principles of US model, such as shareholder rights, transparency and external independent directors. On the other side, it is argued that a new hybrid model with the right mix of market rule, corporate regulation and stakeholder power will emerge. It seems reasonable that the dominant governance model will be featured by strong minority shareholders and multi-dimensional corporate objectives (Ponssard et al., 2005). Meanwhile, Ponssard et al (2005) also pointed out that the dominated model would present variations because of the dependency path in national distinctive contexts. Towards which model the national corporate governance may converge is a global scenario and the factors that contribute to this emergence are significant.
Three main factors, indicated by Ponssardal. (2005) and Jeffers, (2005) should be taken into consideration: the internationalisation of financial market, the globalisation of corporate strategies and the rise of international regulations. The first factor has been cited largely, since "the deregulation of financial investment is a reality in most countries" (Ponssard et. al., 2005). Judgement and methods of both fund managers and analysts become similar due to the strong convergence in financial policy. Institutional investors possess considerable power and play an active role in the global financial market now. According to the statistical yearbook of the OECD, they manage over $ 35 trillion in 2001. Governments and organisations in Europe who consider finance restructure and expansion would turn to global financial markets to attract foreign investors. The second factor is concerned with the increasing amount of firms which tend to take a more global strategy, in order to gain the benefit of economies of scales and cheaper resources. Firms are predisposed to develop an internal culture in terms of control and coordination which is away from national differences (Jeffers, 2005). For instance, the boards of director include foreigners and the compensation standard has to follow common principles. In addition, state and governments would construct new regulations to consolidate the process of internationalisation, though the approaches are hesitant. However, evidence of new policies directly linking to corporate governance can be illustrated. For example, the rule to limit risks taken by investors is implemented and the international accounting law to harmonize taxes succeed in European countries.
In contrast to the US system of managerial control, the corporate governance in Germany is characterised by the way it incorporates rights for a range of stakeholders. This is a highly concentrated pattern of ownership, particularly among by banks, cross-shareholding companies and interlocking directors (Edwards, 1994). Additionally, employees are powerful in Germany system in respect of decision making involvement and social and personal matters negotiation. Their seats in supervisory board are mandatory by Co-determination Act. However, there are signs of change. One striking change lies on the German corporate sector's financial relationship. Banks and insurance companies display a reduced engagement to protect German firms from market control. Meanwhile, organisations in Germany become more willing to list in stock market. Thus inter-company shareholdings and the bank-industry relations have been compromised to some extent (O'Sullivan, 2003). These changes bring an influential effect to German enterprises in terms of their corporate governance. Economic and political factors leading the Changes are discussed within five scopes: challenge of existing corporate governance system; changing in the financial market; opportunity from the stock market; influence of multinational corporations as well as emergence of Government policies.
Germany has encountered some economic difficulties which raise the question on the weaknesses of stakeholder-oriented corporate governance. Firstly, financial markets are less developed than in the shareholder model. Moreover, the legally required representation of employees on the boards of directors has led to a constricted area of question discussion, which deliberately causes these controlling tools less meaningful (Jeffers, 2005). Consequently, top company executives and representatives from banks have a tendency to discuss major questions in an informal framework. Because those banks are chiefly concerned with the financial services activity undertaken by companies than any other matters, according to Ponssard et. al. (2005), shareholder control over corporate strategies and operational decisions might be poorly implemented.
Another noticeable drawback of stakeholder model of corporate governance is its lack of transparency in the communication with minority shareholders. Opacity, pointed out by Jeffers (2005), as a feature of this model, refers to that "players with informational advantages prefer to keep the firm opaque in relation to others". This displays a key problem of German corporations to attract foreign institutional investment. Additionally, it is argued that German's existing corporate governance inhibits innovation and growth in the global competitive environment (Mayer, 2000). Therefore, there are growing calls for a shift of German corporate governance towards a more shareholder-value-oriented model like in the U.S., in the hope that such development could improve its current economic situation. Fiss and Zajac (2004) stated that since last decade, an increasing number of German organisations publicly announced that they become more shareholder-oriented. Firms' adoption of this system at least affects their acceptance of shareholder model of corporate governance, despite of any practical issues in the institutional context.
The emergence of global capital market in the mid-1980s puts pressure on German enterprises to move toward a more market-based and shareholder-oriented model of governance (Jackson and Moerke, 2005).
Some of the largest German corporations began to rely less on bank credit and more on equity markets to raise capital (see appendix 1). Take the example of VEBA, the shares held by foreign investors increased from 23 percent to 43 percent between 1986 and 1991. The shareholding of institutional investors rapidly went up from 4 percent in 1992 to 13 percent in 1997; respectively from 66.5 to about 285 billion dollars (Deutsche Bundesbank, 1999).This expansion is contributed by both US investment funds and the emergence of domestic institutional investors.
Foreign controlled pension funds, particularly by America, are taking up a growing proportion of the foreign holdings which accounted for 15 percent of all German shares in 2000 (Jurgens et.al., 2000). By 1999, there were 25 domestic financial institutions that focus on their activity on those German enterprises list in DAX-30 index (Jurgens et.al.2000).
As a result, national ownership and cross-shareholding among German firms become more dispersed, due to the involvement of institutional investment such as US pension funds and mutual funds (Jeffers, 1998). Thus the ownership role of foreign investors referring to the corporate governance could not be neglected, and this issue is discussed in section three.
German banks have shifted away from long-term industrial capital providing to highly profitable investment banking scope (Deeg, 1999), partly attributed to the increasing financial pressure in their own business. In the early 1990s, the big banks, especially Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank, attempted to turn themselves into global investment banks and found the competition was intense. In addition, Banks' industrial shareholdings among German corporations have decreased compared to insurance companies, foreign investors and other financial institutions in the past a few years (see appendix 1). Furthermore, Banks have slowly reduced their seats in supervisory board in German enterprises. Sherman and Kaen (1997) illustrated that compared to 20 percent of seats in large 100 companies in 1974, private banks only held 6 percent in 1993. Nevertheless, some authors (e.g.Vitols, 1999; Jurgens et.al, 2000) indicated that Banks still played a critical role in the system of corporate governance. They pointed out that Germany remained a bank-centred financial system, as banks have direct ownership of shares and companies still finance themselves via bank credits. However, banks are no longer the only influential players on strategic performance and monitoring in corporations.
Insurance companies play a significant role in German economy in controlling the market value. They used to manage their asset as banks did, whereas, they have changed their investment policies recently in turning to increase their equity holdings (Jurgens et.al.2000). Large Insurance groups, like Allianz have separated their asset management sector and the cross-shareholding activities have been discouraged (Ponssard, 2005). It could be argued that the changes in the incentives and behaviour of banks and insurance companies have somewhat shifted the German system of corporate governance towards a shareholder value orientation.
Since banks and insurance companied are becoming more impatient in playing their traditional role for providing industrial loan, a rising amount of German corporations are seeking for capitals from equity market. They undertake public share offering, engage into merger and acquisition and expand stock-based compensation (O'Sullivan, 2003). Subsequently, O'Sullivan (2003) highlighted that German enterprises were more involved into stock market activity than before.
A new type of stock market, the Neue Markt (new market) has opened in 1997 in Germany, with the aim of allowing more companies to make Initial Public Offering and supporting venture capital. It has started to replace the main market in Germany. There were 319 companies listed on the  Neue Markt by 2002, and it becomes the leading European growth bourse (Harnischfeger, 1999). He also indicated that the Neue Markt represented "the changing face of German capitalism". Additionally, some big German companies have sought to be listed on the foreign stock market from the middle of 1990s. By the early of 2006, 17 German companies are listed on the NYSE and eleven on the LSE (see table 2). According to O'Sullivan (2003), German companies who are willing to be on NYSE listing are waiting for chances of getting acquisitions. In the contrast, firms listed on Nasdaq are motivated by its access of raising capital in the US markets. Coffee (1999) demonstrated that the firms who are seeking to list on US stock markets will voluntarily adopt the shareholder-oriented system of corporate governance in order to gain foreign funds. However, some argued that although the stock market plays a more important role recently, it still play a smaller role compared to its US or UK counterparts.
In terms of merger and acquisition, the hostile takeover of Mannesmann by Vodafone in 1999 is the most cited one. Nevertheless, the number of takeover has risen in recent years in Germany, "involving foreign buyers and sellers as well as all-German transactions" (Jurgens and Rupp, 2002) (see table 3). Moreover, after analysing the data from Thomson Financial, O'Sullivan (2003) stated that German organisations have been a major acquirer than be purchased. Similarly, the use of stock options has increased in Germany, though it is mostly occurred to the large companies listed on the new market.
Multinational Corporation (MNC) is one that operates in multiple nations. These companies usually have production and marketing facilities in different countries and a centralised head office in one country where they coordinate global management. Recently, MNC have constituted a more world-wide network framework. Their interdependent relationship promotes flows of good, finance and information (Ponssard et.al.2005). The strategies and activities of MNC, in both German context and overseas scope, impact on the national corporate governance system. Simultaneously, the changes in corporate governance also create pressure on large German firms in undertaking these activities.
German multinational company Volkswagen is a noteworthy case. VW has extended its operation to a broader global degree. Ponssard et al (2005) described that the corporate governance of VW had begun to step further towards a shareholder-value-oriented model since last decade. Organising several meetings with the main shareholders, announcing a share buy-back scheme as well as the "concession bargaining" with labours could be examples of its changing track. Nevertheless, while seeking for lower cost within the system of co-determination, VW still keep good industrial relations with German institutions, since the role of co-determination maintains significant in Germany even in an era of market control (Haipeter, 2003).
The VW behaviours outside of Germany showed their less willingness in handling business restructuring. Take the Portugal case for example, VW made an agreement with the Workers's Commission there on a two year pay freeze as a compensation of no compulsory redundancies during the recession period (Ponssard, et al., 2005). Similarly, signing agreement on global social and labour rights in 2002 with the international Metalworkers Federation presents that VW remains using social instruments for negotiation and monitoring, as well as aims a balanced goal of "shareholder value" with "workholder value" (Jurgens et al,2000).
The changes of German corporate governance are not only driven by international economic factors, but also political pressures. As Morgen (2005) stated, due to the increasing EU engagement in merger and acquisition activity within a cross-border scope, the standardisation in many areas has stimulated the converging process of national governance systems. Additionally, states and governments are seeking to become part of a regulating force on an international level when faced with the evolution (Jeffers, 2005; Ponssard et. al.2005). The legislation in Germany constituted by Government has accelerated its changing phenomenon. For instance, banks and enterprises do not have to pay any capital gained taxes when selling their stock holdings. Moreover, during 1990 to 1998, German government enacted the Financial Market Promotion laws in order to make it easier for companies to implement stock options.
The changes in the stakeholder-oriented corporate governance system in Germany affect the ownership and control of companies to the issues of management. German banks have reduced their long-term shareholdings and seats in supervisory boards. As a result, Jackson and Moerke (2005) suggested that the management autonomy would be increased and ownership and control could be separated. Manipulated by top executives and banks before, the new form of control is rather implemented though the power of institutional investors. They expect, for example, the transparency of companies in financial services, accountability of senior executives for their decision and equality of treatment between shareholders (Ponssard et.al.2005). The institutional managers do not have to intervene directly in the strategic and operational decisions. Rather, they exert direct or indirect pressures on senior executives of companies when companies are poorly performed. For instance, by threatening selling of shares and informing negative news to the public give warning signals to senior executives in organisations.
Company executives in Germany are more likely to reinforce financial market control (Vitols, 2000). Ponssard et.al. (2005) indicated that senior executives might use the pressure from financial market to emphasize their power in taking more offensive strategies. Typically, manager compensation was similar to the average employee schemes to top managers. Compared to the traditional situation, managers now could gain more personal rewards and higher financial compensation through such as stock options. Moreover, one feature of classic German corporate governance is the productionist, company-centred orientation of German senior management (Jurgens et.al.2000). Productionist objectives and high-quality products are major aims over financial objectives. Nonetheless, the changes require senior managers to have the skills of focusing on financial performance and managing the relation with capital markets. In addition, skilled labours were regarded as valuable long-term assets in German system that might be treated as expendable in shareholder value model. Consequently, tensions among management, employees and institutional investors even in the whole society context could be supposed.
According to Edwards (2004), though changes such as collective bargaining is reduced and works councils are more tended to accept management proposals, there are continuities in German system. Corporate ownership is still concentrated, and collective bargaining and co-determination maintain to cover majority of the employees. Similarly, the changes are more noticed in large corporations rather than among small and medium enterprises (SMEs).
To summarise, the article consists of two main parts. Firstly, it has reviewed the general argument on convergence of national corporate governance. The view that a new hybrid model of corporate governance seems to be emerging is favoured, with the characteristics of strong control by shareholders and concern of other stakeholders. Factors which might drive the convergence have been indicated with regard to economic globalisation, corporate internationalization and the raising of political regulations. Secondly, changes that are more or less associated with the corporate governance system in Germany are identified and related driven factors have been discussed with deeper reference to the German case.
German economy has encountered some serious difficulties within the typical stakeholder system of corporate governance. Meanwhile, the pressure and opportunities brought by globalisation in terms of changing in capital market have stimulated its changing towards a shareholder-value-oriented model. Foreign investors have largely increased their shareholdings in German enterprises, especially to the big corporations. Investors monitor the performances of firms through both direct and indirect mechanisms. Similarly, the role of banks has seemed to change from the patient capital to profit-focused investment institutions. In order to seeking for free capital rather than banks credit funding, German firms have attempted to be listed in both domestic new stock market and foreign ones like Nasdap and NYSE. Moreover, actions of multinational corporations such as Volkswagen and Siemens are flagship companies who adopt the attitude towards the shareholder oriented model. Furthermore, government policies have also accelerated the dynamic changing process of German corporate governance system.
Nevertheless, due to the resistance from stakeholders, especially employees and the institutional context constraints in Germany as well as the weaknesses of shareholder model, the fundamental changes of corporate governance in a fairly large scale in German industry have not appeared. Some argue that so far German enterprises are unlikely to operate identically as the ones in Anglo-American countries do. Moreover, whether those changes will bring positive effect to German economy is not convinced. However, the evidences show that Germany is undertaking a series of significant changes. Whether the outcomes will emerge as expected and whether these returns are sustainable ought to be concerned by different interest group in Germany. However, it is beyond the discussion of this paper.