Analysis of the data and information you supplied and recommendations are as follows:
Based on the January market price of the deniers, the mix combination of fine and medium denier is suggested to be 3000 kgs and 12000 kgs respectively which results in higher contribution than of January sales.
The proposal price offered is higher but the final total contribution is the same.
It is recommended that more time should be added for the Spinning process.
The accuracy of the forecast provided by the Marketing Department is questionable but the trend line of its forecast is consistent.
Comparison of January's mix production contribution to formulated combination and implications of the proposal toward February's total contribution.
Assuming the information given by Miss Sue is true, we have drafted out the analysis based on the following:
3000 kgs < Fine Denier <10000 kgs
6000kgs < Medium Denier < 15000 kgs
January's market price and variable cost per kg has been used in these analyses assuming that there is little or no change in the price.
We are also assuming that the variable cost of producing 1 kg of fine & medium denier to be 0.88 and 0.74 respectively.
Based on the constraint given, the best mix production we could find out for the next production is 3000 kgs for fine denier and 12000 kgs. The contribution we get out of this mix is 8700. The production mix for January came out short by 120. We soon found out from the sensitivity test that should additional hours allocated for Spinning process, not more than 50 hours, there will be more contribution to be reaped. The maximum amount of extra contribution we could gain is 1500 as every extra hour spent will result in an extra 50 contribution.
Our report shows that time available for Draw-Twisting, 1600 hours, are not fully used as there are 550 hours not used. As compared to the production mix in January, there is 730 available hours left unused. Like in the Spinning process in the month, any additional hour spent on Draw-Twisting process will not help gain any extra contribution. Unless the company wanted it left unused, I suggest Miss Sue should use it for any by-product or joint product possible with the availability.
By assuming that the variable cost remains unchanged, price changes in the either deniers may or may not change the optimum mix production. Based on our sensitivity report we believe that the suggested mix production will remain optimum: for changes of not more than 1.0 of the current contribution and not less than 0.05 below the current contribution of medium denier.
The customer offering to buy 5000 kgs of fine denier at 1.82 has exceeded the range for our formulated optimal mix production; hence our formulation is no longer in use for this purpose. We have formulated a new mix of production of 5000 kgs and 8000 kgs of fine and medium denier respectively; the total contribution is 8700. Unless Miss Sue has a better use of the unused time, 850 hours, which is more than the earlier formulations, the contribution and everything else is about the same. Assuming that all production will be sold every month, the cushion provided is insignificant. Based on Graph 1.0, the forecast is corresponded by the actual result most of the time. When the forecast shows a rise in price it is most likely that there will be a rise in the actual price. There is no exception this time around. I strongly believe the actual price will rise as suggested by the forecast with a rise of 0.01. The average magnitude of the rise and fall is around 0.06. That being said, I believe the rise could well top the offered price, if not, equivalent to it. Based on these analyses I would advice that Miss Sue be patient enough to wait for the actual price revelation. Even if the price falls, it would not be as big an impact as a rise because the trend is going up and the gap is widening between the actual and forecast price. As the table suggested, the accuracy of the forecast is questionable with an average differing rate of 0.06 which is not negligible. But the trend of the forecast has in history been corresponding to the trend of the actual price most of the time. The question here is whether this would be accompanied with a big or insignificant increase.
Miss Sue decision to pre-sell to vendors at market ruling price is risky and unstable. I would recommend that Miss Sue come to an agreement with all the major vendors or loyal clients of the transaction price of the yarns. This would write off any uncertainties in the production mix. Should Miss Sue decided to stick on her way, It is advisable to spent more time on the Spinning process and divert the unused time from the Draw-Twisting process to other production.
The proposal is attractive but due to the trend of the price, I believe Miss Sue should reject it.
Finally, the marketing department should review their accuracy and increase their scale research.