Following the premiere of his controverisal black-comedy The Lieutenant of Inishmore (2001), Martin McDonagh declared that he would write no new material until the staging of his back-catalogue. McDonagh's newest play The Pillowman is therefore one of his earlier works, and on comparison is notably dissimilar from the author's other offerings. Replacing the rural Irish setting of plays such as The Beauty Queen of Leenane and The Cripple of Inishmaan with a stark portrayal of a vaguely Eastern European totalitarian state, The Pillowman also ventures from McDonagh's traditional naturalistic format. Substantiating the tension of a grimy police cell, in which the writer Katurian Katurian is interrogated on the corrolation between the content of his stories and a series of grisly child-murders, are abstract explorations of artistic responsibility and child abuse through the medium of fairy tales. What punctuates the play, however, is the 'absolutely McDonaghesque' (Independent Sunday, David Benedict, 23.11.03) humour, and like his previous offerings, The Pillowman reverbs with the wildly disturbing and the blackly comic. Staged at the National Theatre in 2003 to considerable critical acclaim, it was declared 'dizzying - not only are the stories woven with a real mythic power, the comedy is effortless, a brash delight in saying the unsayable combines with subtle Pinteresque flourishes that pitch the audience into hilarity.' (Sunday Times, Victoria Segal, 23.11.03) The success of the original National production prompted a nationwide seven-city tour in 2005, and it is this production performance at Warwick Arts Centre that will be discussed.
The 2005 Pillowman featured a quite substantially modified set from the original production, for the quite simple fact that this was a touring performance. As such, the set had to be adaptable for the various theatrical spaces the production would visit. Compared to the Cottlesloe, "the smallest, the barest, the most potentially flexible" of the three National Theatre spaces, the Warwick Arts Centre Theatre is almost double the size, seating 550. Other tours in the venue included the Newcastle Royal Theatre, which with it's 1500-capacity seating, and more traditional 9.01m wide x 9.53m high Proscenium stage, is an extensive variation on the far smaller, yet adaptable Cottlesloe. The new production had to successfully transfer from venue to venue without compromising the play's subtleties. The tour at Warwick made good use of the stage's extensive height and, as in the original, were able to enact out the Katurian story-sequences directly above the unfolding of the author's own story below. Particularly memorable was the image of "The Little Jesus", tortured and buried alive by her evil foster-parents, slowly sinking down in her coffin to the level of the interrogation room. It was at these moments, when the naturlistic plight of Katurian and his brother mingled with the narrative unfurling above them, that the duality of the set realised it's full potential.
Indeed, the surreal and nightmarish Grimm-stories Katurian retells semi-autobiographically are suspended as "queasily beautiful tableaux" (Sunday Times, Victoria Segal, 23.11.03 ) above the bleakly-comic naturalism below to quite startling effect. Coupled with the play's Slavic-inspired score these stories are hauntingly reminiscent of the traditional fairy tales to which each of us is accustomed: 'something wicked and whimsical also haunts Paddy Cunneen's enchanting original music. His melodies carry the fantastic echoes of a music that probably once lulled the children of Hamlin away into the mountain.'
Neither a set nor a score is suggested by McDonagh in the script, which is void of all but the most basic stage directions, containing only the most necessary descriptions:
McDonagh leaves the particulars of the set in unspecified opacity: like the details of the totalitarian state the characters inhabit, the playwright prefers a sense of gloomy ambiguity to permeate the play's setting. Indeed, it is attributable to Scott Pask's set design that 'Katurian's dark imagination explodes into picture-book re-enactment, just as your eye cries out hungrily for colour'. His interpretations of both the interrogation room (whose plain, yet vaguely Eastern European walls are smeared with grey filth and dribbles of rust), and the more abstract backdrops of "The Writer and the Writer's Brother" and "The Little Jesus" stories (which augment any premonition of ensuing child-torture with painfully-bright dcor and crampt, angular design) were absolutely impeccable, and the two were juxtaposed highly effectively. The grainy reality of Katurian and Michal's dilemma is immediately followed by the dreamy fantasies of Katurian's Grimm-inspired stories. The expansive, high-ceilinged cells of the police-station are immediately followed by a nauseating claustrophobia, as Katurian's literary characters acted out his tales in the cramped theatrical compartments above the main stage. This effective duality of space "illuminated... a tragic vision of stunted and frustrated lives" (Fintan O'Toole, Irish Times). Overall the effect is oxymoronic: as Katurian becomes progressively isolated (discovering in Scene 2 that his spastic brother is responsible for the child murders he himself is suspected for), the freedom of imagination ascribed to his stories increasingly appeals. Inevitably, at the play's climax, Katurian desperately forsakes his own naturalistic stage for his stories when he forfeits his own life to save his work.
Lee Ingleby (Katurian) asserted that 'in the forefront of this production were the storytelling elements,' and though larger than the Cottlesloe, the 2005 actors understood the necessity of an effective story-telling atmosphere. Katurian, sitting simply on a chair at the edge of the stage, always maintained an intimate relationship with the audience in order to carry the finer nuances of his plots. Whilst ignoring the playwright's original stage-directions, which specify that Katurian should be 'narrating the shirt story which he and the mother, in diamonds, and father, in goatee and glasses, enact' (p.31), such an action was vital to preserve the personal involvement of the audience with the story-teller that was so necessary in conveying the play's strong moral message. Though such an action made Katurian seem remote and ancillary to the story he was telling, it inevitably resulted in a more intimate relationship with the audience.
To transcribe McDonagh's play to various locales and maintain both the macabre and comic tones that pervade the script was certainly a challenge, and The Pillowman as a whole is both demanding and ambitious: the treatment of child-abuse as a potential source of comedy is certainly unorthodox. One actor (Mike Sherman - Father) noted that audiences were somewhat reluctant to yield to a script which contains the fictional torture and crucifixion of a young girl. Yet the 2005 production was assuredly well-prepared to meet the many demands of the script. Dealing comically with the subject of child-abuse and child-murder requires a certain boldness, and the cast and director were keen to approach McDonagh's script without restraint with the aim of maximising the script's considerable comic potential. Moments of disturbing brutality are often accompanied with comic remarks that only add to the discomfiture, and the 2005 production showed no restraint in their blackly-humorous treatment of these comic opportunities:
Dispensing with any dry, ironic insinuations, Jim Norton (Tupolski) opted instead for a delivery characterised by a distinct nonchalance. The rising solemnity of Ingleby's (Katurian) acute distress is immediately assuaged by Tupolski comic bluntness, and Norton relaxed easily into the "light-relief" role previously established by Broadbent, and like his predecessor '[caught] to perfection the hilarious coarseness of authoritarian brutality, like a [character] out of Dickens.' (Metro, Dominic Maxwell, 17.11.03) Such an interpretation of Tupolski is open to criticism, and adopting such a deliberately comic tone frustrates numerous attempts to imbue the piece with any sobriety. During the performance at Warwick, Katurian's death at the play's end was followed by a muffled guffaw from the audience. Such a reaction is surely contrary to the author's intention: though we are always aware of McDonagh's toying with numerous narrative strands (which diminish the sense of realism and thus the impact of Katurian's death), he is surely suggesting that fiction can have tragic consequences in reality. The deaths of Michal and his writer brother are meant to be moments of profound pathos which illuminate the horrors of both authoritarianism and a complete lack of social responsibility. That the Warwick performance elicited such a flippant audience response suggests that the production glossed over the more serious moral undertones of McDonagh's script. The script's difficulties lay mainly in telling an entertaining story without diluting, or conversely over-emphasising, the play's messages on social responsibility and artistic freedom. Perhaps the most prominent shortcoming of the touring production was it's failure to address this challenge fully: at times the comedy would siphon tension from moments of solemnity and detract from the moral reflection.
Despite this, such an interpretation of character has advantages. Tupolski never allows the play to descend into the stodgy and depressing, and the comic tone he applies to much of the dialogue extracted some wonderful audience responses. Unsure as to whether it was appropriate to laugh or not, audience members often resorted to poorly-concealed sniggers that were quickly silenced by the reproachful glare of contemporaries. Challenging the audience on their notion of 'acceptable' humour, The Pillowman is rightly praised as 'a delve into the amoral imperatives of story telling that asks its audience to find their own response.' (Mail on Sunday, Georgina Brown, 23.11.03 ) Emotional theatrical opportunities were pursued but the intellectual elements of the story were frequently left to the audience to unravel for themselves.
It is difficult to assess the extent to which the 2005 tour of The Pillowman constituted an adaptation of its 2003 predecessor. Many of the original elements of the play, including it's direction and casting, had altered (prominent theatrical names such as Jim Broadbent had departed, to be replaced by lesser-known professionals). Furthermore, apart from the two actors who had previouly belonged to the original production, none of the 2005 cast had seen the 2003 performance at the National, and Edward Hogg (Michal) admitted that "if we had, it might have affected the end play, yes. But we therefore treated it as a fresh play."
Such an approach by the new cast and team could have compromised the production's aim to effectively replicate the 2003 original. Yet though John Crowley's previous direction, which "supplied the sure, merry-macabre tone the piece needs" (METRO, Original Pamphlet) was absent from the new tour, what remained a constant was the considerable influence playwright Martin McDonagh exerted on it's development. From the productions earliest stages McDonagh was present to provide an essential link with the tour's predecessor. For the actors at least, the purpose of the tour was to produce "as close a copy as you can get" between productions separated by two years. McDonagh's role in the 2005 production and it's development is testament to this. In regards that only two of the new cast had seen the original play (and these were, in fact, minor characters), McDonagh's purpose seems to have been to provide effectively what constituted as an artistic blueprint of the original performance in areas which the script was open to interpretation. When asked as to when they departed from the author's original intentions, the actors replied that "we didn't", and it is clear that McDonagh was highly specific in his advice (which extended to checking "every word and comma, crossing the t's, even checking the pauses.") Although freely admitting that such a close working relationship with the playwright proved "intimidating" at times, both the actors and director were keen to adhere strictly to his artistic guidelines, and the experience proved to be a "fascinating" one.
Certainly what characterised the 2005 production was it's required flexibility: the departure from the Cottlesloe necessitated an adaptable cast and direction able to perform for the varied audiences from around the country, and an alterable set for the assorted theatrical environments where the play would be staged. This the production provided effectively, and was essential for the play to take it's leave of the more veteran audiences that freqeunt the National Theatre and appeal to the general public. However the tour benefited, like it's predecessor, from an unusually constant discourse with McDonagh. That the playwright was a constant figure in the rehearsal process suggests that the actual content and style of both productions remained similar despite a different director and cast. McDonagh, after all, was present at many rehearsals to ensure "it was his vision that the play must be moulded around" (Jim Norton). It would be difficult to categorise The Pillowman 2005 as an interpretation of the 2003 production, as overall artistic authority remained with McDonagh (who had been equally prominent in 2003). Though there were notable, and required changes, to the play which were due to the constantly shifting location and audiences, McDonagh's extensive involvement in both 2003 and 2005 resulted in two productions remarkably similar in their interpretation of the script. Watching the play, it proved easy to discern the "stomach-churning and wildly comic" (the Observer, Susannah Clapp, 16.11.03) elements of the 2003 Cottlesloe performance in Frow's 2005 tour, and this is attributable solely to the playwright: "the sure, merry-macabre tone" (Metro, Dominic Maxwell, 17.11.03) is surely the author's own.