Contemporary reaction to Edward Bond's Saved consisted of an almost universal condemnation of the play's brutal and uncompromising character. Outraged at its graphic cruelty and explicit eroticism, Saved was denounced as 'a systematic degradation of the human animal' [Irving Wardle, quoted in The Plays of Edward Bond, Scharine: p.20] with a 'gloating approach to moments of brutality and erotic humiliation." One reviewer declared it 'well past the point when both life and art are irretrievably debased,' [Lloyd Evans: 139] and on the whole critic's failed to comprehend both Saved's prevailing moral idealism and Bond's humanitarian concern for the plight of his characters. Saved's very title is optimistic, even prophetic: despite its potential for irony, Bond chooses instead to expound upon the play's positive message, and the hope that the audience will choose to rescue itself from a growing social malaise of frustration and violence. Indeed, in the play's Author's Note Bond called Saved 'almost irresponsibly optimistic." However, Bond's play does not give way to a 'fatuous optimism based on superficiality of both feeling and observation', and neither does it wallow in 'the self-indulgence of pessimism.' Either such perspective when facing the events of Saved would degrade the play's moral message. Instead, the optimism accorded Saved is very much like its main protagonist: tenacious, uncompromising and 'clutching at straws.' Like Len, the play ends in ambiguity, 'not knowing what to do next.' [Author's Note: p.5]
Bond's assertion that Saved is innately hopeful and optimistic is based on both its ambivalent ending and what does not happen in the play. Like its branding as 'an Oedipal Comedy', Saved raises early expectations within its audience that are never fully realised, and much of the play is concerned with demolishing negative audience preconceptions (that would allow them to distance themselves from any moral responsibility) conjured both from the play's title and its general proceedings. As the play progresses, a typical Oedipal outcome remains unfulfilled: Len and Mary do not have sex and Harry is not murdered with the knife. Instead, despite a deliberate build towards both events, the play's Oedipal elements are distorted to the level of comic pastiche: Len ends up sowing Mary's stocking, and anything that might of followed is disrupted by Harry wandering in to get his Pool tickets. Harry himself is assaulted with a teapot, and despite his melodramatic plea for 'Doctor' [p.110], Len announces 'It's only a scratch... Yer'll live.' In another divergence from the Oedipal tradition, Len does not supplant Harry's authority as head of the household: by the final scene 'he merely becomes part of Harry's household and, by his presence, keeps that household alive.' [Scharine, p.73]
From the play's very opening, and the comical yet despairing scene of a young man's erotic fumbling during his seduction by a girl he has bumped into (the sexually voracious Pam), we also presume that the young couples relationship will be transitory, and of little importance. As the pair pause before having sex, Len asks Pam 'Wass yer name?' [p.12] Pam proceeds to reply to most of his more prying questions with variations of 'Don't be nosey!' As the couple struggle to keep up a meaningful dialogue, eventually resorting to obscene jokes, the audience becomes increasingly aware that the ensuing sexual act will be of little worth, and grant nothing more than an ephemeral and deluded sense of release. The assumption is then made that this will be Len and Pam's first and final encounter, a misconception dispelled fully by Bond in Scene Two, where we discover that Pam and Len are still together (though things have clearly stagnated even further), and indeed will continue to have a relationship of sorts for the rest of the play and beyond. Len and Pam's tumultuous bickering, and final muted cohabitation, is indeed at the forefront of the play, providing a backdrop against which other events are able to unfold. The relationship, and 'the frustrated desires, coping strategies, insecurity, and ingenuity it reveals can be recognized in much that follows.' [Dramatic Strategies in the Plays of Edward Bond, Spencer, p.143]
The play's first scene also illustrates the importance of humour in Saved, establishing it as an important dramatic device that can be closely identified with Bond's overriding aim for social change. The comedy of Saved resides in its crude sexual slurs and the embarrassing inadequacies of the play's characters: it is the cruel, derogatory humour of the frustrated and let-down working classes. Though Saved's Oedipal undertones foster the idea of an eventual catharsis, 'the restorative, reiterative effects expected from traditional comedy are muted by the perception of an already damaged social structure - one that cannot be "fixed" by defensive manoeuvres alone.' [Spencer: p.148] Saved's bleakly comic nature instead has the opposite effect, a factor that probably contributed to the vociferous public response. To laugh at Bond's play brings about a sort of epiphany of understanding, for to laugh at the situation is to understand it, and naturally desire it to change. To hear Saved's jokes and to watch such cruel comedy is a sullying and unpleasant experience, but one that makes us instantly more amiable to reform. As Spencer notes, 'the humour embedded in Saved makes a lasting impression that is not entirely negative in its effects; for the irrepressible nature of the joking exchanges displays the driving energy necessary for social change.' [Spencer: p.151]
Similarly, the explicit violence is Saved is presented 'not as some neo-Gothic testimony to the cruel absurdity of the universe and human nature, but as a social deformity crying for correction.' [Lloyd Evans: p.136] Indeed, Saved attributes the death of the child to environmental and social pressures, and whilst the actual stoning is shown on stage, a key factor in the Lord Chamberlain's decision to ban the play, its death 'in a London park is a typical English understatement. Compared to the 'strategic' bombing of German towns it is a negligible atrocity, compared to the cultural and emotional deprivation of most of our children its consequences are insignificant.' [Author's Note: p.6] Those who denounce Saved as gratuitous and obscene fail to recognise that its violence 'is indeed sickening, but it is a sickness that the author is witnessing, not creating.' [Scharine: p.22] That the root of Saved's violence has for Bond a sociological explanation means that those ultimately responsible for the child's death, or at least those capable of it's rescue, are those present in the theatre. Bond works hard to implicate his audience in the baby's killing because of his belief that 'society has enforced upon humans strictures that can only lead to violence. It then calls that violence an inherent part of human nature and uses it as an excuse to add still more strictures.' [Scharine: p.66]
Nor is Saved's violence the most depressing aspect of the play to watch. Particularly discomforting is Scene Four, during which 'slowly a baby starts to cry.' [p.36] Nothing is more effective at conveying Saved's total absence of love and compassion than its continued neglect: Pam continues to watch TV. Len continues to eat. The baby 'goes on crying without a break until the end of the scene.'
Yet despite his obvious failure as both a husband and lover, Saved's main protagonist is characterised mainly by his optimism and tenacity in the face of defeat: indeed part of the play's optimism lies in his refusal to accept it. Apparent throughout Saved is Len's willingness to help, in numerous circumstances his offers of support provoke outright rejection, yet this fails to deter him: 'he carries Mary's groceries and helps pay the rent; he offers Pam his tickets to the Crystal Palace to help her win back Fred; he accepts responsibility for Pam's baby, refusing to desert the situation even when begged to do so; he brings Fred cigarettes in jail and offers him his own room when he gets out.' [Spencer: p.32-3] Symbolically, at the end of the play Len is still obstinately trying to help out: he mends the chair. This final scene shows people 'at their worst and most hopeless,' yet despite this, Len 'does not turn away from them. I cannot imagine an optimism more tenacious, disciplined or honest than this.' [Author's Note: p.5] Len's character is practical, like the optimism ascribed to the play. He is also a good person, though his goodness is flawed and human: 'his faults are partly brought home to him by his ambivalence at the death of the baby and his morbid fascination with it afterwards.' [Author's Note: p.5]
Whilst these shortcomings are significant, they are shared with the audience, and Len is not alone in his apathy towards the baby, neither in his inaction when he could have could have saved it's life: the audience is also culpable for both failings: 'the audience witnesses with him - as it witnesses a thousand worse atrocities daily - and, like Len, is does nothing', and though 'the audience of the play may be disturbed by the view, but stays put nonetheless.' [Spencer: p.35] Len's simple admission that 'I saw the lot... I didn't know what to do. Well, I should a stopped yer' [p.76], coupled with his uncomfortable harassment of Fred in Scene Ten, where he repeatedly asks 'Wass it feel like when yer killed it?' [p.103] are unpleasant reflections of the voyeuristic role the audience adopt as inactive observers of the stoning and its aftermath.
To watch the events of Saved unfold without Len's involvement would be truly despairing, for Bond's plays are primarily concerned with the culturally stunted, intellectually frustrated and 'morally illiterate' of Britain's lower classes. Yet Len somehow manages to transcend other characters in his refusal to accept the triumph of evil and despair. In Len, Bond is presenting to us the viable alternative 'of the man who says no to evil... who chooses neither to be brutalized by his circumstances nor to abandon his responsibilities.' [Scharine: p.27]
Bond's optimism is limited though, and he professes to being 'a pessimist by experience and an optimist by nature.' [Author's Note: p.7] Though 'Len has "saved" humanity from defeat... Bond has traced the patterns of deterioration too clearly for us to believe in any kind of ultimate triumph.' [Scharine, p.58] In a letter to Richard Scharine dated 2 October 1974, Bond calls Len's final decision to stay 'a moral act, though its effect it limited,' and this reveals an outlook that is certainly consistent with the rest of the play: though Pam and her family have indeed been saved, their rescue is not enough to raise them from the depths of their 'silent social stalemate' [Author's Note: p.5] Fred, in the course of the play, has become institutionalised by the gang, by prison, and by society: he has been defined as a felon, as evil, as good for nothing, and has accepted his label. There is little hope for him after the play, as even Len (the endless optimist) admits 'Yer ain't seen what it done t' 'im. 'E's like a kid. 'E'll finished up like some ol' lag, or an ol' soak. Bound too. An' soon. Yer'll see.' [p.116] There is no doubt that Len speaks the truth. The gang, as it is, will continue as they have before. No doubt subsequent horrors will be committed by its members: there is a sense that the stoning of the baby resulted from a momentary release of violent frustration, an Oedipal frenzy of orgiastic scope and proportion. There is no suggestion that by killing the child the gang have exorcised their demons: further venting of their aggressions seems not just probable but certain.
Yet despite the horrendousness of their crimes, Saved presents its characters in surprising objectivity, and the play's moral detachment, especially regarding the gang, suggests that Bond regards society as equally culpable for their actions. In fact, they are almost 'clinically observed' [Scharine: p.25] so that we may better understand the society responsible for their creation. Bond's rejection of a purely naturalistic approach lends his characters many Brechtian qualities, both in tone and their sense of higher moral purpose, and as devices that become emblematic of the social situation. The people of Saved are portrayed as human beings who are lacking in ethical understanding, individuals who have lost the ability of moral consideration that is such an essential part of their humanity. They are not presented as so many see them: as animals, whose instincts are cruel and selfish, whose motivations are shallow and egotistical and whose actions are innately vile and inhumane. The gang's cruelty is explainable not in the assertion that human beings are by their very nature inclined to such acts, 'but because their capacity for sympathy, their ability to imagine the feelings and the suffering of others, has been restricted and withered by the culture they live in.' [Coult: p.71] Bond's entire moral message is expressed through them.
Ultimately, Saved's moral message and its plea for social change are the sources from which the play's essential optimism stems. Hope presides over the play almost irresponsibly, indeed were it not for Saved's higher moral purpose it could be branded as such. However, Saved is conscientious, and does have a sense of duty. To base the play based on 'a fatuous optimism' would indeed have been irresponsible, but instead Bond shows that the future is both mutable and unresolved, whilst reminding us that a positive outcome is by no means assured: it must be fought for constantly, and the champions of reform must be the audience themselves.
This is Saved's purpose, and it is one that all of Bond's work shares. In a poem titled "You Sit and Watch", Bond explains 'You must solve the same problems/ In your life/ Suffer while they are made clear/ Perhaps die in solving them/ The actors will show you these future deaths'. ['You Sit and Watch': 31-8] It is a passage that is clearly transferable to Saved, illustrative of its assertion that solutions exist but that it must be the audience that provides them. Essentially, Saved is concerned with 'teaching... moral scepticism and analysis, and not faith', in order 'to remind you/ Of what you forgot to see/ When you came here/ To hear what you were too busy to listen to/ Too afraid to believe/ Too ashamed to admit' ['You Sit and Watch': 8-16], and it is this moral integrity that gives the play both its optimism and a sense of responsibility.