At the start of his literary career Clare had forged for himself the poetic identity of the 'Northamptonshire peasant poet.' It was a persona that bestowed its author with celebrity status and was also a principle factor in the popularity of his collections. 'The Badger' was written when public fascination with the labourer-poet had begun to wane. A series of increasingly diminutive returns from his publications and imminent detention at a sanatorium were events that vitally contextualise the poem. Clare constructs 'The Badger' around the struggles of it's eponymous protagonist, and the badger itself suggests possible commensuration with both the author and the labouring classes to which Clare belonged.
This is the central interpretive dilemma of the poem: should we read 'The Badger' as political allegory or personal biography? The poem can be viewed primarily as a metaphor of rural displacement; the badger emblematic of a countryside Everyman expatriated from his natural surroundings and forced into the violent competition of the towns. The consequence is either death or servitude, the "baited badger" (l.55) of the final stanza symbolic of the country-folk assimilated into an urban regime and relegated to menial social function. Once able to "fight with dogs for hours and beat them all" (l.36), the badger's status to his opponents is now rendered in imitative terms: the repetition of the simile "like a dog" (l.56, l.66) emphasises the descent from the independent to the servile.
Yet Clare is not presented as an exterior persona. This suggests that the poet saw himself as synonymous with the badger of the poem, and indeed there are many parallels. Clare was perceived at large as a genuine Wordsworthian poet: one who wrote from a "spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings" but who lacked the intellectual aptitude bestowed by education and upbringing to write poetry of appealing sophistication. 'The Badger' is partly an expression of Clare's increasing sense of frustration at the complacent marginalisation of his work by the wider public.
Both interpretations emphasise the conflict between the public and private: the spheres of nature and the solitary individual are incongruent with the crowded "noisey streets" (l.28) of the new industrial towns. The first stanza emphasises Clare's idealisation of natural solitude. The lumbering badger, "awkard" (l.5) and "grunting" (l.1) is analogous to the romantic notion of an isolated poetic wanderer, akin to the author himself. Clare's poetry was, after all, the product of lonely self-immersion in his natural surroundings. The badger is strangely anthropomorphised (indeed, throughout the poem he will increasingly appropriate human characteristics: in later stanzas the badger "grins" (l.40) and "cackles" (l.54)) and vaguely geriatric: groups of human boys provide the antithesis to his character. They beat and kill him for amusement. Their pleasure in destruction will later extend to burning the forest, which the badger enjoys a symbiotic relationship with. With his "nose on the ground" (l.5) he
. The badger lives in harmonious accord with nature, a notion the last stanza expounds further. Where we previously saw the badger's cheerful coexistence with the woods in which he resides, the tamed badger featured in the last stanza
. This subsequent destructive isolation from his natural habitat illustrates a shared mutual imperative: both badger and wood must be together. To separate them is anathema.
With no authorial persona, the poem's viewpoint oscillates between the individual
badger and the larger human collective in the town (though Clare's sympathies are easily identifiable with the benign placidity of the singular animal compared to the urban mob.) Human activity is heralded by noise: aural disruption accompanies the badger's capture. The men "laugh and shout and fright the scampering hogs" (l.26), who enter the town to a deafening cacophony: the residents
. Urban life is characterised by loud and abrasive sound: "the drunkard swears" (l.42), the "blackguard laughs" (1.44), dogs bark "in noises loud" (l.48). Clare's social group is a conglomerate of drunks, villains and aggressive animals. In contrast the badger is singular and silent, only incoherently articulating a cackle and groan at his death. The badger is bereft of a voice in a community that regards him as an alien and temporal focus of its amusement: one feels the resonances here are with Clare specifically.
The death of the badger should provide some sort of poetic resolution; the poem's climax and subsequent end. However, the poem's ballad form and unusual structure seem conflicting. The staple ballad relies on the briefest of exposition followed with succinct conclusion, yet the lengthy epilogue that constitutes the last stanza contradicts such conventions. Though the direct opening and swift narrative sequence of 'The Badger' lead naturally to the death of it's protagonist, structurally this is not the poem's centre. Counting the lines of the five stanzas reveals two sections of fourteen and twelve lines arranged around a centre stanza of sixteen lines (the midpoint of which is line 34). Numerically the stanza's resemble a simple palindrome: 14-12-16-12-14.
Clare's mirroring and repetition occur (with far less coherency) on the micro level: between lines (the AABB rhyming couplet offering a simplistic example) and between stanzas or fragments of stanzas. The capture of the wild badger (ll. 24-26) closely resembles the taming of the badger in the fifth stanza (ll.55-56). Fragments of the fifth stanza also closely resemble:
There is a transformation, however, that occurs between these reflected lines. Once we return to the themes of play and departure discussed at the start of the stanza, it is clear that the badger has changed. He no longer fights, he shows affection to his masters. He no longer leaves, instead "he scorns to fly" (l.59). Similarly, in the previous example the captured badger is presented as distinct from the dogs that hound him. The baited badger, no longer wild and unruly, "follows like a dog." The emphasis here has shifted: the badger is not pursued by dogs unwillingly, he himself obediently tags behind. The resulting anti-climax is unnerving: the death of the previous badger has been undermined by the tame badger's complacent capitulation to a human master.
Yet if the lengthy epilogue and the poem's structure contribute towards the bathos at the poem's end, then where is the poetic climax shifted? Punctuation in its absence fosters a constant build throughout. 'The Badger' is instead relying on the conjunctive "and" to punctuate sentences. Each line stumbles awkwardly into the next without halt, reflecting the persistent race motif (l.6, l.45): the reader is given little chance to stop. Similarly, the iambic pentameter of the poem lends 'The Badger' a swift and constant rhythm that complements the constant build. Incremental repetition combines with the lack of punctuation to create a dramatic crescendo: the badger defeats innumerable combatants and drives the crowd back on four separate occasions (ll.30, 41, 47, 49). Each juncture effects a successive build in tension.
The escalating violence of the poem's latter half seems to be catalysed by the exact middle line of the poem. Indeed, the line "The badger turns and drives them all away" (l.34) becomes both a literary and actual turning point: this is effectively the poem's Volta, and the revelation of the badger's physical strength transforms him from an object of awkward ridicule to a fearsome natural opponent. The mastiff and bull-dog he fights have been tempered by man into ferocious fighting creatures, yet the natural integrity of the badger overpowers them. The turning point effects a change in both tone (now brutal) and milieu (the idyll of the forest substituted for the chaos of the town.)
Clare uses sophisticated arrangement and a rhythmic metre closely associated with Shakespeare and his contemporaries. One could construe the motivation behind Clare's erudite choice of iambic pentameter and palindromic structure as an attempt to technically sophisticate his poetry. The complexity of construction in 'The Badger' parries notions of patronising simplicity in the audience: Clare evidently thought very carefully about the composition of his poem. 'The Badger' is in no way the sole product of a "spontaneous overflow of feeling." It is the result of both an emotive and cerebral effort on behalf of the author.