Lombroso believed that degenerates, more specifically criminals, possessed 'numerous anomalies in the face, skeleton and various psychic and sensitive functions' that were indicative of their immoral behaviour. These physical characteristics made them identifiable as prone to criminality and, on a more general level, subordinate to the aesthetically 'normal' members of society. Moreover, such characteristics could be inherited and therefore people could be born as criminals. In 'The Portrait of Dorian Gray', Wilde uses Lombroso's concept of degeneration and physicality to establish both character description and the demise of Dorian Gray through his painting.
Henry Wooton comments in the novel that 'crime belongs exclusively to the lower orders' and Wilde uses Lombroso's theory to illustrate this within his description of the lower classes that Dorian encounters through both the theatre and the opium den. In particular the theatre owner is described as 'a hideous jew' with 'greasy ringlets' and 'beaming from ear to ear with an oily, tremulous smile'. Similarly, the other characters involved in the play are described in an equally derogatory manner- the orchestral conductor as 'a young hebrew', Romeo as 'a stout elderly gentleman, with corked eyebrows...and a figure like a beer barrell' and Romeo and Mercutio together as 'both as grotesque as the scenery'. Dorian Gray in fact comments on the theatregoers as being 'common, rough people with their coarse faces'. The concept of a 'coarse face' is particularly relevant to Lombroso as he believed that degenerates had identifiable physical features due to the atavistic nature of their faces and skeletons. He notes criminals in particular as exhibiting a prominent jaw, long arms and large ears- all somewhat animalistic and Neanderthal qualities. Wilde uses the idea of biologically backward appearance to enhance his depiction of the lower classes.
In terms of Dorian Gray himself, Wilde uses Lombroso's theory as a vehicle to display his deterioration through the portrait. Although this does not concur with Lombroso's belief that criminality was hereditary, it does exploit the concept of immorality having physical effects- even if it is in retrospect and evident only on the portrait (as Gray has bound himself to a lifetime of youthfulness). For instance, Gray is described as observing 'its beautiful marred face' and that 'he would examine with minute care...the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead, or crawled around around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age'. Gray also comments that 'if a wretched man has a vice, it shows itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids'- Lombroso's theory exactly. Therefore, Wilde uses Lombrosian theory as a basis for the physical description of many characters, but in Dorian Gray himself manipulates the concept to turn it into a literary vehicle with which to sustain the reader's attention. Lombroso believed indicative physical features were inherited and present from birth; Wilde depicted them as appearing and mutating as the soul of Dorian Gray began to degenerate.
There are other features of Lombroso's theory on criminality that Wilde has manipulated in The Portrait of Dorian Gray. For instance, Lombroso commented on the often cold nature of criminals towards their kin as 'their moral sense is sterile because it is suffocated by passions and the deadening force of habit'. Whilst Dorian Gray's family are only revealed through portraits that he studies, he seems to blame them for his condition- not only displaying some hostility towards them but making an acknowledgement of hereditary degeneration. For example, he says of Philip Herbert's portrait: 'Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body to body till it had reached his own?', and also that 'he knew what he had got' from the 'wine-dashed' lips of his mother. 'Wine-dashed' also implies that his mother was an alcoholic, another disease associated with the concept of degeneration. All his observations imply a sense of pre-disposition akin to the thoughts of Lombroso, and resentment towards such inheritance concurring with his beliefs as well. In terms of moral sterility Dorian Gray shows no remorse for his role in Sybil Vane's suicide, to which Basil comments 'I don't know what has come over you. You talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you'. Also, not only does he murder Basil but deals with his death in a methodical manner- summoning Alan Campbell to dispose of the body, and systematically burning all remaining evidence- and describes after the event that 'he felt strangely calm'. Equally when Campbell subsequently commits suicide Gray accepts no responsibility for causing another death. It is only when Gray eventually admits to himself the devastating effects he appears to have on all that he meets that he begins to be troubled by his actions, breaking with Lombrosian theory.
Lombroso also believed that besides hostility towards kin, criminals also were especially friendly towards strangers and felt an affinity with animals. Throughout the novel Dorian Gray proves popular with the other characters, courting the affection of various females (most prominently Sybil Vane and the Duchess, but Gray comments on numerous occasions that he has experienced much female attention throughout his life) and Basil, and also in striking an immediate friendship with Henry Wooton. When Dorian Gray goes hunting with Sir Geoffrey Clouston, he begs him not to shoot a rabbit because 'there was something in the animal's grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray'. Therefore Wilde even weaves some of the less prominent Lombrosian characteristics of the born criminal into his characterisation of Dorian Gray.
However, when considered on the whole, Lombroso only appears to influence Wilde on a foundational level as Dorian Gray himself seems to be equally swayed by external influences. His whole demise is derived though a desire to stay young, mostly courted by the compliments he receives regarding his beauty and comments such as Henry Wooton's 'beauty is a form of genius- is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation'. Wooton also influences Gray by lending him a book. This idea of environmentally influenced degeneration is closer to Nordauism than Lombrosian theory. Although Wilde published Portrait of Dorian Gray in1890, two years before Nordau wrote 'Degeneration', his theories were very much in development and the concept of degeneration was a highly discussed contemporary topic. Wilde also uses external influences for a literary purpose- to heighten the demise of Dorian Gray, and also to create a sense of empathy with the character. With Lombroso's theory there is little sympathy for the criminal as they are depicted as some form of physical monstrosity, inherent on committing illegal and immoral acts due to their heredity, but in Gray's final act of slashing the portrait and being discovered as a 'withered, wrinkled and loathsome' looking corpse the reader is able to understand the futility of Dorian Gray's situation and blame his acquaintances and society for his demise just as much (perhaps) as the actions of Gray himself.
Therefore, 'The Picture of Dorian Gray' is influenced fundamentally by Lombroso. Wilde uses the concept of physicality in his descriptions, and also forms Gray's personality according to many of the characteristics of the born criminal. However, he also draws upon contemporary developing theories of environmentally induced degeneration to seal the fate of the protagonist. Overall, abiding only by the principles of Lombrosian theory it would be difficult to create a character with both any sense of remorse and any empathy within the reader, and both of these are necessary to maintain interest in and affinity with the novel. It would also prevent any final sense of demise, climax or conclusion to the novel. Wilde, subsequently, uses Lombroso's beliefs about criminality and degeneration as a basic literary vehicle from which to develop his novel- after all, his aim was not to create a scientific document but an enthralling tale of the deterioration of a man as a result of his whimsical desire for eternal youthfulness.