The Irish appropriation of the English language is an event lamented by many of the country's nationalist elements. Traditionally cited as the event that sparked off a lengthy stagnation of Irish culture, the discontinuing of the Gaelic vernacular has been interpreted as yielding to an English rule bent on tyrannical colonialism and cultural hegemony. Yet in his play Translations, Brian Friel is 'neither nave nor simplistic in attributing the erosion of Gaelic Ireland to the obvious distortions' [Richards, p.190] that resulted from Anglicisation. Through the remarkably simple presentation of an Irish peasant community, the townland of Ballybeg in the Northern county of Donegal, he paints a far more complex picture of Ireland's cultural and linguistic stagnation, and it's eventual renewal. Though the loss of the Irish language is regretful, and treated by Friel with an aura of reverent nostalgia, the author is clear to emphasise Ballybeg's crumbling social structure and is equally clear in his indictment of the Gaelic dialect as the basis of the decay. Friel's play expounds upon the idea proposed by schoolteacher Hugh in Act II, Scene I: that 'a civilisation can be imprisoned in a linguistic contour that no longer matches the landscape... of fact.' [Friel: 419]
Translations, with its three-act structure, simple love story and general rural landscape owes much "to the old Irish melodramas of Boucicault" [Murray, p.211]. The play's form, 'having roots in the simplest and most popular of forms... can thereafter support any number of ideas... the pathos of the situation is not evoked in the service of the plot but of ideas.' [p.211] These ideas revolve centrally around questions of language, and with them Friel is depicting a complex anthropological and sociological, and specifically Irish, condition. The play's title establishes the idea of translation, which occurs constantly throughout the play, from Owen's subtle paraphrasing of Lancey's Imperial dictum to Hugh's final crumbling recital of Virgil's Aeneid, and is a reference 'to Steiner's linguistic epistemology centred on the notion that all communication, even within the same language, involves translation.' [Richards, p.183] When the play itself was performed in Irish, Friel insisted that the entire text should be translated in it's entirety, including the dialogue of the British soldiers. Such emphasis on presenting Translations in a single dialect is important: by dispelling the sense of 'the two languages as competing and commensurable vernaculars... the play's overall linguistic and cultural conclusion follows naturally: the loss of Irish... is presented as a matter of ontological rather than political importance.' [Pilkington, p.219] It is clear that the characters of Translations must converse in the same tongue: to do otherwise would compromise and detract from the play's integrity as an exploration into the nature of language.
Indeed, a serious linguistic dialogue runs at a constant parallel to the plot, making it
impossible to dismiss Translations as a simple melodramatic love story. By harbouring a deceptively simple plot structure, Friel effectively masks the play's real purpose, and Translations is intended as an analysis of language and its relationship to culture and society. Much of the articulated discussion lies in the dialogue of Hugh the schoolmaster, and his lengthy symposium on the nature of language lies fragmented and strewn throughout the play. Significantly, much of it is not Friel's own creation: many of Hugh's (and subsequently Friel's) ideas are directly lifted from George Steiner's After Babel. As such, Steiner's work provides a compelling insight into Friel's own linguistic philosophy:
Such a sentiment is expressed throughout Translations, and from the play's opening it presents a society derelict, archaic and adrift from reality. Friel has described Ballybeg as 'a dying climate - no longer quickened by its past' [Essays, Diaries, p.75: Richards, p.186,], and the very first descriptions of the hedge-school, 'held in a disused barn or hay-shed or byre' [Friel: 383] are immediately striking: something once used for practical and agricultural purposes has been taken over by a crumbling educative doctrine of classicist intellectualism. Around the set lie 'forgotten and broken implements' [383] that enhance the sense of decay. The nostalgia Friel conjures is offset: 'there is no trace of a woman's hand.' [383] The rural idyll has been uneasily subordinated with the academic and the cerebral, and the result is something dusty and moribund.
Yet there is much more in Translations that highlights the deterioration of Ballybeg and the old Irish agricultural tradition than the hedge-school's shabby physical state. A curious and unpleasant duality continues throughout the scene, as 'when the play opens, Manus is teaching Sarah to speak' whilst Jimmy-Jack Cassie 'sits by himself, contentedly reading Homer in Greek and smiling' [383]. The juxtaposition of one character, fluent in Greek and Latin, with another struggling to say her name reinforces the sense that language has lost it's communicative properties and is now a barrier that obstructs human progress: as both the subject of the play and it's medium, Translations is interwoven with displays of language's ability to control and limit its users. While Maire and Yolland are able to transcend the barriers it creates, the characters at the hedge-school are restricted by their words. These isolated figures are soon joined by others, yet it is clear that the number of pupils at the hedge-school is slowly dwindling:
The people of Ballybeg no longer find Hugh's decrepit classes of use: they are no help to those bringing in the salmon; to those like Maire who are bringing in the harvest they are completely superfluous. Conversations in Latin and questions on times tables serve no practical purpose for an Irish farming community. When Maire says
no one at the hedge-school is able to comprehend her: its pupils are too immersed in their own language, it's staff too caught up in the tongues of 'the warm Mediterranean.' [Friel: 417] The entire hedge-school community are prisoners of their own linguistic contours, and '[their] physical problems (lameness, muteness, alcoholism) indicate the deformities of their interior lives.' [Richards, p.186] Yet these ordinary characters serve as sophisticated conduits of linguistic theory. Foremost of these is Hugh, ageing schoolmaster of the hedge-school, father of Owen and Manus and protracted alcoholic. Though often 'he has, as always, a large quantity of drink taken,' [Friel: 397] Hugh is lucid and eloquent throughout the play, though he never attains complete sobriety. He is also capable of the most compelling articulations of Friel's opinions on language, that 'native culture is a fine and noble thing but one must also welcome what is new... one must be prepared to change and grow, as replacing Irish with English place names implies... culture does not necessarily lead to an ennoblement of the individual or to national greatness.' [Murray, p.211] In many ways he is the author's "voice" throughout the play. As a scholar versed in Greek and Latin, as well as the plays contemporary vernaculars of English and Gaelic, Hugh is also the only character imbued with the clarity of vision needed to understand the events transpiring in Ballybeg. Yet ironically it is the staple drink of his community, Irish poteen (that he drinks onstage, p. 417), that has rendered him impotent and unable to save it.
That Ballybeg is a society slowly eroding is self-evident from the microcosm of the hedge-school and it's tiny community. When Nellie Ruadh's baby dies at the end of Act III it confirms the extent of the rot, and over the town hangs the spectre of violence and rebellion (in Doalty and the Donnelly twins) and the omnipresent threat of potato blight:
This stagnation is not something that is attributed to the acquisition of English as a primary vernacular. As Yolland perceptively remarks, 'Something is being eroded' [Friel: 441], yet it is clear that Ballybeg's communal attrition has been a principle feature of the society for many years, and is not directly attributable to the encroaching English. As Owen retorts to Yolland's wistful romanticism, the very crossroads the pair stand upon has had its name corrupted: Tobair Bhriain has become Tobair Vree, and as Owen explains, even the locals have lost the original meaning:
It seems that what Hugh predicted earlier in the scene has come true. The Irish have ceased renewing the images in their literature, and have begun the long and steady process of cultural fossilisation: within the Irish language itself 'the connection between the names and the significance of places has begun to erode.' [McGrath, p.190] Yolland's solution, to keep the current name, is ultimately seen as counter-productive: like Jimmy-Jack, he no longer makes the distinction between 'the literal past, the "facts" of history, that shape us', and the 'images of the past embodied in language.' [Friel: 445] He has forgotten what Hugh has iterated a few moments earlier, 'that words are not immortal but merely signals and counters.' [Friel: 419] And like Jimmy's self-deluded immersion in the world of the gods, Yolland's idealism 'stems from a similarly flawed perception: a failure to recognise a distinction between history and fact, and history as narrative.' [Pilkington, p.215] Such a position is ultimately condemned by Friel, who recognises the attempt 'to compensate for an impoverished and isolated condition' [p.215] but regards it as prolonging the very poverty it seeks to superficially alleviate. The Gaelic syntax, it's luxury as a vernacular, results 'not in an improvement of that condition, but in the sure guarantee that it will continue.' [p.215]
Whilst Translations holds that the Irish language has ceased to match the facts of Ireland, Friel is equally assertive that neither does English, and there is a sense that this new dialect must be transmuted into something else, something indefinably Irish, if it's appropriation is to be successful. Despite Friel's portrayal of a society in decline, there is a constant oscillation between 'regret and irony in Translations... its lament for a lost culture and its critique of that culture's malaise, allows the play to transcend simple nationalist sentiment in order to dissect a complex national condition.' [Gleitman, p.101] Resonating throughout the play is the 'definite impression that this change - Irish-speaking Ireland's surrender to modernity - will also involve an unquantifiable ontological loss.' [Pilkington, p.217] To draw parallels with Chekhov, Friel vacillates between conveying the tragedy of the loss of Gaelic as a vernacular whilst similarly explaining the need for it's passing. This application of a Chekhovian viewpoint suggests that English must be adopted as a primary language because it champions a practical realism over Gaelic's deluded romanticism. As Gleitman explains, 'the struggle between old and new worlds is won by the new not only because of its efficient brutality, but because the old is exhausted and effete, and indulges in fantastic self-deception rather than finding... methods to adapt to a changing world.' [p.101]
In the end, it is clear that Irish has to go: 'it has become innately entangled with a sense of inaction and daydreaming, it has naturally "functioned historically as a compensation for poverty"' [p.214] Such sentiment is explained by Hugh in his conversation with Yolland and Owen:
It is in this 'linguistic contour' that the Irish have been imprisoned: they have substituted material progress for 'a syntax opulent with tomorrows.' [418] Yet this has ultimately been unable to free them, for whilst it ennobles individuals like Manus, Hugh and Jimmy with a tragic cultural greatness, others like Doalty, Bridget and the Donnelly twins sink further into a spiral of material destitution and cultural deprivation. For many, like Maire, emigration offers the only escape. Some, like Sarah, are in limbo: she remains unable to access the comforts of a language 'full of the mythologies of fantasy and hope and self-deception' [418]. When Sarah finally loses all communicative ability she becomes a symbol of the loss of language, and the loss of culture into history, and her final terrified silence at the play's end 'constitutes that untranslatable residue between incommensurable cultures.' [Richards, p.192]
The final act of translation in the play, Hugh's static and broken translation of Virgil's fated fall of Carthage, is at once ironic and prophetic, yet it is essentially the passages inconsequentiality that is the source of real pathos. Ultimately, the speech contains the very essence of Friel's message, as well as multiple layers of irony. Hugh is, of course, retelling the downfall of Carthage in the vernacular of the victorious Romans, much like Friel himself is recounting the discontinuance of Gaelic speech in the English that has now replaced it. Yet unlike Friel, Hugh is unable to complete the translation that he is himself now a part of: he has ceased to make the distinction between the events he narrates and Ballybeg's own story. The audience must complete for themselves what Hugh cannot. Contemporary Irish audiences would have looked to Hugh knowing that his language was now a dead one: the image of him reciting archaic Latin into a now equally defunct Gaelic, is striking in its profundity. The old source of education and culture has finally crumbled. 'A contemporary audience, aware that they have already lost contact with Hugh's Irish language, can only be struck by an embodied source of contemporary fracture, division and alienation.' [Murray, p.212]
Inevitability, Gaelic's destruction comes as no surprise. For Friel and his audience it was not a contemporary issue hanging in the balance but something that had occurred many years before. That Translations ends ominously and yet not pessimistically seems to reinforce the idea that the Irish, whilst losing an old language, have appropriated a new one and twinned it with their existing culture. This victory, of adapting to the present without compromising the past, is something that should be celebrated, and Translations itself is testament to 'not the possibility of recovering the Irish language as a widely-spoken vernacular, but of Ireland's skilful appropriation of the English.' [Pilkington, p.214] That Friel can 'transcend simple nationalist sentiment in order to dissect a complex national condition' [Gleitman, ed. King, p.101] is proof enough that the Irish have made English their own.