The Attic tragedians presented madness as intrinsic to the disintegration of their tragic protagonists. Often, a male character will perform irrational acts for inexplicable reasons, and is labelled "mad" or "beyond reason" when social comprehension of his actions is bewildered. Attic theatre has "two nouns for madness, both feminine, both daemonically personified: Ate and Lyssa." (Padel 162) Both are external forces that work their influence upon the male interior. Though women are the frequent victims of madness in both the Oresteia and Bacchae, the consequences of female insanity are always rendered as ancillary to those inflicted on the male or the social hegemonies they personify. Men such as Agamemnon and Pentheus, bloated with hubris, have fallible judgement. Irrationality in such characters catalyses their destruction. Madness in females will always have tragic consequences for the women involved, yet it is always celestially ordained; a manifestation either of prophetic destiny or divine wrath directed overwhelmingly at the heroic male. Women are the active agents of a hero's demise: the consequences of feminine madness are frequently violent and always emasculative. They work to dismantle male power structures. In the Bacchae and Oresteia they are responsible for the destruction of Thebes and it's royal family and the loosing of social anarchy. The royal bloodline of Atreus is also threatened by female insanity. This essay aims to explore the tragic disintegration of the male in the Bacchae and Oresteia through the invasion of the mind by natural and divine foreign bodies, and the emasculative consequences these (inherently feminine) material and celestial foreign bodies exert over the male hero.
Madness in ancient Greece was not merely a physical condition but was synonymous with social standing. It was reductive of men for them to be mad: the Athenian orator Demosthenes regarded an individual exempt from the law if he was "out of his mind by reason of old age, drugs, or disease, or by reason of a women's persuasion." A man under such influences cannot reason properly: he is exempt from the law but also beneath it, his political (and masculine) power now equivalent to that of women, slaves and foreigners. This is a strict hierarchy observed in Greek tragedy: when male heroes are emasculated through madness they become as women (the most explicit example is that of Pentheus.) In the Bacchae particularly there is a further level of degradation: humans become animals. Padel notes that tragic madness "upsets distinctions between human and animal." (Padel 242) Such metamorphosis is sometimes illusory, sometimes actual: Agave sees her son as a lion, "one of the three emblems of Dionysus" (Kott 191), but the hallucination is temporal. Cadmus will literally become a serpent and the transformation is permanent.
Madness is so easily diminutive of the male because it is an external threat that enters the internal mind to cause damage. The traditional warrior paradigm is defenceless: strength, agility, prowess with a shield, a sword, are all ineffectual and irrelevant. Madness attacks the mind, the body part which, "as tragedy presents it, is dark, interior, penetrated, filling and flowing with blood, impure and uncontrollable. It has the perceived qualities of the human interior." (Padel 129)
Parallels with the female womb are striking: the fate of Pentheus solidifies the notion of "the mind as female-like, vessel-like, passive, entered by emotion from outside." (Padel 42) Pentheus' mind, his kardia, becomes passive and malleable. It is penetrated by Dionysus, who implants the seed of Bacchic revelry. Pentheus adopts the costume of his mother and aunts. The madness of Dionysus, however, operates differently from that of the Furies. The new god inverts the established blood-motif of Aeschylus: "spilt blood summons madness" becomes "madness summons spilt blood." Insanity now works primarily as an agent of divine punishment, and those under its influence are enacting celestial prerogative. Dionysian madness is the "presentation of passion in a violent inner movement, expressed in violent outward action." (Padel 175) Indeed, the madness of Agave is surmisable as a monstrous birthing, as she literally and figuratively brings out the innards of her son with her own emotional frenzy. After the ordeal she cradles Pentheus in her arms: her maternal instinct has never been more apparent (and perverted) than in the Bacchae's final stages.
The final image of Pentheus' lengthy emasculation at the hands of Dionysus is the youth astride a phallic pine tree the god has complete mastery over:
The resulting sexual climax is expressed through sparagmos and omophagia. After the tree is reduced to impotency, Pentheus' demise occurs as prophesied by his enemy:
This perverted return to foetal origins exemplifies Pentheus' steady masculine devaluation. Pentheus is revealed as "defenceless against the temptation of a return to the womb." (Kott 224) Cradled in the embrace of Agave, Pentheus returns to Thebes lacking, in a literal sense, the body that was the source of his warrior's pride. With only his head surviving, his remains are denied a heroic (and male) demise and subsequent burial: Pentheus is the only unburied corpse in all Greek tragedy.
Agamemnon undergoes a much more traditional emasculation. His marital bed is supplanted blood-enemy Aegisthus, his death is by his wife's hand. The King's masculinity becomes an object of ridicule: he is a cuckold, murdered by his adulterous wife.
Clytemnestra now mocks his virility, which takes, in his death throes, the form of a vein
It seeps back into the Earth and smothers the jubilant Clytemnestra, who exults in her victory and taunts Agamemnon's masculinity. Here, it has been assimilated into the natural feminine order:
Clytemnestra, like Dionysus in the Bacchae, is the active agent of a tragic hero's destruction. Internal trauma is pre-requisite to tragic demise, yet the moment of downfall is always catalysed though outside machinations. It may seem self-defeating to suggest madness was a feminine affliction, whilst presenting it as both an internal and external force. Yet linking the inner and outer are the eyes, the means by which the internal views the external. Madness enters through them: "Evil is more in the world than in human beings. It enters from outside... the world's violence penetrating the human exterior." (Padel 178) The eyes are often crucial to the state of tragic madness. Individuals, such as Agave, commit monstrous acts because they cannot "see." Seeing incorrectly is a pre-requisite to mistaken identity and the principle tragedy of the Bacchae. Anagnorisis for Agave marks the end of the rapture. During the ritual dismembering of her son "her eyes were empty, she was senseless" (Bagg 417), yet the clearing of her vision is an important prelude of her return to sanity.
For Orestes and Pentheus, the principle male victims of insanity in the Oresteia and Bacchae, it is this recognition that is fundamental precipitator to their torment. Pentheus' change in perception occurs when he sees double, "two suns on fire in heaven," (Bagg 408) after submitting to Dionysian revelry. In a Bacchic revelation he perceives the god's true form, a bull. Orestes is ostracised and isolated figure because he perceives what others do not. The Trojan chorus think him maddened by blood-lust. Yet Aeschylus proves otherwise in the final part of the trilogy when he places the Furies directly on stage. It is Orestes' vindication to those who previously thought him to be dreaming:
For Aeschylus, true perception is only granted to those marked out by the Furies for blood-vengeance. Orestes has to empirically witness the reality of the Furies in order to be affected by the madness they inflict. Similarly, Dionysus must also reveal himself to his enemy before his destruction. This change in perception is vital because it is primarily responsible for splitting the male from the public body he previously held ascendancy over. The end result in both plays is the same, with the individual segregated by the communal majority he was once head of. And to isolate a male and then strip him of his social standing is to emasculate him.
Madness originates from Olympus and Gaia, and indeed Greek ideas of masculine and feminine did not just partition humanity: the Classical world-view extended gender into the realm of the natural and divine. Sexual conflict between male Sky and female Earth would manifest itself in the personified divinities of early-Greek creationism. The theme of emasculation is introduced even here: Zeus castrates his father and casts his genitals from heaven. The blood that spatters the ground gives birth to the Furies, the "hounds of Lyssa" (madness). The weakening of the male through the symbolic overflow of blood onto Earth is a notion Aeschylus expounds further. The Choephori comment
The birth of such monstrous creatures is presaged by murder and catalysed by blood. Earth in Greek tragedy is explicitly feminine. Her effect on the male is consistent with the emasculative forces she harbours (in the Oresteia, specifically the Furies.) As Padel notes, a hero's
Furies and Earth are both similar in their ability to enfeeble the heroic male through the draining of his blood. Their vampirism is triggered through the blood shed as a result of murder. Indeed, the Furies' relationship with Earth is iterated many times in Aeschylus. Similarly the maenad train's symbiotic relationship with nature is expressed by the messenger (Bagg 399) in the Bacchae.
After she kills her husband, Clytemnestra is told by the male chorus "You've sown and you'll reap."(Harrison 41) They are right: feed Earth blood and it will bear revenge. Madness and it's consequence (murder) establish a cyclic harvest, with the seed of blood yielding a further crop of vengeance. Clytemnestra breeds her own destruction, the snake-son that emerges from her uterus: Orestes is his mother's madness manifest. Earth harbours in her own womb the Furies that will pursue Orestes. These gorgon-like creatures are notable for reviving the serpent motif through their hair, a mass of "Snakes coiled within snakes" (Morshead 109).
Snakes are also recurring in Theban genealogy. Prior to founding Thebes, the progenitor of the city, Cadmus,
Pentheus' father Echion "was snakeborn" (Bagg 424), one of the men harvested from the crop of snake-teeth sown. At the Bacchae's finale, the male lineage of Thebes is erased. With Cadmus' bloodline defunct, the old ex-king is banished with the knowledge that he himself will metamorphose into a serpent, and finally be immortalised in his bestial form. He will cease to behave as a rational male, and assume the role of maddened, destructive animal. To change Cadmus to a snake is to emasculate him fully. The play ends with him as an aged social outcast. The death of his grandson has eradicated his line and rendered him impotent. Cadmus is the male who acquiesces to Dionysus, yet is still punished along with those who resist him.
Snakes are emblematic with the feminine in both the natural and demonic spheres, as the chorus of Bacchante's assert:
The Bacchae's descriptions of a seeming Elysium on Cithaeron contain the play's most striking images of the snake-motif. Earth, as female, embodies many of the hostilities to the masculine ideal: she drinks the blood of warriors, murdered kings and libations. She provides Bacchante's with wells of milk and honey. And though the scenes of pastoral provision by Bacchus for his maenads herald a return to the ancient Golden Age, disturbing emasculative forces are lurking beneath the rural idyll. Cithaeron seems an ideal milieu for masculine voyeurism, and the shepherds
They note, however, the snakes wound "like belts around each woman" (Bagg 399) and maenad wands that drip honey "in sweet threads from their wands." (Bagg 399) Milk oozes "fresh and white" (Bagg 399) from the raked earth. One maenad enters the earth (womb-like and feminine, as previously discussed), with her thyrsis;
With their phallic wands the Bacchante's seemed to have acquired a principle emblem of masculinity. This particular maenad is now androgynous, or at least, she can fulfil all of the social functions traditionally upheld by the male. She is farmer of the earth, and as the shepherds soon find, rapturous defender of her sisters: she renders the notion of the male provider obsolete.
It is also the feminine invested in the natural world and it's miscellany that is diminutive of the male tragic hero. The few well-placed props in Aeschylus and Euripides are manifest emasculation. They are reductive of status and emblematic of an individual's peripetia. Noteworthy objects include the dress and wig of Pentheus, the red carpet Clytemnestra lays as welcome-mat for her husband and the trammel she casts over him in the act of murder.
The net is the product of weaving, a pastime denoting domestic fidelity and obedience. Semele's sisters wove before Dionysus ensnared them in his frenzy. Agave declares "I quit my loom and found more serious work" (Bagg 422). Now she and her sisters are as "netted birds, caught up in sex." (Bagg 410) Upon returning home, Agamemnon has never been more secure in his masculine ascendancy: his monarchical supremacy is restored replete with the military glory Troy's destruction endows upon his reputation. He journeys back to his wife with Cassandra as his sexual trophy. In all respects, politically, militarily and (in the realm of the domestic) sexually, Agamemnon is the Alpha Male. Yet the loom that has just provided him with a crimson-floored victory parade (bestowing on him the same privileges as an immortal) is to cloak him almost immediately afterwards in a "rich, flowing doom-robe." (Harrison 41) Clytemnestra has subverted a traditional emblem of feminine domestic obedience into an object with emasculative properties. Both the manner of Agamemnon's death and his subsequent burial are heroically reductive: killed in his own house by his wife at the feast held to celebrate his glorious return, and buried (not burnt), so that his remains are assimilated into the feminine Earth.
The flowing hair of Dionysus is central to his femininity. Pentheus fixates upon the stranger's "delicate curls" (Bagg 389), which Dionysus identifies himself as a holy symbol of power. Modern readers may equate the ensuing narrative with the biblical story of Sampson and Delilah; a man enfeebled by feminine deceit, symbolised by the removal of his sanctified hair. The golden locks of Bacchus are similarly emblematic of Pentheus' heroic decline. The wig is perhaps the most brilliant example of an emasculative prop which during it's travels indicates the steady degeneration of Pentheus' character. First cut ruthlessly from the stranger's head by the prince, Pentheus proceeds to wear the maenad wig Dionysus provides. As he practices dancing inside the palace, a ringlet falls out of place: in adjusting the lock of hair, Dionysus becomes paternal carer of his enemy, whilst Pentheus is paedomorphic in his dependence:
The Messenger who relays his death to the audience notes how, in an attempt to shatter his maenad illusion, Pentheus
The youth is fully infantilised at the play's climax, when Agave enters with his severed head, where she mistakes Pentheus' wig for the long mane of a lion:
In the Bacchae, impersonation is madness. It is a concept synonymous with Dionysus, god of the theatre. In putting on the maenad costume, Pentheus is substituting flagrant valour for feminine subterfuge. Pentheus' transvestism is emasculation in the theatrical and meta-theatrical sense. Donning the costume is an act that assimilates him fully into the Dionysian realm of theatrical mimesis, metamorphosis and trickery:
Pentheus' elaborate transformation adds another lattice to his identity on stage: he is now an actor playing a man playing a woman. Pentheus submits fully to the notion of performance: "the god charms him with the possibility of... being a spectator." (Foley 208) But Pentheus instead "becomes a spectacle and participant, where the god alone remains a spectator." (Foley 212) Indeed, Pentheus is soon obsessed with his own display: he practices dancing like a maenad in the palace and inquires how the women hold their wands. He is enraptured by the role-play, and wishes to be seen purely in imitative terms. He asks Dionysus "Tell me who I look life. Like mother? Or my aunts?" (Bagg 408) The last vestiges of Pentheus' masculine identity are gone. As the dress-wearing youth remarks, "You're changing me" (Bagg 404). It is significant that Pentheus now leaves Thebes as a stranger, and desires to "walk through Thebes without being seen" (Bagg 404): social humiliation is anathema to the tragic hero. Yet Pentheus' last vestiges of masculinity are gone when he changes his mind, instead asking to be publicly paraded around the city: "Show me off through the heart of Thebes" he asks. "I want them all to see" (Bagg 410).
This is the enduring image of madness in Greek tragedy: the impetuous youth seduced by the feminine allure of the outside stranger. Pentheus defunct in terms of sexual potency, political control and social standing. The male interior of the mind destroyed by the female exterior of the god and his natural world. And finally the impending catastrophe ordained by divinity, enabled by male irrationality and enacted through female vessels, i.e. the Bacchante's.