For political playwrights and theatre groups, Realism's manifesto proved irreconcilable to their own doctrine. The inadequacies of a realist form stem chiefly from it's early inception in the 19 th century, where it garnered artistic credibility because of the emergence of strict social and natural ideologies that supported it. The theoretical kudos inferred from the works of Marx, Darwin and Taine fostered such momentum for Realism that it became (and remains) the dominant mode of artistic presentation in theatre. Yet a theory (invariably linked with the Naturalistic movement) that espouses material truth, and the stressed importance of an essentially deterministic natural formation was to be largely rejected by creators of political theatre. It is easy to understand why: the contradictions between the realist and political doctrines are varied and problematic. Creators of political theatre are essentially unable to reconcile a medium that triumphs clinical observation, a Darwinist rationale and a scientific dogma to one that, in essence, concerns cultural intervention, community action and ideological transference (outlined in Kershaw: The Politics of Performance. )
Early examples of realism concern powerless, trapped figures regimented into their suffering by the prescribed determinations of callous natural and social formations. Such characters (Miss Julie, Oswald, Hedda Gabler) have little escape, except through withdrawing completely from the natural order by suicide. Yet though the plays this
essay will eventually move to discuss (Sarah Kane's Blasted and Theatre Workshop's Oh! What a Lovely War) present the effects of socially fabricated tragedies on the lives of individual people, there is hope in both pieces for future amelioration. To posit an alternative is a chief characteristic of political plays, even those portraying dystopic and nightmarish societies. For political and social structure (unlike the natural order) is both mutable and human. And the presentation of such systems must always therefore contain the innate possibility of alternative goodness, however minutely manifest such hopes may be.
Contextualising Theatre Workshop's departure from social-realism reveals a series of events that fatally undermined public belief in the supremacy of science. Artistic faith in science's ability to act as a beacon of social progress was seriously damaged by the advent and subsequent use of atomic weaponry. Intellectual traitors (akin to Brecht's Galileo) had placed science firmly in the hands of the state: it seemed no longer a scholarly tool utilised to alleviate social ailments but a potential annihilator of mankind. Significant 1960's movements such as CND and the anti-Vietnam War campaign perceived science as the instrument of total human destruction. With science discredited, there was a need for alternative (and anti-realist) forms of staging.
But Realism, it seems, was such established theatrical dogma that to subvert it's sacrosanct formal properties was tantamount to a very grave theatrical perversion. The vehement critical and public reaction to Sarah Kane's Blasted seemed to stem not from 'scenes of masturbation, fellatio, frottage, micturition, defecation - ah, those old familiar faeces! - homosexual rape, eye gouging and cannibalism' (Billington, Michael: Guardian newspaper, 20/01/95) so much as from an utter incomprehension of the play's non-realistic format:
Critics failed to comprehend the play's structure because it transcended the single "reality" that they were used to. Kane remarked in an interview that "the best art is subversive in form and content... I suspect that if Blasted had been a piece of social realism it wouldn't have been so harshly received." (Kane, qtd. Saunders: 12) A common complaint was that two polemical civil states, war and peace, seemed to coexist in the play. Certainly this is true: in the hotel, room service and telephones all operate normally. Outside football matches proceed with regularity and the press continues to print daily tabloid stories. Yet in our global society, such chaos and order is separated only by country borders: Kane removes any tangible boundaries and places war and peace side-by-side.
In many ways Blasted is a palimpsest: underlying themes rise to the surface through the externalising effects of the explosion, which both literally and figuratively inverts the play's contents. For Ian particularly, objects already mentioned before the mortar attack reverse meaning: children (he previously mocks Cate's spastic brother) become a source of survival. A symbols of his power, a gun, is degradingly put up his anus. Gin (the cause of his rotting liver) becomes an elixir of life at the play's finale. The newspapers, thrown casually onto the bed by Ian in the first scene, are testament to his wretchedness during his blindness when he uses them to clean up his faeces.
Ian's actions are also the catalyst of the play's deterioration. Cate's simple statement "You're a nightmare" (II:33) prefigures Blasted's eruption of violence. Indeed, one could read the Soldier as a facet of Ian's own persona, which is only able to materialise because of the previously committed rape: the seed becomes the tree. Such assumptions are supported by the lack of a third party, or witness, to the Soldier/Ian dialogue on stage. When Cate returns she never acknowledges the presence of a body, she merely 'steps over the body of the Soldier  with a glance
.' (IV: 51) Linking a rape in a Leeds hotel with the wider effects of civil war is one of Blasted's foremost intentions. Such comparisons are enabled principally through the decay in formal structure:
The seeming irrationality of violence in Blasted is accompanied by no attempt at comprehension: such a dilemma is left to the audience. Yet for Littlewood and Theatre Workshop, rejection of the realistic format assumed a different motivation: a struggle to understand and render legible the confusing atrocity of the First World War. The public failure to understand why the conflict happened was resolved by Littlewood's company, who through the circus medium of the Pierrot clowns renders the conflict in term of class, economy and the tyranny of the state. Contrastingly, where Kane's structure degrades to prevent ideological explanation (instead focusing primarily on the audience as witnesses), Oh! What a lovely war is deliberately anti-realist to clarify the war's events in terms of an overriding socialist dogma. Theatre Workshop was operating under the radical precept famously established by Clifford Odets: new theatre "should shoot bullets."
Kane's work, in contrast, operates in the cultural context of a post-modern society eschewed from overriding ideologies and the simple problems that accompany such doctrines:
Kane has a preoccupation with the proliferation of violence and the perpetuation of abuse. In the end, though, Blasted is a play fundamentally concerned with war and hope, and the form and the characters bear the brunt of war's consequences. It is in the play's structure that the bomb resides, and it is here that the effects of the mortar attack are wreaked most savagely. The expensive hotel room in Leeds is literally blown apart, and becomes torture chamber, toilet, grave and eventually a metaphorical hell. Accompanying the physical havoc on set is the steady disintegration of form: "we move from socio-realism to surrealism, to expressionism." (Kenyon, qtd. Saunders: 40)
Littlewood discarded a realistic interpretation of the conflict, modelling her actors on the French Pierrot instead of soldiers. By defamiliarising the actor's costume, Littlewood substituted the multitudinous anonymity of soldier-khaki with the tragicomic clown persona, whilst still retaining a degree of era authenticity ("Pierrots were all the go in those days." (Littlewood, preface: ix)) Her principle theatrical instruments were the M.C (and the aura of improvisation he exuded) and the play's episodic structure. These combined to create an ensemble carnival atmosphere. As Spinetti, the original M.C, notes,
The production assumed the form and structure of a Pierrot show: the short, episodic "acts" portraying the progressive absurdity of the war "game":
Indeed, it is the most slapstick and potentially ridiculous scene at the play's climax that becomes the most poignant. We know that the conflict reached similar levels of insanity. The mechanised slaughter of trench warfare is superbly represented by the clownish impersonations of sheep by advancing soldiers:
The form of Oh! What a lovely war had to reflect the manner in which the war was carried out, and so it is necessarily farcical, bleakly comical and absurd. Similarly, the dramatic form of Blasted owes itself to Kane's experiences and reactions to the portrayal of violence in former Yugoslavia. The atrocities in Bosnia, along with the response to the catastrophe shown by the British media, were to contextualise the play's violence and inspire the fractured form. The structure of the play alters with the entrance of the Soldier: the narrative dislocates and becomes a series of tableau, Cate disappears, the room explodes. Kane's response was an immediate intervention that came literally during the conception of the play. Blasted is performing a vital role that the press were unwilling and unable to fulfil, that of Witness. It is a function Ian as journalist neglects. In averting his eyes, Ian inadvertedly becomes a victim and his sight is taken from him. The disintegration of the play's structure, which allows for a man's eyes to be sucked out, bitten off and eaten, thus effects the most important discourse between the play and audience. The burden of witnessing passes from Ian (a responsibility he shirked) to those watching: as bystanders to the play's actions they assume moral culpability for their perpetuation. To abnegate moral responsibility is unthinkable, for the consequences of such a course of action are visibly enacted upon Ian.
Yet it is because of this that Kane can also be labelled a 'realist', though not in the conventional sense. Though she shares none of realism's formal properties, she does possess a similar desire to hold the mirror up to her audiences. In perceiving Blasted's characters, the public are witnessing fractured elements of themselves. Blasted cannot be fully divorced from reality because it relies on the fundamental assumption that an audience will recognise the action on stage as real and desire it changed. Kane is forcing her audience to "face up to reality" whilst depicting events through a structure that is bewildering in its lack of meaning. Such presentation serves to quicken the audience's realisation that the play's amoral action must be stopped.
Kane's emphasis on an illusory image which the audience must recognise as themselves has led some European critics to regard her notions of reality as Lacanian. For Kane, as with Lacan, reality exists as an overriding concept, "always present but continually mediated through the imaginary and the symbolic." 
Blasted appropriates elements of Lacanian ideology in it's presentation of a dystopic image which, whilst deliberately anti-realistic, is still representational of our society. For Kane, like Lacan, it is society's recognition and subsequent identification with an exterior, non-real, image that is crucial:
This identification with image is most prominent in scene five, during the montage of Ian at his most universal and vulnerable. He is reduced to basic and pitiable human functions: a figure alone, defecating, starving, having a nightmare, crying. Communal identification with Ian is enabled through the quick sequence of short tableau: the play's form allows for the entry of a sustained succession of "lights up/down" images. A linear narrative and realist form is not compatible with such theatrical techniques.
Blasted's montage scenes acknowledge Baudrillard's post-modern obsession with the Sign, a phenomenon that began to manifest itself even in 1963: essential for a production of Littlewood's Oh! What a lovely war! is
The images of trench misery undermine the fatuous optimism of the songs. What instead emerges is the gritty tenacity of the common soldier and moments of bleak, yet uplifting, humour:
The unremitting montage of violent acts Blasted's anti-realist format allows reflects the similar "staging" of atrocities in Yugoslavia. Acts of barbarity and genocide committed by the Modern State are often executed in a flourish of theatricality, and Kane is responding both to the sustained spectacle of violence in Bosnia and to the failure of television to capture the horror of such events. Kane's idea was to bring the televised violence into the brutal and immediate milieu of the theatre, where she presented it in a form that was both frightening and unfamiliar. One of the failures of a "realistic" interpretation of genocide and torture was that 90's audiences were rapidly desensitised to human suffering that they could detach themselves from. The medium of television enabled viewers to literally "switch off" the scenes of distant violence reconstituted on their TV screens via media coverage. Blasted abandons realism because a performance that granted it's audience the privilege of a fourth wall (in the manner of television) would alleviate their position of responsibility: as voyeuristic onlookers, rather than inactive bystanders, their moral responsibility is diminished, and to remain inactive becomes acceptable.
Kane likewise rejects traditional historical documentation - for to catalogue something is not necessarily to witness it. In Blasted this takes the form of Ian's hackneyed journalistic formula, rendering incomprehensible cruelties into the digestible legibility of a tabloid article. The bewildering structure of the play reflects the source of it's disintegration (acts of rape and genocide), which are themselves baffling and traumatising. The revisionism of Blasted overwrites orthodox modes of historical recording with the non-realistic response of the artist. This is because traumatic and cruel events are beyond our regular powers of cognition and reason (the empirical observation of 6 million murdered Jews cannot impart the horror and impact of the Holocaust):
Oh! What a lovely war attempts to revive the flagging sense of collective memory that was created through the trauma of the Great War. Though meticulously researched from academic and historical sources, even more vital was the input cast and audience provided. Each told individual stories that when collated formed a tapestry of national consciousness:
What Theatre Workshop achieved in Oh! What a lovely war was nothing short of historical revisionism. It was a reinterpretation that returned the war's significance to the working-class Tommy. Fundamentally the play concerns reclamation; of giving a voice back to the forgotten soldier classes. Victor Spinetti confirms in an Afterward that "Lovely War wasn't just a show. It was a revelation." (Afterward: 93) Littlewood recollects how further material for the show was provided by a communal sharing by the audience of their "memories and mementoes, even lines of dialogue which sometimes turned up in the show." (Littlewood: 688)
Both play's hold a belief that only through artistic representation can the witness/audience be made to fully understand the consequences of a catastrophic event. Yet it is also pertinently clear that
What develops logically is that traumatic events must be portrayed in a format that reflects their ineffability which is so irreconcilable to a logical world-view. The vast array of violent spectacle in Blasted is often stylised aesthetically by production companies. Red material frequently replaces the blood from Ian's eyes. Like the sub-text of Blasted's dialogue and the seeming incoherency of it's structure, the play's poetic violence forces the audience to look beneath the exterior proceedings to address their source. To continue further the "seed-tree" allegory formulated by Kane, Blasted shows us the seed of violence, and it shows us the tree. After Blasted we are left with the responsibility of discovering, and removing, the roots of such violent externalisations in ourselves.