Franciscella tularensis was first noted for its plague like symptoms in rodents in 1911. Usually the organism remains in natural reservoirs involving arthropods, lagomorphs and rodents. When humans disrupt these lifecycles they contract F. tularensis leading to the manifestation of tularemia. Less then ten organisms are required for tularemia to be contracted, which has generated significant scientific interest, especially for its potential use as a biological weapon.
This essay broadly describes the current information available concerning F. tularensis, focusing particularly on its virulence and how tularemia manifests itself in humans.
The history of the discovery of Franciscella and the impact of its ecology are briefly examined leading to the discussion of its transmission, virulence and treatment. The essay concludes by summarising why F. tularensis is so very virulent and the subsequent problems that this poses.
Franciscella tularensis was first described in 1837 as 'hare meat poisoning' by Homma-Soken. Soken observed a connection between the consumption of hares and the onset of a condition characterised by lymphadeonopathy. In 1911 an outbreak of a plague-like disease occurred in Tulare, California USA. McCoy investigated this outbreak and failed to isolate the causative organism of plague on agar, which was initially believed to be the culprit. McCoy concluded that a new bacterium had been discovered and it was named 'Bacterium tularense' in 1912.
Francis and Mayne, (1921), determined that 'Bacterium tularense' was the origin of hare-fever, deerfly fever and the rodent plague-like disease seen in Tulare. In 1947 Dorofeev determined that 'Bacterium tularense' was a new genus of bacteria which has since been confirmed by 16S rRNA sequencing, he named the genus Franciscella.
Four subspecies of F. tularensis exist as demonstrated by Table 1, the subspecies and relative virulence of F. tularensis.
F. tularensis tularensis strain Schu S4 is the most virulent of the subspecies with an infectious dose of less then ten organisms. It is estimated to cause 70% of tularemia cases in humans in the US 2.
After numerous tularemia outbreaks in Europe during the Second World War, Japan, America and the Soviet Union observed the damage this organism could inflict upon enemy troops and began to study it as a possible biological weapon. America and the Soviet Union began to stockpile biological weapons including those capable of disseminating F. tularensis well into the 1960's. Thankfully, America destroyed its stockpiles in 1973 but the drive to research F. tularensis unknown virulence characteristics has never ceased. Such research hopes to better prepare the military, medical personnel and civilians if a threat of a biological agent arises.
F. tularensis is the causative agent of a bacterial zoonosis disease termed tularemia. It is a small gram negative coccobacillus as illustrated by Figure 1, the morphology of F. tularensis
This pleomorphic organism is non motile, surrounded by a lipid capsule and an intracellular pathogen. It is a saprophyte meaning that it is able to utilise decaying organic matter and survive most conditions including low temperatures, moist soil, water and even straw. F. tularensis is endemic across North America, most of Europe and, Asia and has only been isolated in the northern hemisphere between latitudes 30 and 71 north as shown by Figure 2, the distribution of F. tularensis.
F. tularensis persists in the environment in two lifecycles both involving biting arthropods. The first lifecycle is by far the most common in causing infection in humans. The tick-lagomorph cycle predominates in North America. The incidence of infection peaks in June and November when tick populations increase and when humans come into contact with lagomorphs and their ectoparasites respectively. Figure 3, the tick lagomorph cycle demonstrates how humans can easily disrupt this lifecycle and become infected with  F. tularensis.
The second lifecycle involves the ingestion of contaminated water or a bite from an infected mosquito. This lifecycle is predominantly found in Europe and is known to involve rodents more so then lagomorphs. Epidemics of tularemia are associated with this lifecycle of F. tularensis and are known to correlate with an increase in the wild rodent and lagomorph populations. Figure 4, the rodent-mosquito cycle demonstrates how humans can contract this disease.
F. tularensis is found in many animals in the environment. It is suspected that no primary reservoir exists as 100 species of mammals or more, 50 species of arthropod and many amphibian and fish species have been shown by Burroughs et al (1945)5 to be naturally infected. It is evident that F. tularensis has many hosts in which it can persist in the environment. F. tularensis is also known to be able to survive and replicate inside amoeba in a similar fashion to Legionella. Protozoa are found in water and as these organisms are similar to macrophages, it is suggestible that F. tularensis is able to replicate inside them thus persisting in the aquatic environments for up to 90 days.
F. tularensis is able to survive outside the host for a number of days, in straw for 192, rabbit meat for 31 and carcases for 133 indicating that the source of an outbreak of F. tularensis would be difficult to determine and eradicate.
The worldwide incidence of tularemia is unknown, possibly due to under-diagnosis through inexperience and underreporting and possibly because it tends to occur in rural areas. Outbreaks of tularemia in the US have been declining steadily since the 1940's as demonstrated by Figure 5, the decline in the cases of tularemia.
Outbreaks are associated with the tick-lagomorph lifecycle as shown by Figure 4. A decline in the incidence of this disease is due to susceptible individuals such as hunters and trappers becoming more aware of the disease. The decline in the practice of hunting and eating hare is another contributor. Figure 5 and Figure 6 demonstrate the decline in the number of tularemia cases.
Generally the USA has 0.05-0.15 cases per 100,000 people on average 7. Outbreaks of tularemia in Europe are associated with contaminated water supplies leading to dramatic outbreaks. For example in Sweden, the annual number of reported cases of disease in humans over the period from 1973-1985 ranged from less than five cases to over 500 4.
Although F. tularensis is rare, it is contacted by humans when we interrupt F. tularensis natural lifecycle. F. tularensis is non motile and unable to penetrate the skin or mucous membrane so it requires a vector such as ticks, mosquitoes or deerflies. The most common vectors appear to be the ticks such as Dermacentor reticulates and Ixodes ricinus and the mosquitoes Aedes, Culex and Anopheles species 4. Tularemia can be contracted through undercooked infected meat, entry through broken skin, urine contaminated water, inhalation of contaminated dust, bites from vectors and eye infections from contaminated skin.
The symptoms of tularaemia can differ depending upon the route of transmission. Ulceroglandular tularemia is the most common form of the disease. A tick bite, normally to the lower limb, transmits F. tularensis into the host. After three to five days of incubation, F. tularensis multiplies locally causing the surrounding tissue to become raised and inflamed. These papules often ulcerate and form an eschar. F. tularensis then disseminates to the local lymph nodes causing the manifestation of flu-like symptoms. Macrophages stimulated by F. tularensis antigens activate T-cells causing lymphadeonopathy, similar to the bubo caused by Yersinia pestis. Common symptoms include 39-40.6C fever, malaise and headaches. Glandular tularemia produces similar symptoms but no ulcer forms at the inoculation site. Figure 7, the different types and clinical symptoms of tularemia, demonstrates the generalised symptoms of tularemia.
Gastrointestinal tularemia is contracted from the consumption of infected meat or water. Diarrhoea, stomach pains, vomiting, acute bowel ulceration and flu-like symptoms are known to manifest.
Oropharyngeal tularemia is an infection in the tonsils causing them to become inflamed and a creamy pseudomembrane to form.
Pneumonic tularemia is the most sever form of the disease, especially if caused by F. tularensis tularensis. Symptoms, as shown by Figure 7, manifest but can persist for weeks and months if antibiotic intervention does not occur. Often prostration, hypotension, septicaemia and death can occur with this form of tularemia.
A relapse of tularaemia is known to occur if the individual concerned has been frequently exposed to tularemia. In such a case granulomas can form in which the organism is surrounded by cells and macrophages preventing its destruction by phagocytosis or antibiotics which can result in latent infections.
The strain of tularemia determines the mortality rate of tularemia. F. tularensis tularensis (type A) can cause 35% or more mortality rate particularly in the pneumonic form of the disease but declines to 5-6% in cases of cutaneous tularemia emphasising the importance of the route of infection. F. tularensis palaeartica (type B) can cause a mortality rate of 5-15% if gastrointestinal tularemia is contracted. F. tularensis novicida only causes disease in immunocompromised people.
The virulence of an organism refers to the ability for the pathogen concerned to cause disease. F. tularensis is known to be highly virulent as it is able to cause tularemia with a low infectious dose. However, although the organism demonstrates some typical virulence characteristics, not all of them appear to determine the virulence of the organism.
Upon infection of a host, for example from a tick bite, F. tularensis will begin to grow and replicate locally, often forming an encrusted ulcer at the site of infection. As the organism is non motile, it disseminates via the lymph until it reaches the local lymph nodes. During these early stages of infection, the bacteria must resist lysis from complement and find a suitable cell in which to replicate. The lipid capsule prevents lysis by complement and phagocytosis by macrophages. Macrophages are activated by the foreign F. tularensis antigens and travel to the lymph nodes where they stimulate T-cells to produce antibodies.
F. tularensis was shown to be an intracellular pathogen 3, when samples were taken from infected mice, PCR was used to amplify the F. tularensis gene target and determine where it could be found in the sample. The bacteria were only identified in the blood sample containing macrophages confirming the prediction that F. tularensis was an intracellular pathogen. Upon encountering a macrophage, F. tularensis will enter via the cytochalasin B insensitive pathway as the presence of the lipid capsule prevents phagocytosis. Usually, upon infection a macrophage will be activated by CD4 T cells which produce cytokines. This causes the vesicles containing the F. tularensis to fuse with the lysosome in order for a respiratory burst to occur. F. tularensis is somehow able to prevent this vesicle-lysosome fusion. Its genome encodes an acid phosphatase enzyme which is capable to preventing this fusion and the resulting respiratory burst. The respiratory burst is the release of a mixture of oxidising chemicals such as nitrous oxide and hydrogen peroxide. It is thought that F. tularensis replicates within acidified vesicles known as endosomes within the macrophages 3. Recent research suggests that these acidic conditions can help obtain iron from molecules such as transferring indicating that iron is important for F. tularensis growth.
Studies concluded by Golovlior et al
3 determined that four proteins of different masses appear to have greater abundances when F. tularensis grows in macrophages. In particular, a protein of mass of 23-KDa was shown 3 to be able to inhibit the respiratory burst employed by macrophages to rid themselves of intracellular pathogens.
F. tularensis inhibits the release of IL-1 and TNF - along with other cytokines from the T-helper cells. This prevents inflammation and the attraction of other immune cells to the site of infection. The 23-KDa protein released by F. tularensis inhibited the NF-KB system preventing the cytokine release. Another virulence factor is encoded by the gene minD. The 29-KDa protein it encodes is suspected to act as an ion pump for toxic radicals 4. MinD is therefore able to pump put free radicals when a macrophage is activated and a respiratory burst triggered.
Baron and Nano identified genes mglA and mglB. They are an operon which regulated the release of the four proteins which appear to be unregulated when F. tularensis replicates in macrophages 3. It is thought that these genes are shock genes, stimulated by the reduction in nutrients.
After F. tularensis has replicated, apoptosis of the macrophage occurs by lysis of the cell due to the sheer numbers of F. tularensis which then disseminate until another macrophage is found.
It appears that tularemia cannot be resolved by the action of the immune system alone. Only if infected macrophages are stimulated early enough foe example if alveolar macrophages are stimulated by INF-Y before the F. tularensis can synthesise the acid phosphatase, they can be eliminated by a respiratory burst. As such, antibiotic treatments are required.
F. tularensis is relatively rare in western countries where individuals are unlikely to come into contact with the bacterium and medical personnel are unlikely to be trained to recognise the symptoms. Tularemia is diagnosed if evidence suggests an individual may have been in contact with ticks, rodents or lagomorphs in countries where the disease is endemic. Recent threats of biological warfare could also suggest manifestation of tularemia if a relatively high number of individuals are admitted with similar symptoms. Thankfully, F. tularensis is easily distinguished from Bacillus anthracis and Yersinia pestis by staining and examination by microscopy. An immunoassay test will indicate that an individual has tularemia as antibodies against the bacterium will increase by four times. Such a titer of 1:160 or greater is confirmation that the individual has tularemia. Although PCR could be used, Grunow et al reported that some human samples contain substances capable of inhibiting PCR therefore as such it is not a reliable diagnostic method.
The other method of diagnosis is through the culture of F. tularensis on cysteine-glucose-blood agar. It produces distinctive colonies as shown by Figure 8, a culture of F. tularensis.
Tularemia responds well to antibiotic therapy. Streptomycin is the drug of choice for adults and should be administered at 7.5-15mg/kg intramuscularly twice daily for ten days 7. It works by inhibiting protein synthesis by binding to the 30S subunit of the ribosome in F. tularensis. Children should also be administered with streptomycin but at a higher dose of 15/20mg/kg intramuscularly twice daily for ten days 7. Other antibiotics such as gentamicin tetracycline and chloramphenicol can be used but are less affected.
Tularemia is not known to be transmitted between people so isolation is not required and neither are post-exposure antibiotics although if a suspected biological attack has occurred, treatment of exposed individuals with doxycycline and ciprofloxacin can be used to ensure tularemia does not manifest. As such, F. tularensis does not seem to be adapted to the human host.
The risk of contracting tularemia can be reduced by a few simple procedures. People inhabiting endemic areas as shown in Figure 2, the distribution of F. tularensis. should always wear protective clothing covering all exposed skin, particularly the legs which are at risk from tick and fly bites. Repellents containing diethyltoluamide and permethrin can also be used as these deter the ticks. Farmers, butchers, hunters and trappers should always take these precautions and always wear face masks when handling lagomorphs, rodents and hay or straw to prevent pneumonic tularemia.
Even though F. tularensis is a category three organism which should be handled with utmost care, it still causes laboratory acquired infections. Usually laboratory personnel are vaccinated with F. tularensis tularensis, strain LVS but cases of tularemia have been known to occur even with vaccination. The continuous threat of the use of biological weapons from the Middle East and extremist groups has caused the drive to develop an effective vaccine against F. tularensis to increase. Although strain LVS is capable of inducing significant protection against the bacteria, it does not provide lifelong nor complete immunity. Exposure of previously vaccinated volunteers to 2000 colony forming units or more produced symptoms of tularemia, albeit mild. New research in this area hopes to develop a more effective vaccine and explore vaccination via the respiratory route which appears to be very effective. Such research will not be discussed in this essay.
F. tularensis is one of the most virulent organisms known. It has numerous reservoirs which can never be eradicated from the environment and as such we can never be free from the threat of this pathogen. If dispersed by an aerosol, F. tularensis has the potential to infect thousands of people in the pneumonic form of tularemia, which is the most serious. This combined with a low infectious does will have disastrous consequences. If medical personnel are unable to recognize tularemia and threat it accordingly, resources will be inefficiently used and more importantly deaths can occur.
F. tularensis is so virulent because it is able to evade the immune system effectively. Its lipid capsule prevents phagocytosis and lysis by complement, the acid phosphatase enzyme prevents respiratory burst and is able to inhibit cytokine release by the macrophages. However, the lipopolysaccharide layer of the cell envelope does not act as an endotoxin. This is the extent of the knowledge available concerning the virulence of F. tularensis. One suggestion as to why its virulence characteristics have not been elucidated to is its unique genome. Although F. tularensis is related to other genres, its genome encodes 1,804 open reading frames, 1,289 of which encode proteins of which 413 are unique to Franciscella4. This indicates that F. tularensis may posses many unique genes which may confer unique virulence factors as yet undiscovered and not adapted to the human host. Vital research must therefore occur in order to increase understanding of this pathogen such as how it penetrates the gut in gastrointestinal tularemia.
The use of biological weapons is not a new phenomenon. Japan experimented with biological agents during the world wars, as did Iraq and Iran in the gulf war and most recently anthrax attacks occurred in America in 2001. A real example of the threat and the scale of destruction biological weapons can cause has yet to arise. Even with careful planning and exercises such as the Hanuman Redux Exercise, Louisville Kentucky USA, 2001, nations cannot adequately prepare themselves for biological attacks. The Centre for Disease Control concluded that the Hanuman Redux exercise handled the situation adequately and effectively. Models determined that 200,000 people would have been exposed resulting in 4,800 cases and 1,700 8 deaths and in 1970 the WHO reported that an aerosol dispersal of 50kg of virulent F. tularensis over a metropolitan area with 5 million inhabitants would result in 250,000 incapacitating casualties including 19,000 deaths 9.
With continuous threats from extremist groups and the availability of F. tularensis and information concerning this organism we will always be living in the threat of a natural outbreak or attack from this highly virulent pathogen.