Strain construction involves the transfer of specific alleles or mutations of a gene from one cell to another. There are four main selection approaches to constructing a new strain of bacteria. These are direct selection, co-transduction, transposon tagging and penicillin enrichment.
Direct selection is where if a cell is an auxotroph, you are able to select for the prototroph or drug resistance in other situations.
Co-transduction is the simultaneous transfer of two genetic markers by transduction. Transposon tagging is where you can select for the transfer of a selectable marker if a transposon is next to it. Finally penicillin enrichment is a relatively ineffective technique for increasing the proportion of auxotrophic mutants.
The five strains of bacteria available for strain construction all have mutations in a variety of genes. The information provided concerning the mutated gene endA4 does not explain how this mutation can be isolated. Strain UWB103 has the endA4 mutation rendering it EndA- which the desired strain must be.
As such UWB103 will be chosen as the starting strain.
The phenotypic requirements of the desired new strain must be Trp- Met- Amz- EndA-. It does not matter if drug resistance markers or transposons are present in the final strain. Technically the order in which the desired strain can be constructed does not matter. I have chosen to construct the strain the following way for ease of explanation.
This mutation cannot be directly selected for. The trp genes are co-transducible with the rspL63 marker which encodes streptomycin resistance.
Co-transduction can therefore be used to introduce the trp- phenotype into strain UWB103.
Strain UWB104 contains the rspL63 marker and the wild type trp genes. When bacteriophage BAZ is grown on strain UWB104, a proportion of the bacteria will incorporate the rspL63 and trp genes onto their capsids.
The resulting lysate should be grown with strain UWB101 on minimal media with streptomycin, glucose and tryptophan. The streptomycin selects for those colonies where the rspL63 gene has been transferred and the tryptophan is to enable those colonies with mutations in the trp genes to survive. A proportion of the colonies will have had the rspL63 gene transferred next to trpA2 mutated gene.
When fresh bacteriophage BAZ is grown on these colonies, some of the bacteriophage will incorporate the rspL63 and trpA2 mutated genes into their capsids. The resulting lysate should be grown with strain UWB103 and plated on minimal media with streptomycin, glucose and tryptophan. A proportion of the cells will have had the rspL63 and trpA2 gene co-transduced into their genome.
In distinguish between cells which are tryptophan auxotrophs and the prototrophs, replica plating should be performed onto minimal media with glucose and tryptophan and minimal media with glucose. Streptomycin is not required as the transduction of gene rspL63 has previously been selected for. Colonies which only grow on the minimal media with glucose and tryptophan are the required colonies.
These colonies should be re-plated onto minimal media with glucose and tryptophan and designated UWB106. This strain is endA4 sacB6 amzC45 rspL63 trpA2.
This mutation cannot be directly selected for, however, the met and sac genes are co-transducible. Co-transduction should therefore be used to introduce the met- phenotype into strain UWB106.
Strain UWB102 contains a metA7 gene, indicating that it is unable to synthesise methionine but strain UWB102 is able to utilize sucrose which strain UWB106 is unable to do, providing a simple means of selection.
Bacteriophage BAZ should be grown on strain UWB102 and a proportion of bacteriophage will incorporate the wild type sac gene and the metA7 gene into their capsids.
The resulting lysate should be grown with strain UWB106 and plated on minimal media with sucrose, tryptophan and methionine. Any cells where the met genes were not transferred will be unable to utilize sucrose and as such be unable to grow.
To ensure the mutated metA7 genes has been incorporated into strain UWB106, replica plating onto minimal media with sucrose tryptophan and methionine and minimal media with sucrose and tryptophan media. All of the colonies should be technically only grow on minimal media with sucrose tryptophan and methionine.
Such colonies should be picked and re-plated onto fresh minimal media with sucrose, tryptophan and methionine. This strain will be designated UWB107 and is endA4 amzC45 rspL63 trpA2 metA7.
Strain UWB105 contains a pool of insertions of transposon Tn 917 which encodes erythromycin resistance.
Some of the bacterial cells in strain UWB105 will have a transposon inserted next to the amzD46 gene. When bacteriophage BAZ is grown with UWB105, a proportion of the bacteriophage will incorporate the transposon and amzD46 gene incorporated into their capsids.
The resulting lysates should be grown with strain UWB104 as it is the only strain which does not contain a mutation in amz gene cluster. The lysate and UWB104 cells should be plated out on nutrient agar with erythromycin.
The resulting colonies indicate that Tn 917 encoding erythromycin resistance has been transferred onto the bacterial chromosome of strain UWB104.
The resulting blue colonies indicate that the transposon has 'hopped' onto the genome of the bacteria but has not transferred the mutated amzD46 gene into the amz gene cluster.
White colonies indicate that the transposon was inserted near the amzD46 gene and caused its transference onto strain UWB104 genome. These colonies will be designated strain UWB108.
The final strain must be able to produce amazin. In order to convert UWB107 into an amazin producing strain, a back cross on strain UWB108 must be performed.
Bacteriophage BAZ should be grown on strain UWB108. As all the transposons will be located in the amz gene cluster, a proportion of Tn 917 will have inserted near the wild type amzC gene.
The resulting lysate should be grown with strain UWB107 and plated onto nutrient agar and erythromycin. Any resulting white colonies indicate that the Tn 917 transposon had not inserted near the wild type amzC gene and as such did not transfer the gene to strain UWB107.
The resulting blue colonies indicate that the wild type amzC gene was transferred.
A blue colony should be picked and re-plated onto minimal media with sucrose, tryptophan and methionine and designated strain UWB109. This strain is endA4 metA7 trpA7 rspL63 Tn 917 and therefore the strain has a Trp- Met- Amz+ EndA- StrR EryR phenotype. Figure 1 illustrated this process.