The picornaviridae family comprises of a wide range of human and animal pathogens which are classified by their physio-chemical properties.
Bovine Enterovirus, as illustrated below by figure 1 is a picornavirus which is endemic in cattle populations. It is a member of the Enterovirus group of picornavirus and is non-pathogenic to its natural host and humans.
BEV is a class four virus with a single stranded positive sense RNA genome. BEV exhibits a very wide tissue tropism for cell types in vitro which has hampered efforts to determine the cell surface receptor to which its Vp1 capsid protein attaches. The Vp1 protein locks to the receptor and becomes exposed producing a channel enabling its RNA genome to pass into the cell.
In the cytoplasm, the genome is replicated by continually by a gene encoded RNA polymerase. Many RNA polymerase molecules are able to attach to the 3' end of the genome which forms a double stranded intermediate. As continuous replication of the genome occurs the RNA is half away from the genome and newly synthesized RNA by proteins which enables up to five replication complexes to occur at any one time.
The positive sense RNA genome can be translated by host mechanisms to produce a polyprotein which is processed by proteolytic cleavage to yield structural and non structural polypeptides. These then form a 5S structural unit which associates into groups of five to form a 14S pentemer. Twelve of these associate to form a 75S empty capsids into which RNA genomes are packaged.
The capsid and genome are not infectious until VP0 is cleaved to VP2 and VP4 forming an infectious particle which leaves the cell by lysis.
BEV has been shown to be an oncolytic virus (M. Smyth, A. Symonds, S. Brazinova, J. Martin: International Journal of Molecular Medicine 10 49-53 2002) and is therefore being studies to determine its effectiveness as an anti-tumor agent.
When BEV was inoculated into U937 histiocytic lymphoma monocyte-like cells and ZR-75-1 human breast cancer cell lines, it was observed that the virus demonstrated a cytopathic effect around seven hours post infection. Such work described in this paper indicates that BEV should be included for cancer therapy research in the future.
The aim of the experiment is to measure the infectious progeny, intracellular viral RNA and RNA polymerase activity with the view to characterize the progress of BEV infection in BHK21 cells.
The method followed for this experiment was followed exactly as stated in the laboratory manual. However, the draining of the RNA dot plot on 3MM filter paper was not performed for logistic reasons.
Figures 2, 4 and 5 demonstrate the lifecycle of Bovine Enterovirus. From observing these graphs some conclusions can be drawn concerning the BEV lifecycle.
Between zero and one hours after infection, BEV attaches and enters the host cell. This phase is known as the absorption and penetration phase. During these time points, little RNA polymerase activity, intracellular viral RNA and no infectious progeny are present. As intracellular viral RNA begins to increase after one hour into infection, it can be assumed that these phases last roughly an hour long.
There is a time lag between the presence of intracellular viral RNA and the first peak of RNA polymerase activity at four hours as demonstrated by figures 4 and 2 respectively. At approximately four hours, BEV has penetrated the cell and has undergone translation using host cellular components to produce the genome encoded RNA polymerase enzyme and the polyproteins required for effective replication. As such, a peak of intracellular viral RNA and RNA polymerase activity at four hours signifies the initial cycle of BEV genome replication.
Figure 2 demonstrates a second peak in RNA polymerase activity around ten hours into the infection of BHK21 cells but figures 4 and 5 do not demonstrate corresponding peaks at this time period. A possible reason as to why a conflicting result may have occurred is also a possible limitation and therefore source of error for the experiment which will be discussed shortly.
Between four and six hours the amount of intracellular viral RNA decreases within the cells and corresponds to an increase in infectious virus as demonstrated by figure 5. Therefore between four and six hours, the newly synthesized BEV genomes are packaged into empty capsids formed from viral structural proteins translated previously. This would correspond to a decrease in intracellular viral RNA as it would become contained in the capsid which would mature to form infectious progeny.
After six hours into the infection, the BHK21 cells will lyse and release the infectious progeny into the surrounding lysate.
Figure 4 demonstrates a second peak of intracellular RNA is present at seven hours for data set B and eight hours for data set A. A possible explanation for this occurrence is that some BHK21 cells are more efficient at producing BEV progeny and therefore infectious progeny will peak at seven to eight hours for most of the BHK21 cells. The third peak of intracellular viral RNA at ten hours into infection is due to the inefficient BHK21 cells finally enabling BEV genomic replication to occur. This explanation corresponds to the data demonstrated by figure 5. Most of the infectious progeny are released at seven to eight hours into the experiment but infectious virus is still present up to fourteen hours into the experiment for both data sets A and B. As such, although most of the BHK21 cells will be efficient at producing BEV progeny, those which are not will continue to produce infectious progeny releasing them steadily for the remaining time course of the experiment until all the cells are lysed.
A possible reason as to why a second peak of RNA polymerase activity is evident at ten hours, the value for TCID 50 titers at eighteen hours for data set A and a major limitation of the experiment is that different cell lines were used for each of the sampling procedures. Due to time limitations, the experiment was unable to run continuously over an eighteen hour period using the same batch of BHK21 cells. As such, the RNA polymerase activity, intracellular viral RNA and infectious virus data were collected on different days from different batches of BHK21 cells. This in itself will produce errors in terms of the similarity of the BHK21 cells. The cells may have been at different stages of growth, some may have been more able to grow and obtain energy from the surrounding medium at a more efficient rate and possible contamination with other viruses may have occurred.
If this investigation were to be repeated, ideally all data samples should be collected during the same time frame to prevent discontinuity between the BHK21 cells. If such a procedure is difficult, the same BHK21 cells should be used in the remainder of the experiment.
Another possible source of error in the experiment is that the RNA polymerase activity for BEV in BHK21 cells was not sampled for longer. Although this would have been logistically difficult within the time frame of the experimental days, such data may have helped to explain the second peaks at eight hours for intracellular viral RNA for both data sets. A further source of error is that the TCID 50 of infectious virus and the data for intracellular RNA was not carried out in duplicate. As such, any anomalous results will not be accounted for as no averages will be taken. Therefore if the experiment were to be repeated, all procedures should be ideally be carried out in duplicate.