Proteins are one of the most important molecules in biology. Many research projects involve the isolation and characterisation of novel or existing proteins. Proteins are extremely small in size and therefore require molecular techniques to isolate them and aid their identification.
Gel electrophoresis and western blotting are the two techniques focused upon in the experiment. Gel electrophoresis resolves individual proteins by the use of an electric current separating them by molecular weight and charge whereas western blotting transfers these proteins from the gel to a nitrocellulose membrane to enable protein identification.
The plate apparatus is cleaned, constructed and tested for water tightness. The gel is then prepared from many substances such as acrylamide solution, methylene-bis acrylamide is added to ensure uniform cross links form throughout the gel. Altering the concentration of the acrylamide alters the resolving power of the proteins affecting the size of the proteins identified. High concentrations of acrylamide will form more cross links leading to a small pore size and effective resolving of small proteins only.
Figure 1 illustrates gel electrophoresis. In this experiment a discontinuous buffer system which concentrates the protein sample prior to its run on the resolving gel. Upon application of the electric current, glycinate ions from the upper reservoir enter the stacking gel and migrate towards the anode but at a slower rate than chloride ions from HCl in the stacking gel. Once glycinate ions enter the stacking gel they become protonated zwitterions due to the difference in pH. This reduces their mobility increasing the distance between the glycinate and chloride ions. A high voltage gradient is produced between the two ion fronts causing proteins and glycinate ions to be accelerate causing protein concentration to increase. The proteins then migrate in the resolving gel and are separated according to their molecular weight and charge.
Western blotting is a powerful technique used to identify particular proteins after gel electrophoresis using specific antibodies.
After the protein sample has been resolved by SDS-PAGE the gel is sandwiched by a nitrocellulose membrane in buffer. Application of an electric current causes proteins to migrate from the gel into the nitrocellulose filter.
Milk protein is then washed over the filter to block any unbound filter to prevent non specific antibody binding. The filter, in this experiments case was then washed with a primary antibody which was specific for the protein of interest, a second antibody which was specific for the primary antibody and then -rabbit IgG which is biotinylated and detects the secondary antibody. The filter can then be washed with streptavidin-peroxidase which has a high affinity for biotin and enables the protein of interest to be stained. Antigen-antibody--rabbit streptavidin peroxidase complex will mainly bind to the protein of interest. The complex is stained a blue/purple colour in hydrogen peroxide indicating the presence of the protein of interest.
The aim of this practical is to provide familiarity with polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting techniques by analysing glutathione-S-transferase (GST) E. coli protein.
The method for this practical was followed exactly as stated in he laboratory manual. Two changes were made to the protocol, -rabbit IgG was used instead of protein A-biotin and the marker proteins had molecular weights as follows; myosin (250,000), phosphorylase B (148,000), Bovine Serum Albumin (98,000), glutamic dehydrogenase (64,000), alcohol dehydrogenase (50,000), carbonic anhydrase (36,000), myoglobin red (22,000) and lysozyme (16,000).
As discussed previously it is evident that immunoblotting and gel electrophoresis are powerful tools in the analysis of proteins. Figure 2 illustrates the polypeptide profile of the gel obtained by SDS-gel electrophoresis. Marker proteins are indicated by an M on the diagram and were used to accurately determine the molecular weights of the GST and major stained proteins.
Using the distances travelled by the marker proteins a calibration curve can be drawn enabling the molecular weights of the stained proteins to be calculated.
Figure 3 is the plot of the log molecular weight verses mobility obtained from the marker proteins GST and major Coomassie stained polypeptides.
Figure 4 illustrates the amido black stained western blot which stains all the proteins present on the nitrocellulose filter. The immunostained GST protein is clearly marked in the blot indicating that GST was present in the E. coli protein sample due to significant antibody binding and staining.
Figure 2 illustrates the polypeptide gel with major Coomassie stained polypeptides. From using figure 3, the three polypeptides have molecular weights of approximately 69.2KDa, 42.7KDa and 27.5KDa respectively. The GST protein was found to have a molecular weight of 10.96KDa.
The protein of molecular weight 69.2KDa may be the NusA protein from the nusA gene which is required for elongation of mRNA and therefore would be present in large amounts as transcription of the GST protein is very high. The protein of molecular weight 27.5KDa may be a C-terminal truncated peptide of glutathione-S-transferase/PTP-1B. The proteins these molecular weights represent may not be accurate as further information such as their sequence is not available. The conclusion as to the type of proteins these three unknown polypeptides may represent is based on that transcription would be occurring at high levels in the cell system and GST proteins are also present.
Over expression of foreign genes in E. coli can lead to problems. The expression of foreign proteins by diverting resources to the synthesis of a protein which may be useless for the cells growth. Diversion of resources will slow down the growth rate as less energy will be available for protein synthesis, nutrient acquisition and reproduction.
If the gene is eukaroytic specific problems can arise due to the different regulatory properties which prokaryotic and eukaroytic cells possess. For example prokaryotic mRNA is often polycistronic which eukaroytic mRNA rarely is. Eukaroytic mRNA will contain introns and may require post translational processes which the prokaryotic cell may be unable to perform effectively. Eukaryotes and prokaryotes also use different transcription and translation promoter sequences. Transcription in prokaryotes requires two promotes at -10 and -35, TATAAT and TTGACA respectively. These differ from the eukaroytic promoters which are at -25 and -75, TATAAA and CAAT respectively. Unless the eukaroytic gene is altered in the promoter region, prokaryotic transcription mechanisms will not be able to recognise the gene and may begin transcription before or after the start codon of the gene or may not recognise and sequence at all leading to the gene not being transcribed.
Protein A-biotin/streptavidin can be used instead of a secondary antibody although the outcome is the same. An antibody specific for the protein of interest is washed over a nitrocellulose membrane. Biotinylated protein A is then added and binds to the antibody but not al the antigenic site. Streptavidin-peroxidase is then bound to the biotinylated protein A due to its high affinity for binding biotin. The streptavidin peroxidase acts on 4-chloro-1-napthol using hydrogen peroxide as a catalyst staining the protein of interest or antigen-antibody-protein A-biotin-streptavidin peroxidase complex a blue/purple colour.
Monoclonal antibodies are generated in a natural immune response or after immunization in the laboratory and are a mixture of molecules of different specificities and affinities. Spleen cells from an immunized mouse are fused with mouse myeloma cells. These divide and secrete the specific antigen used to immunize the spleen cell. However, human immune systems often rejected the mouse antibodies so a new technique pioneered by CAT involved 'phage display'. In this technique, bacteriophage are manipulated to display human monoclonal antibodies on their surface enabling billions of human safe antibodies to be created for screening.
Polyclonal antibodies are produced when a mouse is immunised against a diverse range of antigens. Large numbers of different B-cells are stimulated producing different antibodies. Sometimes these antibodies recognise or cross react with similar sequences in other proteins so the antibody which was raised against antigen A, for example can also recognise antigen B.
To modify the gel system in SDS-PAGE to increase the resolution of the polypeptides in the protein sample the concentration of acrylamide can be altered. In this experiment the resolving gel contained 15% acrylamide. If this concentration was increased, more cross links could occur between the molecules of acrylamide decreasing the pore size effectively only enabling small polypeptides to pass through. If the concentration of acrylamide was decreased fewer cross links would form increasing the pore size enabling larger proteins to be resolved more effectively. Therefore decreasing acrylamide concentrations enables lower molecular weight proteins to be resolved.
Using the distances travelled by the marker proteins a calibration curve can be drawn enabling the molecular weights of the stained proteins to be calculated.
Radioisotopes are extremely useful for following events in cell systems or simplifying biochemical assays as the radioisotopes do not alter the chemical properties of molecules. A secondary antibody can be tagged with a radioisotope, labelling the antigen-antibody complex of interest. The radio labelled protein of interest on the nitrocellulose membrane can be overlain with a photographic emulsion sensitive to radiation. Where development of the emulsion occurs the radio labelled antigen-antibody complex is present.
Gloves should always be worn when handling nitrocellulose to prevent transference of proteins or oils from your skin onto the membrane which would prevent efficient antibody binding and staining.
Non specific binding of antibody is where an antibody may bind elsewhere other then the protein of interest on the nitrocellulose filter. This occurs because the antibodies recognise a sequence of amino acids which may be present in other proteins on the filter. In order to determine which component is causing the non-specific antibody binding, a nitrocellulose filter should be made eliminating each antibody in turn. For example, in this experiments case a primary and secondary antibody along with streptavidin-peroxidase were used. Nitrocellulose filters would be constructed eliminating each one in them and observing its effect on the non specific binding. This is minimised in immunoblotting by covering the nitrocellulose in a pure protein milk solution such as Marvel. This effectively blocks non protein bound areas of the nitrocellulose helping to prevent non specific antibody binding occurring in these areas.
Three other immuno-detechtion systems may include immuno -fluorescence microscopy, immuno-precipitation and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
ELISA is a direct binding assay for antigen such as protein. The labelled antibody is allowed to bind to an unlabelled antigen. Any unbound antibody is then washed away and a colourless substrate is added. The enzyme attached to the antigen makes a coloured product. Compared to western blotting, ELISA is more accurate for diagnostic procedures and can be performed on multi-well plates enabling many samples to be tested simultaneously. However, ELISA requires a pure preparation of the known antigen or antibody to standardise the assay which western blotting does not require.
Immuno-florescence microscopy involves labelling an antibody with a fluorescent dye; binding of the antibody to the antigen enables the complex to be visualised under an electron microscope. Compared to western blotting, immuno- florescence provides a more accurate picture of the role of the protein of interest in the cell system, however as it is used intracellular it involves the labelling of large quantities of cells using gold particles taking time and money.
Immuno-precipitation is where antibodies are used to precipitate a protein of interest from a cell system. Cells are radio labelled often with 35S-Met which labels all proteins. After a period of time the cells are lysed with a detergent and antibodies specific to the protein of interest are added on beads. The antibodies will bind to the protein of interest retaining it when subsequent proteins are washed away. Compared to western blotting, the identified protein of interest can then be used in other experiments however further analysis require gel electrophoresis.
In conclusion, the use of a simple but highly specific molecule, the antibody, has revolutionised all aspects of biology. They are particularly useful for detecting, measuring and characterising numerous molecules which has greatly improved molecular biology research.