The Bunyavirus genus contains several human pathogens which cause major diseases such as Hantavirus and Seoul virus, which causes severe hemorrhagic fevers. Others such as Oropouche virus can cause encephalitis. These viruses are viewed as emerging infections as these arboviruses are easily transmitted by arthropod vectors. With climate change altering vector habitats and bacterial infections curbed by antibiotics, deaths from these viruses will increase, studying their virulence may allude to a possible treatment.
Bunyamwera, BUN, is a member of the Bunyaviridae family which contains five distinct genera with at least 300 serotypes. As BUN maybe viewed as a prototype, its characteristics can be applied to other viruses within the Bunyavirus genus such as La Crosse Virus. However, BUN is known to cause disease in agriculturally important animals.
Bunyavirus virions range in size from 80-120nm in diameter and most are spherical. These viruses contain a negative sense double-stranded RNA genome surrounded by a lipid membrane envelope, obtained through intracellular budding at the Golgi apparatus.
Wild type BUN contains a three segmented genome. The largest or L-segment encodes an RNA polymerase transferred to the host during uncoating. The M segment encodes the structural glycoproteins G1 and G2, the former of which is essential for BUN attachment. The smallest or S-segment encodes the N protein and the NSs protein in an overlapping reading frame towards the N-terminus of the genome.
To discover the main functions of this protein, a mutant of wild type BUN was constructed with the NSs open reading frame removed. This mutant named BUNdelNSs contained five amino acid substitutions with one at the start and another at the stop codon to remove the reading frame and prevent reversion.
The NSs protein plays no essential role in the major virus possess such as transcription or assembly as NSs deleted mutants were able to replicate and produce infectious progeny. Bridgen A et al 2001, Weber F et al 2002 and Kohl A et al 2003 performed a series of experiments to determine the functions of NSs.
BALB/c mice were injected intracerebally and intraperitoneally with both wild type BUN and BUNdelNSs. After eight days, all mice inoculated intracerebally died but those infected via intraperitoneally only those infected with wild type BUN yielded a detectable virus titre. Brain sections were studied and subjected to immunostaining, revealing tropism of the virus was unaffected, however BUNdelNSs demonstrated a reduced spread within the neurons. This evidence suggests that NSs aids the spread of BUN within the host but does not lead to increased pathogenesis within the host.
The reduced spread of BUNdelNSs maybe due to its inability to curb host protein synthesis which would detract resources from the virus preventing efficient replication. BHK cells were labelled with 5pfu/cell wild type BUN and BUNdelNSs and labelled with 35S methionine. Autoradiography if samples run on PAGE 48hrs later identified that protein synthesis was prevented in BHK cells by wild type BUN whereas BUNdelNSs did show a slight reduction when compared to mock infected controls.
This experiment confirmed that NSs shuts off protein synthesis to allow efficient replication.
Interferon's are an extremely important component of the innate immune system as they induce an antiviral state which allows the spread of virus to be contained. Interferon, IFN- is a type 1 IFNs and are regulated by NK-kB and IRF-3 (regulatory factors) which are induced by double stranded RNA.
Interferon's mediate the antiviral state by increasing protein kinase R which phosphorylates eIF2, preventing GDP-GTP exchange and hence renewal of the translation initiation complex.
Transient transfection of an IFN- promoter to a luciferase gene into BALB/c cells allows luciferase activity to be monitored. When these cells were infected with mock, wild type BUN and BUNdelNSs, wild type BUN luciferase activity was at a similar level to mock infected cells whereas BUNdelNSs levels were 20-fold higher. In a similar experiment using IFN responsive reporter plasmid with luciferase activity in BF cells, wild type BUN produced very low amounts of IFN- whereas BUNdelNSs produced over 1000 units more IFN-.
These experiments indicated NSs is an inhibitor of the IFN- induction. Inhibition was found to occur at the transcriptional step as analysis of cell lysates infected with wild type BUN and BUNdelNSs by reverse-transcriptase PCR concluded that wild type BUN contained undetectable amounts of IFN- mRNA whereas mRNA from BUNdelNSs infected cells could easily be detected. RNA synthesis was unaffected as -actin mRNA levels were constant in both virus and mock infected cells.
Both IRF-3 and NF-kB are required to activate the IFN- promoter as luciferase activity when linked to NF-kB binding sites or IFN-, wild type BUN did not lead to IFN- activation. IRF-3 is activated by both wild type and BUNdelNSs due to L protein activity. As 2f/TGH and 2f/SV5-v cell infection, which have intact and deficient interferon systems respectively were infected with mock, wild type and BUNdelNSs. Blotting with anti-IRF-3 indicated induction in both cells for both viruses.
Infection of 2fTGH and 2f/SV5-v cells were infected with wild type BUN and BUNdelNSs and their resulting morphology observed. After 24 hours BUNdelNSs infected cells showed signs of apoptosis whereas fewer wild type BUN cells did. There was no difference between the cell types indicating IFN signalling does not induce apoptosis. However, when cells were stained with Annexin V and 7 AAD to distinguish between early and late apoptotic stages, more cells infected with BUNdelNSs showed late stage apoptosis than wild type BUN after 24 hours.
As such, NSs prevents apoptosis by inhibiting IRF-3 through inhibition of IRF-3 after its activation.
Activation of the IRF-3 promoter was confirmed by using transient transfection of reporter plasmids with FF-luc gene with apoptosis promoters. No activity for any other promoter could be detected apart from that of IRF-3 whose activity was 2.8 fold greater in BUNdelNSs than wild type BUN. Also P2.1 cells infected with BUNdelNSs and wild type BUN and stained for apoptosis indicated that apoptosis was not increased and numbers of apoptotic cells were similar for both viruses.
The NSs protein of Bunyamwera virus has multiple functions within the cell. It enables efficient viral spread, possibly because it can inhibit host protein synthesis and dampen the immune response. Host protein synthesis is inhibited by the binding of NSs to the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II Thomas D et al 2004. It down regulates phosphorylation at phosphoserine 2, preventing efficient
However, the main role of NSs appears to be through inhibition of the IFN- pathway. NSs prevents apoptosis induced by this pathway by inhibiting activated IRF-3 from binding to the IFN- promoter, preventing subsequent transcription as confirmed by the mini-replicon and PCR experiments. NSs also inhibited NF-kB binding to the IFN- promoter.
These experiments indicate that by preventing apoptosis and IFN- signalling, the innate immune response is unable to counteract wild type BUN infection as effectively when compared to BUNdelNSs. As a result of this, the virus can replicate and spread within neurons to a more efficient extent.