Unlike quantitative methods of research, the issues concerning the quality of qualitative research are less clear cut. Indeed, qualitative research in itself has had difficulty in finding its place within psychological methodology, and continues to be considered by some as an unacceptable way of conducting objective research. In this essay, I aim to briefly consider the correct application for qualitative methods, and how objectivity can be maximised.
Burt and Oaksford (1999) contrast the view of human nature and knowledge put forward by Morgan (1996, 1998, as cited by Burt & Oaksford, 1999) whereby science is seen as uncovering an objective, single truth about the world, and the postmodernist view of Stevenson and Cooper (1997, 1998, as cited by Burt & Oaksford, 1999), where knowledge is seen as constructivist in the face of no knowable objective truth. They conclude that the utility of a theory is not based on its objective truth, and also observe that psychology does not have the complexity of previous theoretical background that aids other sciences in their hypothesis formulation. So it would seem that qualitative research is the initial probe of psychological research, investigating the world in a way that can provide us with the information required to formulate hypotheses.
In the absence of meticulous methods and statistical data analysis, one clear issue has been identified with qualitative research. How do we determine the 'trustworthiness' of qualitative work (Johnson, 1999)? Particularly, how do we translate measures of reliability and validity? Johnson (1999) specifies three problems that must be overcome: indexicality, in which the findings from qualitative work are often specific to the exact context where they were observed; inconcludability, where conclusions from research seem to have no natural termination; and reflexivity, whereby the researcher himself is, in fact, a social factor that must be considered, and in addition brings his own agenda to any research he does.
Lincoln and Guba (1985, as cited by Merrick, 1993) suggest criteria for judging qualitative work that are parallel to those used for quantitative work. Credibility is suggested as parallel to internal validity, whereby sufficient time is given to studies to allow data to accumulate; triangulation is employed to combine data from different sources (Silverman, 2005) to create a 'thick description' (Geertz, 1973, as cited by Johnson, 1999) of the data that minimises inconcludability by allowing data to draw it's own conclusions; peer debriefing is used to inform the scientific community of progress; and referential adequacy ensures that findings are backed up by data, as well as theorising being grounded in specific examples. In addition, Silverman (1997) emphasises the importance of deviant case analysis, whereby cases that negate findings are studied, and may require a change to hypotheses.
Transferability is paralleled with external validity; the applicability of the findings to other situations (Johnson, 1999). Here, the problem of indexicality is overcome by providing enough detail to about theories and data to enable a reader to make this judgement. Lincoln and Guba (1985, as cited by Merrick, 1993) also equate dependability with reliability and objectivity with confirmability. To ensure high levels of dependability, inquiry audits are recommended whereby methodological processes are carefully scrutinised along with the conclusions drawn from the data. Objectivity requires that findings and interpretations are strongly supported by the data.
The problem of reflexivity is one that requires special attention by researchers, as it can easily mislead readers (Salmon 2003). Suggestions to overcome reflexivity include the researcher explicitly stating the way they interpret data (Johnson, 1999) as well as disclosing their own orientation upon the topics being researched (Stiles 1993, as cited by Merrick, 1993).
Examples of these techniques can be found in Murrayal. (2004). Their study lasted for one year, giving plenty of time for sufficient data collection. The subjects used in the work had their age, sex deprivation category and other relevant details recorded; this enables judgements on transferability to be made about the findings, though it should be noted that these details are obtained by contacting the authors directly. The actual interviews were tape recorded, in line with recommendations made by Silverman (1997) whereby original data sources are kept to enable findings to be compared to the data, reducing the problems from reflexivity. However, little other consideration is given to reflexivity, particularly the effect of the interviews on the terminal subjects and the results on their views.
Thompson, Rehman and Humbert (2005) studied the factors affecting the physical activity of children and youths. Many of the subject's responses were restricted in the questionnaire and the semi-structured interview, and so care must be taken that these restrictions do not impose the researcher's own agenda onto the responses. In addition, the ages of children studied were given, but were restricted to only three age groups, something that may limit the transferability of the findings. However, the researchers do plentifully quote the subjects' responses in the results section, following Geertz's (1973, as cited by Johnson, 1999) recommendation for a 'thick description'.
In conclusion, we have seen that qualitative research does have a place in psychology, but that research must be carried out sensitively and methodically if it is to be of high quality, with just as much, if not more, consideration as quantitative work.