As Alfred Crosby notes 'it is impossible to doubt that the transfer of Old World foods and livestock to the Americas had an immense impact on the Indian'. From Columbus' discovery of the New World in 1492, European travellers brought a host of animals, plants and seeds across the Atlantic and many of these were assimilated into the Indian diet. However, the speed and success of such reception varies among the different foodstuffs that colonisers attempted to introduce; whilst meat and vegetables complemented the indigenous diet, attempts to present wheat as a superior staple to maize were far less successful. Many of the products cultivated in the Americas were primarily for the consumption of colonial settlers, or indeed exportation back to Europe, and therefore although there was some acceptance of Old World products into Indian diets, on the whole it was not until the eighteenth century onwards that a genuine fusion of cuisines began to take place.
In terms of the staple diet, as Crosby notes 'in many of the most elemental ways, the Indian remained Indian' as wheat did no replace manioc, potatoes and- most importantly- maize as the basis of the indigenous diet. John Super concurs that 'all three of the New World staples outstripped the major European competitors of wheat, barley and rice in productivity per unit of land' as climactically grains had difficulty adapting to the greater heat and humidity of Latin America. Existing staples, however, were not only already successfully cultivated but were produced in many facets as food and drink. However, more importantly, European staples lacked the social value that maize held within indigenous society. As well as forming the basis of the Indian diet, maize possessed a great religious significance; the Mayan Bible, the Popol Vuh, recounts how man was formed from maize and subsequently one of the Gods worshipped in New World religious practice was the God of Maize. As Sophie Coe observes 'even the Europeans instantly identified maize as the equivalent to their own principal carbohydrate staple, wheat, and classified it as pan or bread, with all the religious and social connotations that the word implied'. Tortillas were the dietary basis of the Mayan people, and the principal Mayan maize product- tamales- was both a commodity and a ceremonial food. Maize was an inherent part of indigenous identity both nutritionally and metaphorically, and although colonialism inflicted religious conversion upon local people Europeans were unable to overcome the great reliance and significance that was placed upon New World Staples. As Jeffery Pilcher concludes 'their (the indigenous peoples) lives centred around maize; it provided the essence of their identity'. Rather than becoming assimilated within indigenous diet, attempts to introduce wheat served to highlight the difference between nutritional regimes and symbolise the values of two different cultures.
Whilst the Columbian Exchange failed to reform the staple diet of the New World, other products such as meat, fruit and vegetables- which complimented the existing foundation of maize, manioc and potatoes- were successfully incorporated into the indigenous nutritional regime. Seventeenth century naturalist Bernabe Coco claimed that 'we Spaniards found so poor and destitute of the animals most necessary to nourish and give service to mankind' and thus colonisers were quick to introduce the foundations of their nutritional regime to the New World. Columbus' voyages to the Americas marked the immediate transference of such items as the ships contained food representative of a microcosm of the Spanish diet, including livestock. On his second voyage Columbus brought seeds and cuttings for melons, onions, radishes, salad greens, grape vines, sugar canes and fruit stones for orchards. Bananas were also brought over from the Canary Islands in 1516 by European settlers. As Super notes 'the combination of New and Old World vegetables, full of minerals and vitamins, self-propagating or easily grown, provided a rich, abundant element in the emerging nutritional regimes'. The indigenous population may not have been receptive to foodstuffs that fundamentally undermined the basis of their existing diet, but they did accept items that could enrich it. The proliferation of crops and items was also beneficial in that the increased variety of products reduced the chance of crop failures and starvation. As Gary Paul Nabhan observes, diversity aided Latin Americans as 'different crops respond in different ways to drought, early freezes, insects, and diseases' and therefore improved their basic supply of nutrients as well as broadening their diet. However, it is debatable to what extent these products were grown for dietary reasons, for in many cases they were cultivated for commercial distribution. As Crosby notes 'the economic underpinnings of most of the important European settlements in the tropical and semitropical zones of America historically have been the raising of a certain few crops on large plantations for export to Europe'. This is typified in the introduction of sugar, for by the 1530s there were thirty-four sugar mills on the island of Espanola, and by 1610 fifty seven thousand tonnes of sugar were being produced annually in Brazil. In Brazil production was carried out through the use of slave labour, demonstrating the greater effect of food introduction for European commercial gain rather than local diet reformation; workers nutrition was subordinate to quest for profit.
Perhaps the greatest change in the New World diet came in the introduction of Old World meats to Latin America. Indigenous nutrition consisted of a predominantly vegetarian diet, although Crosby notes that 'the turkey and muscovy duck were certainly present in pre-Columbian America, and some think that a type of chicken was also'. Livestock did not encounter the same degree of difficulty that occurred in introducing plants, as they were far more adaptable to the climactic conditions; in fact, their ability to settle and reproduce was so great that their expanding numbers quickly became a problem for natives, who found cattle inhabiting their land and destroying their crops. As Pilcher notes 'herds literally overran the countryside, driving Indians from their fields'. However, this practical nuisance did not deter indigenous consumption. Initially, pork emerged as the first meat to be consumed in any quantity, but was soon superseded by beef. Cattle proved the most adaptable livestock to the different climactic conditions and successful breeding led to a dramatic drop in the price of meat- between 1532 and 1538 the price of beef in Latin America fell by seventy five percent. In fact, Pilcher claims that 'urban meat prices fell so low in the sixteenth century that ranchers slaughtered the animals for their hides and often left the carcasses to rot'. As well as the nutritional value of meat itself, the increased availability of other animal products such as milk, cheese and eggs supplemented the level of protein in Indian diets. In fact, meat was incorporated so successfully into the American diet that in 1589 when the Viceroy of Peru advised a healthy diet in order to prevent disease, mutton, fowl and goat were three of the foods that he mentioned specifically. As Super concludes 'meat, a scarce commodity before the conquest, became commonplace in the nutritional regimes of Spaniards and Indians by the middle of the sixteenth century' and subsequently livestock have become an inherent part of the Latin American diet.
As well as introducing new foodstuffs into the indigenous diet, the Columbian Exchange also reformed the role of existing items- most notably alcohol. In Pre-Colonial Latin America the main alcoholic beverage consumed was Pulque, and consumption was closely linked to religious ritual. Drunkenness as a whole was frowned upon, but inebriation during times of celebration such as harvest, births, marriages and other religious ceremonies was considered a display of devotion; as Taylor notes 'alcohol, especially pulque, was associated with periodic, peaceful rituals that expressed village solidarity'. However, colonisation introduced grape vines in a wider abundance, which increased the volume of wine available. Also, the Spanish introduced the technique of distillation and thus Indians had access to much stronger alcoholic beverages than they had experienced through the fermentation process. This wider range of alcoholic beverages not only increased access to alcohol, but also contributed to the secularisation of drunkenness, as the Spanish drunk on a daily basis in moderation and the new drinks were not closely linked to ritual as pulque was. The result of this was the prevalence of drunkenness on a more regular basis among Indians, and an increased involvement of alcohol into the regular indigenous diet as a whole. Colonialism led to the development of alcohol from a product consumed infrequently as part of ritual to a drink featured in the everyday lives of Latin Americans.
On the whole it is easier to note the effect of New World products on the rest of the world, but the influence of European foodstuffs on Latin America cannot be forgotten. Whilst the Columbian Exchange did not alter the staple diet of natives, auxiliary items were more readily adapted to greatly reform the meals that Indians ate; the tortilla endured, but was consumed with meat, fruits and vegetables introduced by the Old World. New items not only meant changes in variety of consumption, but the increased products reduced the chances of starvation from crop failure, and also led to better sources of nutrients- most notably protein. As Super concludes 'nutritional regimes were an expression of the changing historical reality of Latin America' and whilst at an initial glance it may appear that Indian diet was only modified on a tertiary level, Old World produce was significant on a level other than mere reformation of diet. As the New World was embracing the influx of foreign foodstuffs, they were also enduring the commercialisation and slavery implemented by colonisers in their attempt to exploit these newfound lands for European benefit. The Columbian Exchange not only reformed the diet of Latin America, it altered the manner in which foodstuffs were produced and in some ways led to the subordination of natives under the colonial government.