This case, Pepper v Hart and others
, just like Donoghue v Stevenson
 and Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball Co., has brought up important issues and laid down important rules. In this case, constitutional issues were raised. Questions to be answered are whether parliamentary materials, such as Hansard, are admissible in construing Acts of Parliament and if yes, will the rights under Article 9 of the Bill of Rights Act 1998 and the privileges of members of the Parliament be infringed. Now, I will consider the relevant issues individually, starting off with this instant case.
Pepper v Hart involved a dispute between the taxpayers and the Inland Revenue. The taxpayers, who are members of the staff in Malvern College, had the benefit of educating their sons in the school under a concessionary fees' scheme. The taxpayers argued that the cost of the benefit is the marginal cost of the employer of providing the benefit. The Special Commissioner accepted and held in favour of the taxpayers. The Crown then appealed arguing that under section 63(2) of the Finance Act 1976, the cost of benefit was the amount of any expense incurred or in connection with its provision including a proper proportion of any expense relating partly to the benefit and partly to other matters. Vinelott J allowed the appeal and his decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal. The taxpayers appealed. In the first hearing of the House of Lords, the appeal was dismissed. However, a rehearing was listed before a panel of seven Law Lords. In this rehearing, the parties are invited to present their arguments on the question whether parliamentary debates can be referenced in construing the relevant statute, which in this case, section 63(2).
In the rehearing, the Lordships, except Lord Mackay of Clashfern LC, allowed the appeal. The Lordships reached this outcome based on a number of reasons. Firstly, Lord Browne-Wilkinson stated 'that courts have a duty to give effect to the intention of the Parliament. In most cases, reference to parliamentary materials will not throw any light on the matter of dispute. However, in a few cases, where the Parliament has considered the very problem will give a clear indication of their intentions. Therefore, in this kind of situations, the courts should not turn a blind eye and construe words in the way that they cannot bear.' He then laid down three criteria which are to be fulfilled in order to permit reference to Hansard. They are where 1) legislation is ambiguous or obscure, or leads to an absurdity; 2) the material relied on consists of one or more statements by a minister or other promoter of the Bill together if necessary with such other parliamentary material as is necessary to understand such statements and their effect; and 3) the statements relied on are clear. The present case met these three criteria.
Secondly, Article 9 of the Bill of rights Act 1998 was not infringed on the grounds that, as per Lord Browne-Wilkinson, 'the plain meaning of Article 9 was to ensure that members of Parliament were not subjected to any penalty, civil or criminal for what they said. The purpose of looking into Hansard is not to construe or criticise the words used by the ministers but to give effect to the words used as long as they are clear.'
Lastly, Lord Browne-Wilkinson held that parliamentary privileges do not exist in this case in absence of a claim of any privilege extending beyond that protected by the Bills of Rights from the Clerk of Commons or the Attorney General.
'The constitutional role of the judiciary is applying and interprets the law'. The basic rules of statutory interpretation are the enactment is to be construed in accordance with the interpretative criteria laid down in Interpretation Act 1978, which generally guides to the intention and where these conflicts, the problem is to be resolved by weighing and balancing the factors concerned. There are two different approaches to statutory interpretation. Firstly, the literal approach where 'courts adopt a strict constructionist view of interpretation which required them to adopt the literal meaning of the language'. Then, the purposive approach which the courts adopt now 'which seeks to give effect to the true purpose of the legislation and are prepared to look at much extraneous material'. There are three rules in statutory interpretation. They are the literal, golden and mischief rule. Besides that, secondary aids to construction are also available.
Hansard, as an aid to construction, was not allowed before this case. This 'exclusionary rule' was established in the Miller v Taylor where it stated that ' the sense and meaning of an Act of Parliament must be collected from what it says, not from the history of changes it underwent in the House where it took its rise'. In 1840s, reports by commissioners were admissible. However, in 1989, Hansard had been allowed in Pickstone v Freeman plc. This case did not have any large consequences. Now, in Pepper v Hart, Hansard is permitted to be referenced if the three criterion set down by Lord Browne-Wilkinson are met. In another tax case, Lord Browne-Wilkinson added the fourth criterion which says that only statements directed to the specific provision under consideration are admissible.
Pepper v Hart, in my understanding, shows that the courts are moving towards the purposive approach in interpreting statutes. The judges, in the best way, interpret which shows what mischief the Parliament intended to cure. However, use of Hansard or parliamentary materials is still open to criticisms. Lord Steyn stated that 'some cases reference to Hansard proved to be a damp squib'. Turning now to the way courts have chosen to apply, refine or distinguish the decision in subsequent cases.
In Rees-Mogg, an issue of ministerial pronouncements was raised. David Pannick QC contended that 'ministerial statement relied upon the Crown was wrong'. The court held that it did not matter. The point of citation was to show what Parliament intended. Two years later, Clarke J held that Hansard is permissible in cases of construing a statute as a whole. This show the courts are now taking a more flexible approach. In contrast, the third case of Spath Holme
, House of Lords narrowed the construction of Pepper and held that in cases where interpretation of a scope of statutory power, Hansard is not admissible. Following by the case of Beckett
, the narrower construction was applied.
Today, the scope of the ruling has been narrowed in five respects: 1) Purpose of statutory interpretation, 2) House of Lord argued even in ordinary cases involving statutory interpretation with exceptions, Hansard is not admissible, 3) statements relied on must be by government of the day, 4) no reference to Hansard if such materials are not regarded as an aid of construction and 5) Hansard not admissible if penal statute is to be construed.
In conclusion, the use of Hansard or parliamentary material is allowed in very limited circumstances. Furthermore, judges especially Lord Steyn and other commentators have expressed their disagreement with the reference to such materials. In my understanding, courts are now adopting the narrowed construction and slowly departing from Pepper. Hence, departing from purposive approach. Finally, in order to do justice, the courts, in my opinion, should find a balance between justice and preserving the parliamentary materials.