The case appeared before the House of Lords before five Law Lords. Lord Steyn gave the leading judgment and the rest concurred with him except Baroness Hale of Richmond who gave the dissenting opinion. Lord Steyn in laying out his reasoning took into account Parliament's intention, importance of retention of fingerprints and DNA samples and if retention in reality interfered with a person's right under articles 8 and 14 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950 as set out in Schedule 1 of the Human Rights Act 1998.
Adequate safeguards were present to prevent any misuse of the DNA samples and fingerprints and it did not interfere with anyone's private life. The right of the Chief Constable to retain all samples, except in exceptional cases, was justified as it helped in the prevention and detection of crimes and in fastening up the investigation process. Hence the appeal was dismissed.
Lord Steyn saw the important role retention of fingerprints and DNA samples played in detection and prevention of crime, in ruling out the innocent in an investigation and in correction of miscarriages of justice. To illustrate his point he took the example of case 'I' in which the offender would have escaped if it were not for the wrongly retained DNA sample. Dr Bramley's statement showed that a large number of offenders might have gone undetected if it were not for the retained samples. A crime scene sample has a 40% chance of being matched to a sample from the database according to the Home Office statistics.
The parliament intended retention of samples to prevent the guilty from being acquitted and in preventing and detection of crimes, which was clear through the explanatory notes.
One of the main questions before the House of Lords was whether retention interfered with an individual's rights under articles 8 and 14 of the Convention. The judge reasoned that retention of DNA samples and fingerprints help widen the database so that more matches can be made ensuring speedier apprehension of criminals and a higher degree of justice meted out. He referred to what the Commission had to say about the matter, which was that it was 'open to question', and Dr Bramley's statement that the database was rigorously protected and had strong safeguards to prevent any misuse. Levenson J said that retention has no impact on a person's private life as an untutored eye cannot recognize a DNA sample and relate it to a person. To make a match an experienced professional or/and sophisticated instruments are needed. The database just contains the sample and the information of the person to who it belongs and not any physical characteristics or any medical information. Also the use of these samples is restricted by legislation.
Another point to be mentioned is that Lord Steyn did not believe that the UK's cultural traditions played any part in deciding whether retention of samples interfered with article 8(1) of the convention unlike the judges in the Court of Appeal. He believed that the convention is an 'international instrument' and must be applicable in all member states uniformly. On the appellants claim that they feared misuse in the future in light of more discoveries Lord Brown of Eaton-Under-Heywood said that as no such abuse is presently threatened the court will address the issue when the time comes.
Lord Steyn thus concluded that retention did not interfere with article 8(1) of the convention and even if it did it is very 'modest' and justified under article 8(2). In the words of Sedley J, "the purpose of retention - prevention of crime and the protection of the right of others to be free from crime - are foursquare within art 8(2), and retention is provided for by law."
As for retention amounting to discrimination under article 14 of the convention the judge said that the difference in treatment between the appellants and those who had not been required to provide samples was not on one of the proscribed grounds in article 14 and that it fell out of the definition of 'other status'. It was, infact, based on a historical fact of taking the samples.
The second main question was that of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire's policy of retaining all samples, except in exceptional cases, of acquitted individuals in all cases. The appellants claimed that to be incompatible with the fundamental rights of individuals. They said that it created a suspicion in respect to those acquitted. Lord Steyn disagreed. He established that without a sample from the crime scene a match could not be made. The retained samples would not be made public. A person cannot be identified to an untutored eye just by looking at the samples on the database so any interference by retention is minimal. Retention is just to widen the database and help aid the law. As Lord Brown of Eaton-Under-Heywood said that he could not understand as to why anyone would object to the retention of his or her samples unless it is to minimize the risk of getting caught in the future. Also for the Chief Constable to decide on his discretion (on a case to case basis) whether the person is free of any 'taint of suspicion' is impractical. It will just lead to disputes and be discriminating. Others whose samples have been retained would ask (rightly so) why they are being treated guilty when the court found them not so.
Thus it was concluded that there was no interference with articles 8 and 14 and that the Chief Constable's policy to retain samples except in certain cases perfectly lawful.
Baroness Hale of Richmond disagreed on one issue, that of interference with article 8(1) of the convention. She believed that if taking of DNA samples and fingerprints interfered with article 8(1) then so did retention. A person has a right to his private life. Some things are very personal to an individual such as genetic information. She termed it as 'informational privacy'. It is a person's right to keep some things private and to give it out to whomsoever he chooses to. Retention of such personal knowledge about someone is an interference with his right to privacy guaranteed by article 8(1). The Baroness said that storing such information means that someone has seen it and knows of it. Even if he does not understand it or tells anyone, the very fact that he has seen it is an invasion of privacy. She used the cases of Leander v Sweden
 and  Friedl v Austria
 where in the former it was held that storage of private information and its release without been given a chance to challenge it is an interference with the right to privacy. But as retention helps in detection and prevention of crime she found a justification under article 8(2) and dismissed the appeal.
The majority reasoned more or less on the same grounds. The minority judge - Baroness Hale of Richmond - disagreed with the rest on only one point, that of retention of DNA samples and Fingerprints not being an interference to right to privacy of article 8(1) of the Convention. But the appeal was dismissed by all as retention helped in the aid of law.