With the dramatic change in workplace, the demand for the highest quality in both products and services is increasing drastically. Hence, employee commitment becomes crucial if the company has to remain competitive whilst facing all these business pressures.
The front-line staff in an organization, like sales assistants, receptionists, etc., plays a major role here, as these are the ones that come in contact with the customers the most. Organisations today are giving increasing importance to the front-line staff as the management realizes that excellence in service can be achieved only by means of having efficient and dedicated employees as their front-line staff. The employees occupying the position, as front-line staff should not just be friendly to their customers but they should be masters in what they are doing to please customers. (Schlesinger and Heskett, 1991)
Commitment was always believed to be a "taken for granted" assumption (Legge, 2005:214) for directing behaviour. But recent studies have conceived commitment in two distinct ways.
The orthodox approach refers to commitment as an individuals psychological bond to an organisation, as 'affective attachment and identification'. (Cooper and Hartley in Legge, 2005: 214) but the definition usually employed was given by Porteral. (1974) that define commitment as the relative virtue of an individual's involvement with or in an organisation. Because of the difficulty in relating the variations in employee commitment, contrasting views emerged that defined it as ' the binding of an individual to behavioural acts' (Kiesler and Sakumura in Legge, 2005:215). This approach sees commitment to be in terms of the cost lost to the individual if he/she were to leave it. So, according to this definition individuals are more likely to be in the organisation if the organisation binding (including pension scheme, specific training etc.) is high.
To understand employee commitment to customer service better, behavioural approach can be taken into consideration. Behavioural approach means how well can an employee manage to satisfy the needs of a customer on an individual level, i.e. to what extent can an employee go to provide exemplary service to its customers. Generally, in providing exceptional customer service to its customers, in comparison with its competitor organisations, an individual employee undertakes round-the-clock improvement on the job together with exercising effort and striving for the welfare and interest of its customers.
Employees continuously strive for quality, this is not just a psychological state of mind or simply an optimistic attitude, this is of utmost importance to the employee, owning to the fact that it involves expenditure of energy and effort on part of the employee.
The four major bases of employee commitment to customer service are affective, normative, calculative and altruistic. (Etzioni, 1988; Coleman, 1990 quoted in Peccei and Rosenthal).
The beginning of 1980s saw the decrease of the manufacturing sector, the expansion of the service sector and the increased participation of female workers in the labour market which led to the attention on the concept of emotional labour (Taylor, 1998).
Employees in an organisation are continuously expected to 'establish and maintain rapport, maintain enthusiasm and a positive attitude at all times' (Rose and Wright, 2005:154). Other authors like Holman, mention the compulsion to 'smile down the phone' (Holman, 2003:127). The work ethic of 'emotional labour' was first described by Hochschild (1983) but quite a lot of authors have picked on it now. Hochschild, first used the term, emotional labour, as 'the management of human feeling, during social interaction within the labour process as shaped by the dictates of capital accumulation', having three elements: feeling management as part of paid work; mainly during social interaction within the workplace; supervision and measurement to the performance of employees. In addition, emotional labour was divided into two categories: 'surface act' that deceives not oneself but others (e.g. maintaining outward appearance); 'deep act' that deceives oneself as much as deceiving others (e.g. the direct exhortation of feeling). Thus, emotional labour is demanded in the new workplace as standardised goods and services by means of the mass production are not able to satisfy the quantity or detail of customer' needs any more, and 'quality-conscious consumers' have emerged largely (Hochschild, 1983: 84, 85, 86). Emotional labour can also be defined as 'the regulation and expression of emotion in exchange for a wage' (Holman, 2003:127).
Rose and Wright (2005) believe 'emotional labour' to be twofold. On one hand it can be a constant source of burden and pressure, as not every employee can feel positive and motivated all the time, which causes dissonance between real feelings and the feelings on display. This dissonance has been connected to emotional exhaustion and lower job satisfaction (Holman, 2003). On the other hand, it makes a customer happy by giving them what they want. It also gives employees' a rise in feelings and can also have a positive outcome satisfaction derived from the job. (Rose and Wright, 2005).
The principal problem faced by the management is that of the balance of quality and quantity. Mulholland (2002) recognizes that although managers might give the customers a feeling or impression of exceptional service the reality is very different. 'the increasingly intensified pace of work suggests in practice that the system facilitates little more than the minimum service standard.' This viewpoint documented by Holdsworth and Cartwright (2003) clearly suggests that employees find it hard to maintain quality in service when they have to deal with calls quickly and have the pressure of a large number of customers still waiting to be served. This puts them under a lot of mental pressure.
Within the emotional labour process of an organisation, management should provide emotional empowerment (e.g. Total Quality Management through team working) for its employees, as management cannot possibly train their employees with regard to every possible interaction between them and the customers, although they attempt to prescribe the likely feelings and expressions of customers. However, to eliminate negative discretion and encourage positive, the emotional labour within the organisation is supervised by monitoring and controlling that are associated with performed-related pay system. Furthermore, employees are forced to deploy emotional labour - deep act rather than surface act -, not least due to the changing concept of service from technical delivery towards focusing on how it is delivered and competitive environment in the service sector (Taylor, 1998). For example, an employee at Flight path explained in relation to her recent experience with a rude customer, that despite the customer's rude attitude and behaviour, she urged herself to treat the customer as a different type of person only because she thought of the customer as one who pays her wages. Thus, during the emotional labour process the employees suffer from not only physical and mental problems but also emotional draining.
Every job has some element of emotional labour. For an employee in an organisation, the display of a certain set of feelings and emotions is required occasionally/regularly for its customers. A lot of occupations like police service, emergency services, practicing law, health and safety services, debt collecting, etc. have extremely powerful emotions involved, it is these occupations where social interaction plays a very crucial role in achieving organisations goals. With growing competition, emotional labour has become extremely commonplace in the service sector. It therefore becomes extremely important that positive feelings be induced in customers so that they continue to be loyal to the service. An employee's feelings coupled with emotions are given paramount importance, as they are cardinal for the productivity of the employee together with the employee's ability to provide high standards of service. (Hochschild, 1983) Hence, it will not be wrong to say that the management of emotion refers not only to managing our own but others' emotions as well. (Class Notes OPBC, 2005)
In achieving organisational commitment aimed at affective commitment approach, i.e. where an employee really enjoys his job, recruitment of people who are friendly or do not find it difficult to communicate with people and have a natural talent for it will help the organisation positively.
For an organisation to be successful in today's competitive scenario relying solely on how an employee naturally is or on an employee's basic and personal characteristics is not adequate hence, rewards and promotions have to be given on a regular basis to encourage employees from being more productive for the organisation. Rewarding employees helps to achieve calculative commitment.
Having firm control over their emotions plays a very important role whilst dealing with customers as employees come across all kinds of customers. Therefore it becomes imperative for organisations to provide training opportunities to its employees on a regular basis to improve all kinds of skills resulting in quality enhancement that elicits normative commitment towards the organisation.
To achieve altruistic commitment, the management should know how to mould its employee's mindset to one, who respects and connects with the organisation so as to be extremely loyal to it.
Using language effectively and persuasively is solely to make the customers comfortable, loyal and connected to the organisation, in reality however, increasing importance is given to changing behaviour more than values and emotions.
Typically, Employees will not fit into only a single category but will change depending on work pressure, job autonomy and trust in employment relationship (Sturdy, 1998; Edwards et al., 1998 quoted in Class Notes OPBC, 2005).
In conclusion, it can be said that for an organisation to be successful in comparison to its competitors, it must know how to keep its employees committed, reducing turnover. Understanding the bases of employee commitment is a means through which it becomes easy for an organisation to decipher how to maintain its human resource in the organisation. To keep an employee satisfied is the duty of an organisation and this satisfaction eventually leads to commitment or loyalty towards the organisation. Being a part of the service sector means dealing with all kinds of customers on a large scale. This can be achieved successfully only if an employee has a firm control over his/her emotions, in the absence of which dealing with such a huge pool of consumers is a 'Herculean' task. An employee will only be willing to go that extra mile for his/her organisation if he/she is committed in an affective, normative, calculative or altruistic way.