Human resource planning is of crucial significance to an organization for formulating and implementing strategy for achieving its goals. For the past twenty odd years, it is being seen that organisations are trying to match the characteristics of their people with their business strategies (Schuler and Jackson, 1987). Considering that employees play the most pivotal part in making a business successful, when expansion or growth is aimed at as a part of business strategy the personality traits, skills, perspectives, ability, values and knowledge of employees become crucial. Therein comes a need to adopt a strategic approach to Human Resources, in particular the recruitment and selection process.
This piece of coursework tries to explore strategic issues associated with the recruitment & selection process within personnel management. It will first look what constitutes a strategic approach to human resource management in general by discussing various available models of aligning HR strategy with the business strategy. Next, it will throw light on the many different policies and practices used for recruitment and selection in organisations, distinguishing between strategic and non-strategic approaches. Finally, the circumstances that lead an organisation to adopt a strategic approach towards recruitment and selection shall be explained.
Gratton (1994) talks how various organizations create business strategies independent of the human resource department. The article says that usually business strategies are "handed down" to HR professionals for mere implementation. This, according to her, happens due to lack of representation of the HR function at the Board level, which does not create initial integration. This one-way process can also be attributed to the thinking that members of the HR function have restricted business awareness and they are fit only for a "clerk of works" operation rather than an "architect" role. (Tyson and Fell, 1986 quoted in Lynda Gratton). This behaviour leads to lack of functional synergy while creating "strategic imperatives" and the "implementation process", leaving the HR function to develop systems oblivious of the business objectives. In this way the HR function cannot achieve, create or sustain the continuity by which initiatives build upon each other. Instead these initiatives "bump along" the bottom, losing "momentum from one to another." (Lynda Gratton, 1994). In order to give HR strategy a "grounded frame of reference" it is important for it to be aligned with the business strategy.
A strategic approach takes into account the organisational goals and objectives. Its main aim is to align various key elements of HRM like recruitment and selection so that they function in tandem with other functions to achieve organisational goals.
Aligning business strategy to HRM is a well-researched area and there are a number of descriptions, definitions and models explaining how HRM policies - in particular those related to functions like recruitment and selection, training and development etc. should 'fit' a particular management style or strategic orientation (Legge 2005). According to David Guest (1989), "an integrated strategic approach through which organizations attempt to achieve the policy goals of flexibility, quality and commitment through the appropriate use of various types of systems such as recruitment, selection, appraisal, training, development, pay and communication." constitutes strategic approach to HRM.
The fit model of HR strategy (Torrington, Hall and Taylor, 2005) talks in terms of external and internal fits, whereby an external fit recognizes the need to "employ and deploy labour" (Torrington, Hall and Taylor, 2005:214) against future needs while internal fit supports people policies which are "mutually reinforcing" (Torrington, Hall and Taylor, 2005:216) and are applied consistently.
Miles and Snow in1984 developed another widely used fit approach of matching HR strategy to business strategies. Here, they used a contingent/open approach and categorized organizations into four strategic types: Defender, Prospector, Analyzer and Reactor. They defined 'defender' to have a narrow but stable product line an d having a functional structure so there HRM strategy would be to build human resources. Also, 'defenders' involve themselves in extensive skills training programmes because of their narrow product lines. In contrast the 'prospectors' are more adventurous insofar these organisations seek new products and market opportunities to do business in. So they employ sophisticated recruitment techniques and less training, emphasis being on acquiring skills. Similarly, 'analysers' who operate in both stable and dynamic environments need the right allocation for their human resources. i.e. which ones should be put in the stable market environment and which ones in the dynamic ones. Miles and Snow developed guidelines for proactive human resources management systems that tap an organizations full complement of human capability whilst supporting the formulation of new business strategies. Based on their work Rousseau (1995) developed a more exhaustive model to demonstrate the linkage between business strategy and HR practices by developing "buy strategy" and "make strategy" wherein organisations who are 'defenders' use the 'make strategy' to develop their resources and 'prospectors' use 'buy strategy' to acquire human resources.
Schuler and Jackson (1987) further linked HR practices to the three competitive strategies described by Michael Porter in 1985. They described how Porter's three strategies of Innovation, Quality enhancement and Cost reduction could be achieved by linking them with various human resource practices like Job definition and specialization, reward, appraisal and performance management etc. Thus, for example while innovation requires high creative talent in the organisation, hence jobs require close interaction and coordination among individuals whereas; cost reduction would require repetitive and predictable job behaviours.
While deciding the human resource practices are to be linked with business strategies, organizations generally choose from "six human resource practice menu" (Schuler and Jackson 1987) that concern different aspects of human resource management. The policies, practices and strategic issues of one of these aspects that is recruitment and selection would be discussed in the next section.
The issues to be taken into consideration as far as strategic recruitment and selection are concerned can be understood well when we take an organisation in question. Recruitment and selection of human resources certainly have a very important impact on how well an organisation can successfully materialize its business strategy. Also, at this stage organisations face an important question of whether it should develop its existing employees in such a way so as to fulfil its vacancy requirements or should it try to acquire or hire human resource from outside the organisation. In order to build a sound staffing policy organisations develop guidelines around these two major challenges (Kossek and Block, 2000).
HR policies within an organisation need to fit with each other in order to make sure that the organisational strategies are successfully implemented. Recruitment and selection strategies have strong links with HR planning and employment conditions. If there is a lack of fit, enthusiastic individuals will not be provided proper training and development facilities and successful team players will not be utilised to the fullest. Hence, for recruitment & selection policies to fit together productively for an organisation, advance planning needs to be carried out to attract a resourceful pool of candidates. (Wright and Storey, 1997)
Finally, it can be said that each organisation must make its recruitment and selection process quite dynamic and strategic as today's business attributes - such as shortened product life cycles, sophisticated technologies, shifting customer demands etc. (Bowen et al., 1991) not only demands the selection of the best candidates, but of those candidates who fit in an organisation's overall objectives.