Food in itself lacks the power to unite or divide people, societies and nations. Yet, when we impose values on food commodities and food-related activities, we ironically empower them to empower or disempower us. In a more simplistic manner, food has the ability to "distinguish and to discriminate, include and exclude"; it demarcates ethnic, class, racial, wealth and national boundaries.
As a result, food has become a useful tool of analysis because it can capture the dynamic shifts in various social identities we possess over time and place. Warren Belasco neatly encapsulates food as a fluid tool of analysis in that "food...does not merely symbolise or represent in the static sense but rather moves, penetrates and transforms." Hence it is the task of historians, sociologists and anthropologists to capture this change in its entirety by "moving beyond food as a metaphor and cultural symbol"; analysing food in the structure it resides in. In effect, food becomes an important subject of analysis when we situate the analysis of food in a social context. Analysing food discourses will reveal social structures, patterns, unity and disunity. It is indeed the ideal tool and subject of analysis that will allow the practitioner in this domain to unravel cleavages, alignments and identities between people, societies and nations.
In recent years, social historians have started to recognise this consequential role of food and food-related activities as subjects of enquiry which has widened the scope for food studies. Till this stage in time, food as a field of study has been firmly established and the "transformation of food from a marginal subject of interest to a few agricultural historians to one recognised for its potential for exploring new dimensions of the past is now almost complete." Inevitably, the popularity and credibility of food-centred discourses have in turn made this field "more specific and particular" yet "more general and comprehensive." In this sense, the study of food often suffers from and yet thrives in the absence of a defining paradigm. On this note, where should one fix this essay topic in the whole discourse of food?
Essentially, the essay will reveal how food illuminates national cleavages as much as national solidarities in two parts. The first part of the essay will focus on food as a subject of analysis and provide a historical perspective on how food creates and divides people, societies and nations in two Latin American countries, Mexico and Belize. This section will also provide a more in depth definitional analysis of "cuisine" and "nation", providing the essay with a functional theoretical framework to work with. The next part of the essay will adopt food as a tool of analysis through the use of an unconventional means of examining a food blog, to reinforce the thematic concerns of this essay. This section will provide a contemporary perspective on how food and food-related activities, such as food blogging reveal cleavages as much as they conceal and deconstruct them. While both sections are structurally different, they reinforce each other through common issues discussed and themes revealed. The former section affirms the centrality of food to nation-building in Latin America through a historical account of the development of national cuisines in both Mexico and Belize while the latter provides a contemporary discussion on the role and importance of food through a Latin American food blog.
The national divisive or integrative ability of food will be examined historically with regards to two countries; Belize and Mexico. These two case studies are sufficiently diverse to encapsulate unique nation-building experiences, yet both are structurally and historically similar to entail a comparative study of the role of food in creating or uniting national cleavages.
"Belize is an interesting place to look at food, globalisation and nationalism" as Richard Wilk asserted rightly, "because it is one of the least likely places where you would expect to find a national cuisine." Since colonial times, Belize's demographic composition has hindered nationalism as it is populated entirely by immigrants, of whom "many...have shed their ethnic and national identities". Despite this obstacle, Belizean cuisine has evolved to encompass rice and beans, both of which combined, epitomised a Creole cuisine. In a similar light, the cultural history of food in Mexico has definitely revealed more ethnic, class and racial cleavages during the Spanish Conquest than in its post-independence years. Jeffrey Pilcher has extensively traced the "long and contentious process" of the making of a Mexican national cuisine in his book, 
Que Vivan los Tamales! This national development in Mexico mirrors that of Belize in that the final national cuisine that emerges is a distinctive mestizo cuisine - Mole Poblano. It is the fusion of regional culinary delights that forges Mexico's national identity.
Before we analyse the role of food in processes of nation building; it is vital that we set workable definitions for "nations" first and then "cuisines", leading up to the conception of "national cuisines" which epitomises the centrality of food in nation building processes. In Benedict Anderson's definition, a nation is "an imagined political community and imagined as both inherently limited and sovereign." It is imagined because the "nation" is a concept that every member within it acknowledges yet the "members of the nations will never know most of their fellow members, meet them or even hear of them, yet in the minds of each lives the image of their communion." It is also limited because the "nation" shares borders with other nations and only has jurisdiction over itself and its boundaries, "beyond which lie other nations". Lastly, it is also "sovereign" because as a nation, it holds the exclusive right to exercise supreme political authority over a geographic region which encompasses a group of people. Extending this line of thought, nationalism is an ideological belief in the sovereign right of the nation which further legitimises the existence of nations. In multiethnic nations, nationalism remains an ideology torn by many cleavages, ethnic, class, region, religion and race. As such, Ernest Gellner makes a robust point alluding to the importance of a national cuisine within a nation: "one of the most central claims of nationalism is that the nation should be a single political and cultural unit, that the territorial state should also have a national cuisine".
A "cuisine" is more exactly defined as "ongoing food ways of a region" that asserts a certain hierarchy of social norms which shapes and limits eating habits and preferences to those norms. In this light, national cuisines bear two similar features related to Benedict Anderson's concept of a "nation". It is imagined because cuisines operate most ubiquitously in the minds of people. As Sidney Mintz reiterated, it is a concept operating at the level of consciousness because "when people have one, they know what it is without regard to what other people may tell them, because they have been eating it for all of their lives and so they can talk about it." It is also sovereign because national cuisines belong to a specific community or communities of a specific nation. Its sovereignty is asserted when "food is construed as a cultural artefact and emphasis is placed on the nation's historical claims to it, even though these foods might be shared by many other nations." With this conception of a national cuisine, it is evident that food creates, conceals and unites national cleavages through the inclusive and exclusive nature of national cuisines.
Moving on from a historical perspective of the role of food in societies, this section will examine food as a tool of analysis, in particular the food-related activity of food blogging will illuminate similar thematic issues explored previously. To begin with, the term "blog" is an abbreviated version of "weblog" used to describe an online journal, containing dated entries, often made by a sole author. More specifically, the focus of analysis here is on food blogs which are commonly understood to be weblogs devoted directly and mostly (if not entirely) to discussions on food or food-related activities.
Since the turn of the century, food blogging has emerged as a popular mode of food writing to the extent that the International Blogging Awards introduced a separate category for the Best Food Blog in 2005. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that this blog phenomenon is also propagating considerably in Latin America, particularly in Panama. This sets the national context of the food blog that has been selected for analysis as the author of the blog is a Panamanian. The spread of food blogging in Panama is articulated by Armando Carrasco in an article titled "Esos Diarios Virtuales", or "those virtual diaries" in English (Refer to "Appendix One" for a scanned copy of the article). Along with the surge in food blogging, there is also an increased interest in food studies; food magazines, cookbooks, culinary schools, television chefs are merely the most popular manifestations of an upsurge in interest in this field. Inevitably, the next challenge for food connoisseurs will be to adopt more contemporary tools of analysis for such novel developments in this domain. As food blogging remains an unexplored domain for academic research in food studies, this essay will adopt this unconventional mode of analysis which should be rewarding.
Owing to the vastness of the food blogosphere, the number of possible food blogs for academic analysis is also extensive. As such, the essay will limit the analysis to one of the most notable Latin American blog to facilitate an adequate discussion of thematic issues without losing depth. The culinary journal selected is titled "The Cooking Diva Blog" and it is written and updated by Chef Melissa De Leon. In particular, the essay will focus on relevant food blog entries pertaining to Latin American cuisine, especially so to two food sections categorised as Ethnic Cuisine: from Latin America and Ethnic Cuisine: Ecuadorian or Andean. This is to streamline the analytical focus towards the thematic concerns of the essay.
"The Cooking Diva's Blog" is deemed as the best food blog for analysis because it has earned its reputation worldwide by winning the best Latin American blog in the 2007 Global Weblogs Award.
This food blog reveals Latin American cuisines through a holistic presentation of Latin American food cultures, customs, festivals and events, from the perspective of a female Panamanian. Moreover, it is an added bonus that the author, Chef Melissa De Leon, is a renowned female food connoisseur and esteemed chef in the field who graduated from the USPCI, and a Certified Personal Chef granted by the USPCA (United States Personal Chef Association). Her credibility as an author on national cuisines arises not only from her culinary credentials and experiences, but also from her passion for Latin American cultures and cuisines. There is a particular line that strikes a cord with a purpose of this essay; she expressed that "sharing glimpses of those (culinary) experiences could be a wonderful way to draw our (her) friends and readers into a deeper understanding of Latin American culture." Hence, the essay hopes to situate the analysis of national cuisines within a cultural context, examined through the lens of a food blog.
At this stage, it is vital that we recall the vastness of this domain of food studies. The infinite nature of the discourse at hand empowers us to select only certain tools of analysis for certain aspects of study. Essentially, the essay has focused on the analysis of food and its role in creating, reinforcing, bridging and fusing national cleavage. With this thematic issue in mind, the entire essay has examined such forces of unity or disunity within the regional framework of Latin America from two distinct yet complementary approaches.
The first approach provides a historical overview on the development of national cuisines in both Mexico and Belize. In this respect, food emerges as a subject of enquiry more than a tool of analysis. The comparative analyses of the culinary regimes and national cuisine formation processes in Mexico and Belize have revealed similar trends. In the early stages of national cuisine formation, food actually reveals and creates more cleavages in society; food habits and preferences often reflect and demarcate clear ethnic and racial divisions within a multiethnic context of a colonial regime. Yet food also has the complementary ability to unite societies. In the final stages leading up to the emergence of a coherent national cuisine, food may become the emblem of national unity. The fact is that both Belize and Mexico emerged with a creolized national cuisine that fused regional, ethnic and racial cleavages. In this light, the divisive or integrative power of food becomes a fluid concept, suggesting the ability of food to assert either role over time.
While the first approach encapsulates the fluid ability of food to divide or unite nations, the second approach views food-related entities and food-centred activities as important tools of analysis which swing back to the fact that food is an important subject of enquiry. Food historians have often adopted a diverse array of sources for insight into culinary regimes; these sources include cookbooks, travel narratives, literature and paintings. Moving away from these traditional sources of analyses, this essay has adopted a food blog as a tool of analysis which has some crucial implications. Firstly, the importance of a food blog derives from it being a modern manifestation of a cookbook, fulfilling the traditional purposes of a cookbook and uniting the nation through an exchange of recipes and common culinary experiences. Secondly, the importance of a food blog stems from the related activity of food-blogging which creates a community of "foodies" that ushers in multiple perspectives, ranging from the personal to the political. In turn, this affirms the multidisciplinary nature of this field and opens up new possibilities and directions for the historian, anthropologist, sociologist and many more. Taken together, food blogs and food blogging become viable means of sustaining national cuisines. A national cuisine cannot exist unless there is a community of people who eat it, cook it, have opinions about it and engage in dialogue about it. In effect, an active national cuisine translates into national solidarity.
In all, the thematic concern of the essay has been holistically addressed through two distinctive yet complementary modes of enquiry. The conclusion is simple yet complex. Food may create national cleavages however they acknowledge, conceal and fuse them to a far greater extent such that food unites nations more than divides them in reality.