The nature of the essay title alludes to the nature of the issue for discussion; its vagueness and ambiguity leave room for discussions that have ushered in a wide array of diverse and enlightened work over the years. Many thinkers and empirical social scientists have devoted their time in assessing capital punishment in its totality however it is clearly out of a question to even attempt a comprehensive treatment of it on that extensive scale here.
Instead, the essay will present a coherent and convincing argument for capital punishment to be reinstated in abolitionist states and maintained in retentionist states in four parts. The first part of the essay will evaluate capital punishment on its own terms and justify it from a combination of three theoretical perspectives in the order of the retributivist approach, the deterrence aspect and finally the reformist or moral education school of thought. Following on, the next section will examine two practical features of the capital punishment - its fallibility and its finality - which, firmly justify the need to retain the death penalty, contrary to belief that both are arguments for its abolition. The next part of the essay will evaluate capital punishment in its respective societal context and judicial/criminal system. This holistic approach will advocate some safeguards and limitations to "perfect" capital punishment in an imperfect world. Lastly, the essay will conclude that capital punishment is not only justified in its own right and in the justified circumstances, the state is the only justified authority with the means to implement it.
As Hugo Adam Bedau rightly stated, "understanding and justifying capital punishment needs to proceed from within a larger framework..." which is derived fundamentally from the justification of criminal punishment. To begin with, punishment is understood as "the infliction of pain or penalties or the deprivation of privileges, by an authorized person or persons on a person or persons believed to be guilty of having broken the law or more generally of having done wrong". Punishment in this sense and throughout the essay will primarily refer to criminal punishment and ignore formal or informal aspects of punishment imposed by other institutions or agencies. In this manner, punishment is justified as they are penalties imposed on "public wrongs"; to redress the "wrongs that flout values that are essential to the community's identity..."
From here, capital punishment is a further extension of the notion of punishment; it exacts a higher penalty on a greater wrong that has been committed or could alternatively be seen as the highest penalty exacted on the greatest wrongs committed in a society. The higher penalty will be the penalty of death for the commission of a specific crime as compared to the deprivation of freedom or material possessions one has.
Upon establishing that capital punishment is fundamentally justified upon the justification of punishment, this section will extend from that argument to defend capital punishment on its own merits by examining the retributivist, deterrence and finally the reformist approaches in this chronological order. In essence, these three theories are not as clearly defined as they seem and the combination of these three theories into a consistent and coherent argument is perhaps the strongest justification for capital punishment.
Up to this stage, it has been fully established that capital punishment is justified on its own terms. To further strengthen the argument for capital punishment, there must be some further conditional and circumstantial justifications put in place before capital punishment can be a functional and just system in any inevitably fallible judicial structure. It is easy to assert that capital punishment is entirely wrong or right on theoretical grounds however one must not neglect the fact that it is a circumstantial issue and has to be justified based on the necessity, regulation and nature of it in the respective society it is implemented in.
To begin with, it can only be enforced in the most extreme cases. According to Article 6 (2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the death penalty may only be imposed "for the most serious crime in accordance with the law in force at the time of the commission of the crime."
 To impose the death penalty on petty crimes such as theft will only diminish the respect for such a penalty that can be abused by certain states. As a general rule, humanity forbids such punishments to be applied to any but crimes of very great enormity and atrocity to individuals or state; if any crimes can be effectively suppressed by moderate means, these ought to be resorted to first. Hence, the death penalty will be more justified when applied to severe crimes like treason, murder, arson, rape, multiple homicides. Beyond these and some others, it is extremely questionable whether there is any necessity or expediency of applying so great a severity to every crime.
Furthermore, history has illustrated that capital punishment has been abused in totalitarian states during Hitler's and Mussolini's regimes; hence capital punishment is only further justified by a just judicial system in a just state. There must be a security system put in place that will ensure a high degree of arrest and conviction of the guilty which will then proceed on to a fair judicial system with a just appeal system to give every accused the benefit of the doubt before proven guilty. Moreover, the effectiveness of capital punishment would be enhanced if a system of penalties were adopted in conjunction with a moral education system in the state. Hence, the capital punishment system is further justified in a state that aims to reduce crime by cultivating a social inculcation system in its totality by having gun control laws or crime prevention awareness campaigns along with the penalties it exacts.
Additionally, capital punishment is imposed differently in different countries, thus there are other considerations that one has to consider in order to establish an argument for capital punishment in a specific state. Such considerations include: "the judicial safeguards put in place, method by which judicial executions are carried out, where and under what circumstances they take place, the role assigned to personnel in carrying them out as well as the conditions under which and the amount of time during which persons are kept under sentence of death prior to execution or until their fate is otherwise determined".
With all that in mind, it is evident that the capital punishment can be justified on various grounds, and should not be abolished, although there is certainly room for reform in some countries that have retained the death penalty, especially in those that violates international standards of permissible and humane punishment. At the very least, the solution should be to remedy the defect, not abolish the system.
Thus far, we have established that the murdered victim has the right to exact punishment & there are beneficial consequences of imposing the death penalty, this section will follow on to defend the rightful authority of the state to impose a just capital punishment system for the welfare of the individuals of the state.
The basis of this argument rests on the rights to life and liberty justification espoused by John Locke who accepted incarceration and execution in response to violation of right to life and liberty. In a similar fashion, J.S. Mill defends the sanctity of human life by asserting the rights of dead victims to impose punishment on responsible wrongdoers. Ultimately, Mills stated rightly that "he who violates that right in another forfeits it in himself"  and if the murderer forfeits his right to life by violating the right of another to life, then society is justified in imposing the worst (morally permissible) type of punishments on the murderer. Therefore, by breaking the law, offenders forfeit their normal rights or moral standings as rightful citizens and hence justice has to be restored by imposing a penalty on them in order to "prevent future crimes and perhaps to restore them to law-abiding citizenship".
Extending from the rights of the individual to exact punishment from the criminal, a legitimate state also has a right to seek redress on behalf of capital crimes victims. The right to individual self preservation transforms into a societal interest when men enter society; the right to protect themselves from injury to redress wrong is transferred generally from individuals to community. The state has the obligation to define a minimal set of duties and rules which a human being in that community must adhere to in his or her dealings with other in order to ensure that an unacceptable level of violence and harm can be prevented.
Most importantly, the death penalty should remain within the jurisdiction of a state. While international moral codes of conduct will help to establish a more uniform and just capital system over time, the death penalty is part of the criminal judicial system that is inherently within the jurisdiction of the national state. This point has been driven across by political resistances by Muslim states that regard the death penalty as a matter of national sovereignty that reflects their cultural and religious values. After all, on what grounds do we judge a state that reinforces capital punishment out of principle over another state that abolishes it due to public pressure? Surely, it remains the "sovereign right of states to determine the legal measures and penalties which are appropriate in their societies to combat serious crimes effectively."
In a nutshell, the real question is whether an ideal account of capital punishment as it ought to be, can justify actual systems that fall far short of that ideal, so long as we adopt constructive efforts to reform them. The reply to this question will depend on how radically unjust we think our present practices are, the prospects for reform and other alternatives we can envisage in place of the prior system.
Stringing all the various points listed above, there are a few final knots to tie before concluding that the capital punishment is theoretically justified on its own merit and can only be practically justified in some circumstances.
To reiterate the first important point, non-utilitarian abolitionists would argue for its abolition based on the injustice of the death penalty system. However radically unjust we think our present practices are, the maladministration of the death penalty is not an argument for its abolition to the same extent that the fallibility of any criminal penalty system is not an argument for the absolutist abolition of the system of punishment itself. Like any other criminal penalty system, the fallibility of the capital punishment system ironically becomes a justification for its existence when we implement the capital punishment system with full awareness of human fallibility and strive to perfect the system to the best that we can achieve. With that, it opens up room for practical reform. The capital punishment system will have to be reinforced by legitimate safeguards inherent in any judicial system; rights to appeal, worthy judges and juries, just death row conditions and many others. As Joseph M. Giarratano emphasized accurately, "our system of criminal justice is far from perfect, yet imperfections not withstanding, it is a system of which we can be proud of, provided we recognize and maintain a realistic sense of our own fallible nature".
Even in a practical world, it is arguable that the benefits of implementing a capital punishment system outweigh the costs. As it has been reiterated before, the capital punishment system can be justified on its own merits via the combination of three approaches: retributivist, deterrence and reformist. Furthermore, it has been justified that there is no other alternative punishment that can match up to the appropriateness, efficiency and effectiveness of a capital punishment system in relation to grave capital crimes. What is needed is the realization that different principles or justifications may be relevant at different points in imposing the death penalty in different cases.
Beyond the belief that capital punishment has merit in itself, the capital punishment system must also be justified by other practical variables within the state it is implemented in. Simply put, the death penalty could be more justified in some cases and in some countries more so than others. It is a circumstantial concept of which we should assess it not merely on "its internal workings but on the wider socio-political context in which it is set". Hence it is crucial that abolitionists' countries adopt a soft approach to a hard penal treatment and be less judgmental on their abolitionist stance. Instead there should be a higher tolerance and understanding of countries that have retained the death penalty driven by practical necessity and out of pure belief in the value of the system. On this note, the death penalty is further justified in practice when it is imposed by a legitimate state which applies the penalty justly and selectively against the worst crimes fully secured in a just judicial system with the rights to appeal.
To conclude, the capital punishment system is justified theoretically to a great extent on its own merit. While we do not always assume that the actualities will be close to that ideal, the capital punishment system is justified practically like any other fallible penalty system that is capable of reform to near perfection.