Any scholar embarking on the ambitious voyage to examine "Islam" in its entirety will have to first acknowledge the complexity of this field. The ideologically-loaded word, "Islam" in itself, denotes "more than fourteen centuries of history, a billion and a third people and a religious and cultural tradition of enormous diversity". Many have devoted their time and effort to examine "Islam" in its totality however it is clearly out of a question to attempt that comprehensive endeavour here. On this note, the essay will attempt to provide a sufficient and useful account of the perceived and real conflicts between "Islam" and the "West"; stringing together various perspectives and arguments, finally coming to terms that the perceived threat of "Islam" brings a greater backlash of Islamism.
The centrality of this essay will reject the idea that the conflict of "Islam" and the "West" is and should be taken as a given, based on some arguments that are divided into three parts. Firstly, the
Islamic threat has been based upon some unjust and myopic scholarly perspectives, of which the essay hopes to address from the start. Following that, the essay will reiterate the view that "Islam" has always been perceived wrongly as a threat in itself, which becomes a self fulfilling prophecy. With that, the threat of "Islam" stems not from "Islam" per se but originates from socio-economic and political factors that have radicalized it from its religious roots. The last section will examine facets of the Islamist threat, manifested in various dimensions beyond the radical Islamic component. Moving on, the essay will also illustrate that the Islamic threat is not a coherent threat and it faces more threat from within than it poses to the "West". The essay will conclude by reviewing the implications of a perceived Islamic threat and a real Islamist threat on policy making and conflict management.
Having established the argumentative scope, it is also crucial to lay the definitional parameters of the essay. It should be forewarned that generic terms like "Islam" and the "West" will be used in quotation marks as there is no Islam or the West per se that can be treated as "a single cohesive, coherent comprehensible monolithic entity".
To begin with, "Islam" will be the most common word in this essay and yet also the hardest word to define. Edward Said asserted rightly that the term "Islam" is also unjustly overused and is an 'unreliable index' of the phenomena that we are trying to comprehend" . Therefore, there has to be a distinction drawn between "Islam" as a religion and "Islam" as a contemporary political phenomenon. If taken at face value, the former usage of the term "Islam" denotes a "monotheistic religion in existence for more than 1400 years" and the civilisation that "flourished under the aegis of that religion" . Its core beliefs are based on the Qur' an and Sunna of the Prophet Muhammad, believed to be the messenger of God. Strictly speaking, religious "Islam" itself cannot be translated into a real threat against the "West" as it is detached from politics and does not resist the supremacy of the "West" in international political and economic realms. Instead, the focus of the essay will be on political "Islam", more appropriately coined as Islamism. It is a discourse that tries to centre "Islam" within the political order and also refers to modern political movements that are based on Islamist principles. In all, it consists of a set of varied ideologies that aspire to adopt Shari' a or Islamic law to its full extent and reject secular forms of governments. Within this strand of "Islam", fundamentalist Islamism will be the radicalized branch of Islamism, when set in practice, could potentially pose a threat to the "West" or to "Islam" itself.
On the other side of the spectrum, the coherence of the "West" as a single entity also continues to be contested as it can be taken differently in different contexts from different perspectives. Historically, the "West" can refer to "all former colonial nations which have conquered and dominated most of the Muslim World at some point in history" or it can refer to "the entire industrialized world including Japan" in an economic sense. Despite the diversity in its meanings, the consistency lies in that the "West" refers not so much to a geographic location, rather as a symbol of a way of life or values which threatens or stands in stark contrast with certain segments of the Muslim population. In this essay, the "West" will refer to a set of cultural values that are embodied within more or less liberal and democratic regimes based on the "sovereignty" of the people" rather than "God's right to control all aspects of human individual and collective life." It is a belief system synonymous with a secular political system and a capitalist economic system embedded within a globalized arena, with the United States as the de facto trend setter and leader.
The origins of the Islamic threat as a perceived reality must be examined within the contemporary context of post-September 11 th events. Since then, there has been a wholesale branding of all Muslims as fundamental Islamists and events in the world project the image of Muslims as the "new enemy of the West" . It is debatable what the Islamic threat is as it is not one of political analysis rather one of belief. Hence, it is important in academic scholarship that we take a step backwards and examine how "Islam" came to be unjustly perceived as a direct threat to the "West" which became nothing more than an established myth.
Thus far, it has been established that "Islam" as a threat remains a myth; hence the threat of "Islam" is an unlikely notion. However, this is not to deny that fundamentalist Islamism can be hijacked and exploited to further other means which could be a threat to the "West".
Firstly, it is radical Islamism, a strand of "Islam" that seems diabolically opposed to the "West". Examined in its religious context, "Islam" is neither opposed to the "West", much less inevitably in conflict with the "West". Proponents of the threat of "Islam" often allude to the violence and conflicts that are encouraged by an Islamic principle, Jihad (holy war), which is mentioned in the Qur'an. In a strict Islamic sense, Jihad, literally means striving or struggle for a defensive cause to protect the cause of God, Allah. It is waged against oppression of the faith and the faith community. In theory, Jihad is only legitimate when it is used in a constructive and defensive sense. In reality, this Islamic belief has often been abused for the wrong cause.
In the Islamic world, radical leaders like Saddam Hussein, has called for a Jihad in the Gulf war to legitimize his aggressive policies. Al Qaeda, the Islamist militant group behind the 9/11 attacks has also recruited members based on the extreme version of the duty of Jihad, reinforced by videos that show Muslims being killed in Chechnya, Iraq, Kashmir and Lebanon. In the western media, it is often the radicalized version of  jihad that is predominant. In an article in a time magazine, it is written that "guns and prayer go together in the fundamentalist battle" . This skewed view of Islamism neglects the reality that extremism is no more the monopoly of "Islam" than it is the monopoly of other religions, including Christianity. In actuality, radical "Islam" is certainly not advocated from its religious base, rather from "secular radical ideologies exogenous to Islam and the Islamic world" .
Most evidently, the manifestation of the Islamist threat is the rise of radical Islamist militant groups. The "West" and Islamic states have every reason to fear radical Islamist movements that operate independently of governments as they are often more mobile on attacks and also more harder to pinpoint - states are answerable, movements are not. Furthermore, the success of one group may lend moral, material and ideological support to other radical movements on the world scene. Recognizing this threat, it would be futile to try and resolve the problem without addressing the underlying factors that radicalized Islamism into its militant form. It is important to note that even the terrorist group, Al Qaeda that has depended on "Islam" to justify their actions, are in actuality, occupied with "contemporary political concerns and convenience rather than any generic loyalty to a religion".
Situating this Islamist threat in time and place, it is vital that states are aware of some generic factors that could possibly lead to the rise of militant Islamism. As the French scholar Gilles Kepel reiterated in his book, Jihad: the Trail of Political Islam, there are a mixture of factors that unify two core social groups; the "urban poor" and the "pious middle classes", behind such radical Islamist movements. These factors include the failure of secular nationalist elites to meet the hopes and aspirations of their people, the failure to incorporate Islamist participation in the political arena, the uneven economic development and wealth distribution, lastly, the erosion of cultural and religious norms and values that define the Islamic faith. More often, geopolitical events added fuel to the fire. For example, the oil revolution of the 1970s and the ensuing oil wealth enabled Saudi Arabia to propagate its Islamic movement, Wahhabism "which provided fertile ground for the growth and maturation of militant Islamic tendencies"  More notably, the Iranian Revolution in 1979 provided the blueprint for the success of radical Islamism in contemporary politics.
Indeed, the "West" fears Islamism for its link to Islamic terrorism which has manifested itself all over the world in different forms. It is a legitimate threat yet it is nave for us to deem "terrorism as an authentic expression of the predominant values of Islam". Terrorism is essentially a political struggle fought in the name of religion by those who feel powerless seeking to undermine the perceived power of a targeted group. Therefore, the West's containment of radical Islamism or contemporary terrorism is legitimate only to the extent that it also respects and recognizes the benign elements of other Islamist groups which are all part of this widespread revivalist trend. Many other moderate Islamist movements have emphasized change through non violent channels; the political and social transformation of society. Opting for a military confrontation without understanding the diversity of Islamism will only carry the "risk of politicizing hence radicalizing - increasing the numbers of the pacifist Islamic multitude".
At this junction, it is evident that the only direct threat Islamism poses is in the rise of radical Islamist groups. There are also other indirect manifestations of Islamist threats which are threats posed by Islamic states, societies and communities.
Firstly, there are socio developments in Islamic states that may have detrimental spill over effects on the "West". This is epitomized by an impending demographic threat caused by population explosions in Middle Eastern countries which are spilling into the United States or Europe through refugee movements and migration. There are problems of integration, assimilation and racism with regards to the large inflow of Muslims into countries such as Great Britain and France which puts strain on the social fabric. The migration policies and treatment of Muslim residents will also play a substantial role affecting the nature of relations between "Islam" and the "West". This is illustrated through European unease at the prospect of Turkey's entry into the European Union as it would bring about potentially unrestricted migration of about 60 million Muslims into the European countries. More examples would include the controversies over the "headscarf affair" in France where Muslims girls were suspended from school for wearing headscarves and the backlash against Denmark's diplomatic relations with Islamic states when the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten published a dozen mockery cartoons of the prophet Muhammad.
Next, there are also sensitive strategic issues which would threaten Western interests if they are not addressed appropriately. More specifically, such issues include strategic military threats; the role of states on the borderlands between Islamic and Western spheres; pressures and consequences of Western military or humanitarian intervention in the Islamic world. Predominantly, the fear and focus has been centred on the development and use of weapons of mass destruction and carrier systems such as missiles. This fear is heightened when nuclear weapons are produced or stockpiled in a volatile region such as the Middle East. Such fears have perhaps resulted in direct Western military interventions into "rogue states" such as Iraq and predictably Iran in the near future. Furthermore, western's strategic alignment with Israel will continue to be a barrier to diplomatic relations with anti-Israel Islamic countries. With that, western interests will always be threatened as Israel is constantly engulfed by wars waged against Lebanon, fears of an Iranian nuclear threat and the escalation of the Palestinian problem. With all these issues and fears, it is evident that it is neither the religious character, nor cultural tradition of "Islam" that threatens Western foreign policy but conflicting Islamic interests and actions that may threaten Western interests.
Till this stage, the contemporary coinage of the threat of "Islam" should be more accurately termed as the threat of radical Islamism. Even so, most Islamist movements are more concerned with the internal conflicts within the Islamic world than with the outside world. It is worth noting that Ayatollah Khomeini's rhetoric before and after coming to power was a cry of concern: "Islam is in danger".
Reiterating Khomeini's concern on "Islam", it is apparent that "Islam" does not constitute a coherent monolithic threat fundamentally because "Islam" is a fragmented religion in itself. The multitude of Islamic movements, sects, belief systems that are prevalent within "Islam" is a reflection of this centrifugal pattern. Added to that, the fragmentation within "Islam" is compounded by religious, national, linguistic and political differences. State implementation of "Islam" has also varied markedly in terms of its forms of governments, domestic and foreign policies. State systems are as diverse as "Saudi Arabia's conservative monarchy, Libya's populist socialist state, Iran's clerical republic and Sudan's military regime" . As a result, external relations between "West" and Muslim states will always be of an uneven nature - a number of Western countries will still have strained relations with some Muslim states while other Western and Muslim states will enjoy cooperative and even cordial ties. While "Islam" can influence a Muslim nation's attitude towards the "West", in most cases, the overriding determinant will be national interests. This is reflected through the diverse Islamic states' support for and against Al Qaeda's operations. Iran, Syria and Libya, all countries at odds with the "West", nonetheless denounced what Osama bin Laden and his associates were doing. Another manifestation of the lack of a coherent Islamic threat is through the fragmentation of radical Islamist movements. The bloody confrontations among Afghanistan's fundamentalist groups also reinforce this point.
Additionally, the "Islamic threat" has in recent years come to acquire a more "inward-looking"  aspect. The enemy has shifted to not so much the "West" but directed against Muslims within Western and other non-Muslim societies who have "adopted western ways and departed from the comprehensive way of life revealed by God known as Islam". Islamic communities that have emerged in Britain, France, Germany, and Sweden are religiously, nationally, linguistically and politically diverse. On top of religious differences, the Muslims of Western Europe who appear homogenous to the non-Islamic world also come from a variety of national backgrounds. There are predominantly Pakistanis, Indians and Turkish Cypriots in Britain, while France has a variety of Algerians, Moroccans and Tunisians. Fred Halliday emphasized this diversity when he acknowledged that, "even these national labels conceal local and linguistic divisions - between Kurds and Turks, Algerian Arabs and Kabyles ... ".
Linked to the above, the spread of "Islamophobia" in Europe also poses a direct threat to "Islam" itself. A recent report published in May 2002 by the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC) which focused on 'Islamophobia' in Europe after September 11 th, established that the spread of "Islamophobia" and anti-Muslim feelings have became so virulent in the post 9/11 era that it "permeated many levels of understanding: from the most basic of discourse at street level to the rhetoric and politicizing in the hierarchies of national and pan-European governance". Over the years, a number of sensitized Islamic issues have emerged that have not only fuelled hostility towards the Muslim immigrants, but also strained the social fabric of European communities. Such include the Islamic protests against Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses and the prominence of Turks as targets of racism in Germany. The spread of such anti-Muslimism sentiment is taking place in a broader context of xenophobia that poses a direct threat to "Islam" itself.
Lastly, "Islam" with its Islamic communities and states may feel more threatened by the "West" in vital political, cultural, social, military and economic realms more so than "Islam" can be a coherent threat to the "West". In the political arena, such fears would include political pressures from the "West" to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict and western alliances with Israel against the Arabic states. Economically, the oil issue naturally comes to mind, as Muslim states have only in the last two decades "wrested from the West the right to fully possess and control their resources." For most of the century, these oil resources were viewed as indispensable to Western economies that Muslim governments had very little control over the use of their own resources. More so, the economies of the developing Muslim world are also perceived to be deeply connected to the Western economy and its institutions that this dependency translates into a potential vulnerability. There is often a clash between the financial requirements of the World Bank or International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the socio-economic interests of the Islamic society. Lastly, with a higher number of peacekeeping, military and humanitarian forces in the Middle East, Islamic societies fear more direct intervention by the "West" in their internal affairs.
From all these perspectives, "Islam" is fundamentally under threat. What appears to be a conflict between "Islam" and the external non-Islamic world is above all, a reflection of a conflict within the Islamic world. Essentially, the threat to "Islam" is as real as the Islamist threat to the "West". Muslim paranoia is indeed growing in conjunction with a Western's paranoia of "Islam".
The foremost important task for any policy maker is to separate myth from reality; to separate the real, material, specific and secular threats faced and posed by both Islamic and Western societies from their confused religious expressions; then address these difficulties themselves. By recognizing that "Islam" per se is not responsible as a strategic threat to the West's vital regional interests in the region; this perspective calls for a new approach to Islamism within the foreign policy establishment.
The complexity of the bilateral threat issue between the two spheres requires a flexible mixture of hard and soft approaches to tackle the underlying causes for the rise of radical Islamism. At the generic level, we must realize that every threat is manifested in different ways and is critical to varying degrees; hence a mixture of hard confrontation and soft engagement will have to be deployed in various cases over time depending on the nature and severity of the situation. This is epitomized during United States' President Clinton's administration when it applied its "rogue state" doctrine of containment to radically Islamist states such as Iran and Sudan while steadfastly supporting Egypt and Tunisia in their brutal repression of all shades of Islamic activism in the name of eradicating "terrorism". On the other hand, it also urged "the military regime in Algeria to initiate a dialogue with "moderate" Islamists and to include them in democratic elections under international supervision" .
Onto a more contemporary example, Britain has recently banned the catchphrase "war on terrorism". This marked a turning point in British political thinking and foreign policy making. In a speech delivered by Britain's Prime Minister, Tony Blair, to the Los Angeles World Affairs Council in August 2006, he called for a "complete renaissance" on foreign policy to combat "reactionary Islam". More strikingly, he encapsulated the idea of fighting the hard battle with a soft approach by stating that "we will not win the battle against this global extremism unless we win it at the level of values as much as force..." Indeed, a larger effort should be devoted to the longer generational struggle of winning the hearts and minds of mainstream Muslims. On this line of thought, while states should condemn and prevent the rise of radical Islamist groups, states should also facilitate the development of Islamic moderates by supporting their inclusion in political processes which would ultimately subject them to mechanisms of social control thus conforming and transforming them in accordance with the demands of a modern liberal state.
In addition, it is important to note the underlying reasons for the rise of radical Islamist groups. Until the internal problems of these countries are reduced or resolved, Islamism will still emerge as an attractive force against the backdrop of failed secular political system and dire economic status. Furthermore, the Islamist threat does not stand alone and the "West" will have to assess the consequences of its own actions too. On one hand, the "West" will have to develop a greater recognition and hostility towards the racism and general ethnic-religious prejudice that is directed against Muslim immigrants in Western societies and Islamic countries. There must also be a humble recognition on the West's part in acknowledging its failure in preventing the oppression of Islamic peoples whether in Palestine or in Bosnia.
With all the above considerations in mind, the "West" should be prepared for new threats manifested in new dimensions. The future resurgence of "Islam" in Muslim politics will be inevitable, and will be far more indigenously rooted. Secular institutions may soon be complemented or challenged by Islamic schools, clinics, banks and social services. More considerably, the emergence of an alternative class of modern educated yet Islamically-oriented elite may challenge "the Western, secular presuppositions and life styles of many in the establishment". This could be a greater challenge to address as radical Islamism will be camouflaged as a more subtle hue of Islamism which be hard to track, much less tackle.
To conclude, there are various tenets encapsulated in this single argument for the threat of "Islamism" as opposed to the threat of "Islam".
The subject at hand is that the threat of "Islam" does not and cannot exist. It does not exist because it is merely a myth that is fabricated from both inaccurate scholarly perceptions and unjust media portrayals that have adopted contemporary Islamic-related events around the world at face value. More importantly, the notion cannot exist in practice because of the realities of the external and internal struggles that "Islam" is facing today. "Islam" is neither a real nor a coherent threat in itself. Dismantling this construct of the stereotyped "enemy" does not signify a lack of criticism; rather it is a prerequisite for more serious critique of the methodologies adopted in constructing it in the first place. After all, it is realities that should be analyzed, not fantasies.
While it is established that the notion of the threat of "Islam" does not and cannot exist, the threat of Islamism is possibly the most accurate concept that forms the basis of a conflict with the "West". More importantly, the essay has reiterated that the fundamental threat against the "West" comes from the radicalized notion of Islamism which is also militant fundamentalism. This acknowledges the multifaceted dimensions of an Islamic threat; between the supposed unity of "Islam" and the diversity of its multiple and complex manifestations in the world today, taking shape in various realms - from geopolitics to socio-economics.
In approaching this subject at hand, the methodologies adopted must also be critically assessed. Fundamentally, we should not be accused of double standards when assessing the threat of "Islam" from predominantly a secular or outsider perspective. According to Jurgen Liminski, we should not seek to impose our own standards on what "Islam" should be as most Islamic countries in the Middle East "live according to a world of associations which cannot be comprehended or judged by European standards". Ultimately, we are also guilty of "misogyny, aggression, fanaticism and irrationality" which are not exclusive to the Islamic world. It is natural that we adopt completely different standards when we confront the same or different phenomena in other cultures, especially Islamic ones, but it is not an excuse for us to dismiss this biasness of ours. Contemporary "Islam" challenges the "West" to appreciate the diversity of the Muslim experience and perhaps challenge the "West" to stand by the democratic values it embodies to recognize the right of people and states to determine their way of life and nature of their governments, leaderships and societies.
On this note, it is indeed a challenge to conceive "Islam" in a totally different light, contrary to what we have historically and traditionally perceived without a doubt. Perhaps the softer side of "Islam" does exist; nevertheless it will also be accompanied by the darker side. The reality is that there will be newer and more intensified fault lines between "Islam" and the "West" as the two will inevitably meet, yet this does not necessarily translate to an inevitable conflict simply because "the need for the two to live and work together in our increasingly interdependent world has never been greater". With this realistic picture in mind, Michel Foucault has so aptly reminded us that "the question of "Islam" as a political force is a vital question of our times and will be for several years to come. The precondition for its treatment with a minimum of intelligence is probably not to start from a platform of hatred".