The concept of a female warrior seems to be a contradiction in terms, yet female warriors have existed in reality since the "classical myths of the Amazons, in the ancient aristocratic women fighters of Britain's warrior Queen Boadicea and in the pre-colonial female regiments of Dahomey, West Africa". One may not even need to resort to history to recall that women today, are equally capable of being militants as well as perpetrators, as evident in the incident when male Iraqi prisoners were sexually tortured by female guards in 2003. In this incident, the much greater outcry in reaction to a woman's involvement as compared to her male comrades' involvement indicates the existing "naturalization of men as perpetrators..." and perception of women as non-aggressive entities, often carrying the burden of a victimhood mentality.
The dominant image of women in the iconography of war has always been that of an "eternal victim, passive and without agency, an outsider to the battlefront". While women are primarily victims in wartime atrocities and violence, it is crucial that we acknowledge the complexity and multiplicity of women's experiences in conflicts. In midst of their victimhood, women are often pushed to take on greater roles and responsibilities within the home and beyond. Hence, the crux of the essay is to transcend stereotypes of women's non-agency in wars by adopting a post-modern and social constructivist perspective towards this issue.
With the aim of transcending stereotyped representations to reflect reality, the essay is stringed together by the thematic concept of the "ambivalent empowerment"  of women in the context of ethnic conflicts. Coined by Darini Rajasingham-Senanayake, the term "ambivalent empowerment" aptly describes women's agency during ethnic conflicts and yet questions the extent of this empowerment in post-conflict situations.
The first section of the essay will acknowledge and examine the issue of women's agency and empowerment in ethnic conflicts. It will acknowledge women as victims and further transcend that stereotype by providing a critical analysis of the other roles that women have manifested in ethnic conflicts - mothers, militants, perpetrators and peacemakers. The latter part of the essay will then critically assess the extent to which this empowerment endures into post-conflict situations. Following the acceptance of women's diverse roles in conflict, comes about the debate of how long such roles will persist after peace returns and its place during post-conflict reconstruction. More importantly, its implications for gender studies are paramount; it will provide new insight for feminist accounts of women's agency in conflicts. By casting women's roles in a different light will also shed light on how women identify themselves.
Upon establishing the concerns of the essay, it is important to examine those thematic issues within the context of warfare or political conflict. Different kinds of wars permit different kinds of female participation and women's lives are affected in a myriad of ways by the diverse outcomes of wars, hence each war or conflict process is an ambivalent process for women; "women are neither simply victimised nor empowered by war; their experiences are more complicated".
More specifically, the essay examines women's agency within the context of ethnic conflicts. The term "ethnic conflict" is often used loosely to describe a wide range of interstate conflicts that are in fact not ethnic in nature. It is vital that we set the definitional boundaries for this ideologically loaded term. Beginning from the roots of the term, the word "ethnic" is related to the concept of an "ethnic community" of which Anthony Smith regards as "a named human population with a myth of common ancestry, shared memories and cultural elements; a link with a historic territory or homeland; and a measure of solidarity". Extending this definition, "ethnic conflict" refers to a "dispute about important political, economic, social, cultural or territorial issues between two or more ethnic communities".
Ethnic conflicts provide one of the best contexts to examine the correlation between gender and ethnicity because these situational fault lines coincide with where "ethnic and political boundaries have continually shifted and flowed", enabling one to analyze how and when women have situated or shifted their gender, ethnic or national identities, taking on or shedding diverse roles and responsibilities over time and place. Furthermore, the nature of ethnic conflicts take place within the state, in which homes and families constitute the battlefield hence violence is thus "privatised" with more civilians being drawn into conflict; blurring the boundaries between active belligerents and passive victims. Concomitantly, the stereotype of "aggressive men and pacifist women"  can be transcended. With that, the essay hopes to cover sufficient scope without losing depth by examining three contemporary case studies, namely, the ethnic conflicts in Rwanda, former Yugoslavia and Sri Lanka.
In the case of Rwanda, the ethnic genocide that ruptured in 1994 was a result of conflicts between two dominant ethnic groups; Tutsis and Hutus. While the German and Belgian colonial legacy introduced and reinforced notions of race and ethnicity, such notions were further politicised by each respective group as ethnicity became wrapped in the rhetoric of nationalism and power. The period leading up to the genocide followed a serious of economic crises such as the structural adjustment policies by the World Bank in 1990. Political crises also accompanied economic ones; such as the Rwandan Civil War in 1990 and the assassination of Rwandan President Juvenal Habyarimana. In view of all these, the state was facing serious threats to its survival and by extension; the dominant Hutu elites began to perceive the Tutsis as a dominant ethnic threat. This marked the beginning of a nation-wide massacre against the Tutsis.
Similarly, the genocides within the former Yugoslavia territories also occurred due to ethnic incompatibilities within the region. The Yugoslav wars were a series of violent conflicts in the territories of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) that took place between 1991 and 2001. The former Yugoslavia composed of diverse ethnic and religious groups that had been historical rivals including the Serbs (Orthodox Christians), Croats (Catholics) and ethnic Albanians (Muslims). The conflict had its roots in the multi-ethnic make up and the political and demographic demonization of the Serbs. Fundamental to the tensions was the different conceptions for the new state; the Croats and other ethnic minorities favoured federalism while the Serbs argued for greater unity under a Serbian Kingdom. These tensions often erupted into open conflicts, resulting in a repressive regime dominated by the Serb security structure.
Closely related to the above examples, ethnicity forms the basis of conflicts in Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka has an ethnically diverse population, with about 74.6% of the population as Sinhalese, 12.6% Sri Lankan Tamil, 7.4% Muslim and 5.5% Indian Tamil, with other small minorities. In many ways, the history of British colonialism may have also contributed to the rise of ethnic consciousness however the further polarization and politicization of the ethnic groups came about with geopolitical demands and power struggles. Unlike the other two case studies, the Sri Lankan civil war is still an ongoing conflict that started since 1983, predominantly between the Sri Lankan government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), a secessionist group which aspires for an independent state named Tamil Eelam in the North and East of the island.
These three case studies are geopolitically diverse enough to encapsulate unique experiences from three different regions of the world and yet conceptually similar to entail a comparative study of women's agency across time and space. All three conflicts can be viewed as being ethno-nationalist in nature and all reveal a similar theme of women victimhood during those wars. Keeping the focus on the notion of women's agency and empowerment, the essay will merely provide the contextual background of each ethnic conflict to the extent that is sufficient as a backdrop to analyze how women fought and transcended gender norms by taking on new challenges and responsibilities in each ethnic conflict.
In order to transcend stereotypes, we often have to understand how these stereotypes are formed and sustained. As Cynthia Cockburn asserted rightly, "we cannot let traditionalist images of women and men in these wars pass unquestioned, any more than we can accept primordial explanations of the violence itself". State-sanctioned images of non-combatant women in supportive wartime roles reflect, rather than confront, traditional conceptualizations of 'legitimate knowledge' and ways of knowing. The stereotypical image of women as passive victims in conflicts is a result of scholarly short-sightedness set within a gender-bias academic context.
Firstly, we have to confront a disciplinary blindness in war studies which adhere to an essentialist and realist way of approaching women's agency in conflicts. Much of the debate surrounding the inclusion of women in the study of international politics, particularly in reflections of war, promotes passive representation through an essentialist approach. Essentialism is a dangerous theoretical concept as it operates through stereotypes and defines a certain relation between men and women. It is a relation of male dominance which "fix identity in eternal dualisms: woman victim, male warrior..." that in turns sustains gender bias and inequality. Furthermore, war studies often adopt international relations theories that adhere to realism. As an entrenched ideology, realism is problematic for women as it "traps them in traditionally defined and carefully constructed gendered roles" upon which "the smooth functioning of realist international relations, as a discipline, depends". Effectively, women as passive victims are made invisible and silenced by the realist discourse primarily because their experiences are deemed to function within the private realm. Furthermore, the multiple roles women play in ethnic conflicts are simply not recognised in a "discourse that offers no political legitimacy to women located, or proclaiming knowledge, outside of the defined norms, and respects only those who reify existing traditions".
Secondly, human rights discourses and humanitarian interventions have ironically undermined women's non-victim role in conflicts. They often frame women largely as victims of war, requiring (male) protection, and as the sole victims of sexual violence. As Lloyd reiterated rightly, human rights discourses often universalises women and "abstracts from the structural determinations that position diverse groups of women in fundamentally inegalitarian way". All these overriding assumptions become problematic when we examine contemporary examples of victimization, when women are also agents of violence while men become the victims of sexual abuse.
Furthermore, the patriarchal arrangement in society is the most established hierarchy throughout history. Even the most basic analysis of conflict and post-conflict processes reveals significant gender divisions that are so obvious that they end up being largely overlooked - because it is taken for granted that it is "men who fight, men who lead troops or guerrilla movements, men who negotiate peace, men who wear blue helmets, and men who head UN agencies". Such assumptions of what men do or what women do not do are so ingrained in society that such gender norms are often unquestioned. Therefore, women have been left out in history because we have often conceived of history in male centred terms. Reinforcing societal stereotypes, the media often puts women suffering at the forefront of the cover of conflicts which becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
In all, there are many traditional theories that pose methodological barriers to recognising women's full agency in ethnic conflicts - silencing them as a result. As a consequence, women are more likely to suffer from being victims of cultural norms as they have to collectively "shoulder a burden of being (inevitable) victims of the violence the system has created".
Moving away from essentialist conceptions of women's agency in conflicts, it is crucial to begin by acknowledging the widespread victimhood of women in ethnic conflicts. Following on, we can then transcend this stereotype and explore the opportunities and possibilities present in conflicts for women to take on new and unconventional roles. This is epitomised in Sri Lanka, when Tamil women fleeing conflict realised that the "spatial exigencies of camp life produced an erosion of the caste hierarchies" which ironically empowered them to assume men's former tasks and gain a degree of economic and political independence. In Bosnia-Herzegovina, Medica Zenica became a centre for traumatised displaced women and it was run by Bosnian women physicians that provided therapy to more than 2,000 women. Furthermore, In Rwanda, after the conflict, women made up an estimated 55% of the population and headed 33% of families. All these examples illustrate that ethnic conflicts may empower women when traditional structures of domination are shaken, enabling women to take on new roles in reconfigured political space. It is important to trace such patterns of empowerment in order to recognise the positive changes to women's roles and lives wrought in conflict.
Up till this stage, the essay has evidently illuminated women's "invisible" yet diverse roles in ethnic conflict, transcending the gender chains that have confined women's limited experiences to that of a passive female victim. By that, the essay has also ironically empowered women simply by according women some recognition and respect of their own will and freedom as an active agent in ethnic conflicts. However, the extent of empowerment women has achieved during the war and in the aftermath remains highly debateable and problematic.
There are two main tenets encapsulated by the term "ambivalent empowerment" which thematically strings the various arguments in this essay together.
The fundamental concept of "empowerment" is dealt with in the first part of the essay. Essentially, ethnic conflict discourses have often attributed full agency to men while women have been relegated to being a passive recipient. To counter this traditional and gendered notion of victimhood, the essay has pushed forth arguments for women's empowerment in ethnic conflicts based on empirical evidences obtained from the Rwandan, Yugoslavian and Sri Lankan case studies. By first understanding the basis of the victimhood discourse, academic scholarship should transcend that by taking a step further to examine how women often play a greater role than presumed - as mothers of the nation, combatants for the nation, perpetrators against the nation and peacemakers to rebuild the nation.
Upon establishing women's empowerment in ethnic conflicts, the second part of the essay then addresses the "ambivalent" nature of this empowerment during and after conflicts. It has been firmly established that women may be empowered symbolically rather than realistically. After all, they may be conscious agents acting out of their own will, albeit being actors framed within a patriarchal system inevitably. From another perspective, empowerment is a contextualised notion; specific political, economic and socio-cultural conditions may give rise to experiences of empowerment which may be transitory and elusive. Hence women, like men, are capable of being empowered in ethnic conflicts which open up new opportunities and spaces for new roles and responsibilities yet the extent of empowerment often varies according to circumstances.
Stringing the above core ideas together, Darini Rajasingham-Senanayake's phrase 'ambivalent empowerment' seems to fit best when we critically analyse women's agency beyond victimhood in ethnic conflicts. This conclusion brings about two main implications which impact gender studies generally and women's identity specifically.
Firstly, the way and extent to which women may be empowered by their roles and experiences in ethnic conflicts has "theoretical and practical ramifications for gender sensitive analyses as well as for national or international feminist politics". Most feminist human rights theorists and activists have often built their arguments for more equality and justice on the basis of gender discrimination and female victimhood. This illuminates a broader conundrum for feminists: "how do they address women's human rights if in so 'doing', they rectify certain (unhelpful, incomplete, potentially essentialist) constructs that they also wish to - or need to - annihilate?" After all, most of the existing international mechanisms for addressing wartime sexual violence also tend to "reify the male-perpetrator/female victim paradigm". For many feminists who are committed to peace, the notion of female perpetrators becomes an anomaly in their studies, indirectly affirming the perception that women are almost always conceived as victims and nothing more. On this note, there should definitely be more awareness for women's rights in conflicts but we should not overplay women's victimhood in wars which would ironically chain us to the gender norms that we aspire to be liberated from.
Secondly, casting women in a different light also changes how women perceive themselves. Starting from the premise of women's victimization and marginalization in ethnic conflicts may ironically be the best way to illuminate women's identities and lives. Since the experience and threat of sexual violence has been a dominant feature in the construction of women's identities in relation to men, "victimhood constitutes a core element in women's understanding of themselves". From this point of departure, women are equally empowered to construct themselves with the identity of peace activists or agents of war when the opportunities arise. Henceforth, we have progressed from examining the victimhood mentality of women to exploring the non-victim roles that women play, which truly reinforces the diversity of womanhood.
To end it off, women's victimhood identity is truly transcended when we explore the other diverse roles women play in ethnic conflicts. Above all, this symbolic transcendence of victimhood will only be a true socio-cultural transformation when external patriarchal structures are eradicated in conjunction with the development of an internal process of consciousness within the minds of people; creating a universal language that will legitimate women's empowerment in midst of conflicts, furthermore providing women with a sense of their own agency