The speed and vigour with which democratisation has occurred in places ranging from Argentina to South Korea, as well as the new political ideas and influences on previously closed authoritarian political systems 'have prompted many observers in recent years to claim that "we are all democrats now" (Fukuyama 1989). Democracy - it would seem - has ceased to be a matter of contention and has become a matter of convention' (Weale, 1999, pp. 1). However, it is clear that the legacy of authoritarian rule is far from extinct, for example, in China, the violent putting down of the democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square and the following persecution and imprisonment of political dissidents. Also, one may look at the consequences of the collapse of communist and authoritarian systems where, far from leading to liberal democracies, these collapses have lead to examples such as the civil war in Bosnia and war in Chechnya (effects of which are still being felt today). Thirdly, even in well established 'democratic' political systems, there are persistent and pertinent questions about the quality and performance of such a political party. Apart from the flaws in the practical implementation of democracy, as the theoretical foundations of democracy do not elicit as much widespread agreement as the point supposes either, it is perhaps a good idea to weigh the arguments for and against such a political system.
The different types of democracy all presume that those people living together in society need a process allowing them to arrive at binding decisions that take into account the interests of everyone. One common justification for democratic rule argues that people are generally the best judge of their own interests with the argument that equal citizenship rights are necessary to protect those interests, (and there is no better way to minimize the abuse of political power than to distribute it equally.) This instrumentalist justification could thus be said to include the assumption of fallibilism - the belief that no one occupies a privileged position with respect to their political knowledge or judgment and that contestation and criticism of what at any other time is judged to be in the public interest is therefore necessary. 'Therefore, democratic institutions are justified as those practices that promote and protect the common interests of the members of a political community, when those persons regard themselves as political equals under conditions of human fallibility' (Weale, 1999, pp. 42).
Another complementary justification is that popular rule expresses and encourages the autonomy or self determination, of individuals under conditions of social interdependence, where many matters must be decided collectively. However, Lakoff (1996) has pointed out that there are at least three forms of autonomy that have been associated with the idea of democracy. The first is that of communal autonomy, or the notion that a political unit should be independent of outside control. The second form is that of plural autonomy, or the idea that different social groups should share in political power. Held sets out a similar notion when he claims that 'the principle of autonomy entrenched in democratic public law is not an individualistic principle of self-determination, but a structural principle of self determination' where the 'self' is part of the 'majority' enabled and constrained by the rules and procedures of democratic life. The third form is that of individual autonomy, resting on the idea that individuals should control their own lives. A number of writers have advanced the principle of autonomy in its individualistic sense as being essential to the justification of democracy.
It is also argued by some democratic theorists that, as a democracy encourages people to take responsibility for their political lives, it is instrumental to human development. Others are of the opinion that 'democracy represents fair terms of a social contract among people who share a territory but do not agree upon a single conception of the good' (Gutmann, 1993, pp. 412). Democracy is thought to consist of co-operation, negotiation and thus a fair moral compromise from this contractarian viewpoint.
However, this perspective leads to the two main paradoxes associated with democracy. Often, a voter may vote a particular way depending on his or her personal beliefs on the issue. If the majority votes the other way the voter is caught in a clear paradox as he or she being a reasonable person and democrat must now believe contradictory things: that the outcome is not justified (by the best reasons) and that it is justified (because the majority voted the other way.) Though this paradox disappears on a more defensible understanding of the nature of the democrat's beliefs (Honderich, 1973; Pennock, 1974), a second paradox explains that voting is irrational from the point of view of the cost-benefit calculation of an individual in a large electorate. If most people are cost benefit calculators, then democracies are 'doomed to collapse under the weight of all the rational free riders on the system' (Gutmann, pp. 419) If most people are not, democracies depend on the irrationality of citizens.
Both these paradoxes can be developed into arguments against democracy which in turn can be grouped under those that are ideological and those that are practical problems. Tocqueville identified two of the former in particular, the first being tyranny of the majority, when he wrote 'I can imagine no permanent protection against the most galling tyranny; and a greater people may be oppressed by a small faction, or by a single individual with impunity' (Tocqueville 1835) where the view of the majority effectively silences those with other beliefs. In a democracy there is also always the problem of a permanent and entrenched minority whose views and opinions are never heard or acted upon simply because the majority is always against them.
The other problem Tocqueville identified was that of individualism: 'a mature and calm feeling, which disposes each member of the community to sever himself from the mass of his fellows' and while drawing apart with his family and his friends, forming a circle of their own, and finally move away willingly from society. Tocqueville saw individualism as a problem as, at first while it would only 'sap' the virtues of public life, in the long run would destroy all others and eventually would be 'absorbed in downright selfishness.' Apart to this theory, however, he also recognised the 'principle of self-interest rightly understood' whereby individuals 'content themselves with inquiring whether the personal advantage of each member of a community does not consist in working for the good of all.' It could be argued that Tocqueville did not base his theory on hard evidence but rather on his own subjective observations.
For Amy Gutmann, 'democracy is not paradoxical, but it is disharmonious'. In practice, under conditions of imperfect information and understanding, public deliberation does not yield knowledge of uniquely correct resolutions to political controversies. In her opinion, democracy is thus bound to be disharmonious both because individuals face hard political choices without any assurance of finding clear-cut resolutions, and because the conclusions of a 'community of deliberators' are likely to differ when confronted with a difficult issue such as homosexual marriage.
Most theorists recognise the arguments against democracy though some feel that even if democracy cannot live up to its aspirations and the principles of human worth, autonomy, freedom, distributive justice, equality and the rejection of tyranny invoked by Pennock in his discussion of the justification of democratic theory (1979, pp. 130-60), its promise on each of these counts is greater than that of any non-democratic government. While tyranny of the majority, individualism and problems associated with conflicting and incommensurable values are important arguments against democracy, greater public deliberation leading to more justifiable public policies, and a reduction in political animosity and violence as citizens learn to respect each other as deliberative, are among the most inspiring prospects democracy has to offer. There will always be arguments for and against any social or political institution; however the worldwide rapid spread of democracy as a political system goes to prove that it could be the most appropriate political system for a modern nation state.