Arguably, one of the reasons Hua Guofeng failed to hold on to power was because he never had it in the first place. His initial position was inherently unstable, taking on the legacy of Mao in an atmosphere such as this. Maoism had been steadily criticised with the people wanting something else completely- a return to 'normal' politics. Apart from this, Hua quickly lost the support of his few allies (especially the Gang of Four, now arrested). The entire economic equation that he applied to the nation, too, was ultimately wrong, with mini 'leaps' and other developmental plans doing little to raise the living standards of the people, while Deng Xiao Ping promised more. With Deng's star rising, it seemed evident that the latter was simple more adept at the political game, and more able to manipulate power in order to gain authority.
A relative new comer to the Beijing political scene, Hua Guofeng had survived the Cultural Revolution to become party first secretary of Mao's native Hunan province in 1970. He gained national attention in 1971, when Mao nominated him to serve on a panel assigned to investigate the conspiracy and death of Lin Biao. With Mao's strong backing, he was elevated to the politburo in 1973. Two years later, he was appointed public security minister and sixth deputy premier. A competent administrator who lacked strong factional ties to either Deng or the Leftists, who enjoyed Mao Zedong's personal confidence and who lacked a powerful organizational base of his own, Hua made an ideal compromise candidate. His unexpected designation as 'acting premier' broke the stalemate. In April 1976, Hua was appointed first vice chairman of the Central Committee and premier of the State Council, the Tiananmen disturbance was labelled a "counterrevolutionary incident" and Deng's dismissal from posts inside and outside the party were ordered. 'As Mao's health continued to deteriorate, Hua visibly began to grow in political stature and self-confidence and this proved to be an obstacle for Hua's four radical rivals' (Baum, 1994). Events turned in his favour as when the earthquake struck in 1976, Hua took personal charge of the relief effort a managed to generate a great deal of favourable publicity for him. However, position and power did not necessarily mean the same thing.
Of all China's leaders, Hua Guofeng faced the biggest challenge in responding to the legacy of Mao. He had, after all, been a beneficiary of the Cultural Revolution - he owed his very position to radicalism. He had also been a close ally of the Gang of Four during this time. And his sole claim to leadership was that Mao had personally blessed his succession. How could Hua criticise Mao or the Cultural Revolution without undermining his own position? Even criticising the much despised Gang of Four was dangerous for Hua, given his own Cultural Revolution experiences. Hua's position, then, was an inherently unstable one. Unwilling and unable to move away from the Maoist past, Hua instead turned to old tried, (but not necessarily tested,) means of cementing his position. Hua argued Mao had been a great leader, and that the horrors of the Cultural Revolution were all down to the Gang of Four who had distorted the Great Helmsman's ideas and policies for their own gain. Hua portrayed himself as the true inheritor of Mao's unsullied ideological and political programme, a programme that Hua could implement now that the Gang of Four had been removed from the scene.
It is common to talk of the death of the 'Maoist model' after the death of Mao in September 1976. However, while the removal of the Shanghai 'Gang of Four' soon afterwards removed the main-stays of radical Maoism within the leadership, it did not bring about the immediate demise of Maoism as a whole, but of one version. Indeed 1977-8 saw a resurgence of a moderate form of 'developmental Maoism'.
When Mao died, the increasingly strained united front between the radicals and the loyalists totally disintegrated as the Leftists positioned themselves for a showdown. Also, the key members of the survivor's faction supported Hua and the loyalists against the four Leftists. While the other factions were debating on how to act, Hua's faction seized the initiative. They used the mass media to warn people that the 'Rightists' and the 'capitalists' were threatening to split the party and drew support on the grounds of protecting Mao's revolution. On the night of October 6, the four radical leaders were arrested. Thus, Hua's funeral warning that 'Anyone who tampers with Chairman Mao's directives...and anyone who practices splittism or engages in conspiracies is bound to fail" was being realised. (Baum, 1994). However, Hua was soon trapped in a tricky situation. The first wave of post-Mao rehabilitations underlined the extreme delicacy of Hua's position. On the one hand, too much obstruction on his part would render him vulnerable to the charge of covering up the misdeeds of the Left; on the other hand, the exoneration of all previously deposed cadres would cast a doubt on Mao's judgement- upon which Hua relied for his leadership mandate. The movement to rehabilitate Deng soon began to gain momentum. Deng's return to power was formally ratified by the Eleventh National Congress of the CCP, which met in August 1977. The Congress formally declared an end to the Cultural Revolution, adopted a revise party constitution and elected a new Central Committee and a Politburo Standing Committee which now included Deng. The new party constitution bowed deeply in Mao Zedong's direction and stipulated that the party's primary task was to "persist in continuing the revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat, eliminate the bourgeoisie step by step, and bring about the triumph of socialism over capitalism" (Baum, 1994). Ye Jianying even defended the Cultural Revolution as the best means to fight a capitalist restoration.
Hue Guofeng and his likeminded associates did not reject the Cultural Revolution, still less Mao himself; nor did they view the previous decade a disaster. Indeed, they emphasised that, in spite of 'serious interference and sabotage' from Lin Biao, and the Gang of Four, the previous development strategy had basically been correct and economic performance generally good. Meanwhile 'Deng Xiaoping explicitly recognised that both the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution had weakened the Party's general support because of their impact on the population's standard of living. For Deng that "crisis" had to be rectified by economic growth and a return to the "conventional ways of doing things" (Dernberger, 1972). While Deng was mastering the political game and responding to what the mass wanted to hear, Hua and his associates seemed to be harking back to the era before the Cultural Revolution and searching for some kind of amalgam between the stability of the Soviet institutions introduced in the mid 1950s and a more sensible and controlled version of the Great Leap Forward.
Hua sought to create a reputation as a forward-thinking leader and economic strategist and so he proposed Zhou Enlai's "four modernizations" theme as his own and, in 1978, introduced an overly ambitious new Ten-Year Plan for economic development, brought up at the first session of the Fifth National People's Congress. The proclaimed objectives of the Plan reflected the Maoist style of setting unrealistically high goals and then mobilising the population to chase after them. However, the policy mixture contained elements of Dengism as well and was thus, inherently inconsistent. Among the Maoist conventions he proposed the traditional norms of self-reliance, egalitarianism and reliance on non-material incentives. But on the other hand, he proposed reforms such a decentralization of economic management, adoption of managerial responsibility systems, and the widespread use of incentive payment schemes, which had all been criticised by Leftists for encouraging a 'capitalist restoration'. Hua also proposed to accelerate the development of heavy industry and related infrastructure and he called for opening the country to large scale technological imports from the West and Japan. This sharply reversed Mao's post- 1956 developmental model, which had stressed the need for economic self-reliance and the primacy of agriculture and light industry over heavy industry. Thus, Hua and the 'whatever' faction lacked a clear, coherent economic strategy or outlook. 'The very grandiosity of his ten-year economic plan contributed to its eventual failure'. (Baum, 1994)) Hua Guofeng's 'flying leap' approach to modernization and development soon led to serious imbalances in China's national economy. This led to trade imbalances and a steady rise in the rate of inflation. His dash for rapid economic growth to win popular support placed too much stress on China's badly neglected infrastructure; Hua severely undermined his credibility and this further contributed to the erosion of his political authority. It is ironic, however, that these schemes had been borrowed from Deng's proposals, but when they backfired, Hua had to shoulder the blame. Even before the downside effects of Hua's ten-year plan had materialised, Deng had seized political initiative. Wholly rejecting the Maoist concept of self-reliance, Deng stressed the need urgently and continuously to learn from the west and tried to revitalise the education system (Baum, 1994)
Toward the end of 1977, several of Deng's supporters were promoted to leading positions in the party organisation. By the end of the year, the first clear signs of an emerging power struggle between Deng and Hua became evident and Deng's followers launched a campaign to uncover information pertaining to past collusion between the 'whateverists' and the Gang of Four. The suppression of the 1976 Tiananmen incident was Hua's greatest point of political vulnerability. Hua's position was a difficult one to maintain. He had destroyed much of his own constituency of support by arresting the Gang of Four. His attacks on the left brought into question his own record and he was aware that his political power rested on a fragile foundation. He protected himself in the cover of Maoist infallibility and complemented this with a campaign to fashion a personality cult of his own. There was an attempt to create a new public image of Chairman Hua as a 'wise leader' and 'beloved comrade' in the tradition of Chairman Mao. By the end of 1978, however, his position was on shaky ground. Deng argued that the best way to follow Mao was not to adhere slavishly to his past policies; indeed, this ran counter to Mao's political ideas. Times had changed from when Mao was developing his polices, and this meant that to be a true Maoist, policy had to be changed to reflect the new realities.
Even where Maoist politics did succeed in introducing certain new elements into the traditional Soviet model of statist development (notably the emphasis on decentralisation to local governments), the institutional essentials of the old system not only remained, but were also protected against market-orientated reform alternatives which might have threatened the authority of the state. There was still a hegemonic Party dominated by a single leader and rules by a single ideological orthodoxy; the economy was still subject to direct control by state agencies. Indeed, the Maoist experiment served to intensify these characteristic and take them to extreme lengths. In White's book, Riding the Tiger, the author has even gone so far are to say that '[i]n the economic sphere, instead of achieving 'leaps forward' in developing the human and material potential of the nation, Maoism served to restrain growth in productivity by stifling initiative and penalising excellence...whereas the Party/state machine was supposed to become more responsive an democratic, it became more sluggish and authoritarian... As a project for the reconstitution of revolutionary socialism, Maoism was faulty both in its conception and in its implementation...'(White, 1993). While this may be thought of by some as a particularly harsh critique of Maoism, it can be said that in China, many perhaps held this conception as well and were desperate to move past and beyond this political era.
Deng's reform initiatives went well beyond the ideas put forward by Hua Guofeng, but their rivalry showed up most clearly in debate regarding the relationship between 'doctrine' and 'practice'. The assertion that 'practice is the sole criterion for testing truth' exploited the principal theoretical weakness of the 'whateverists' and allowed Deng, through this reformulation of 'theory' and 'thought', to criticise Mao the man, but protected the general legitimising function of Mao Zedong Thought (Dernberger, 1972). His offensive against 'whateverism' rapidly gained momentum and in the late summer and autumn of 1978, Leftists and their collaborators were removed from provincial strongholds across the country while more members of the party and military lined up in support of Deng Xiaoping on the twin issues of truth and tradition. Having seriously weakened the hold of the 'whateverists' on party organisation and operations, Deng still permitted Hua and his supporters to retain their seats on the Central Committee and Politburo, now having lesser positions.
Although Hua had tried to reinvigorate intellectual discussions in science, philosophy, literature and the arts and has been credited for opening up the social sciences in China, these prescriptions for reform were contradicted by calls for the continued observance of traditional Maoist behavioural constraints and political limits. Any authority Hua may have had in the economic sphere was greatly cut way at by the importance of provincial leaders who implemented economic and political strategy in their own ways, similar to the workings of an earlier Maoism. With regard to the army, key military figures, suspicious of Hua, were eager to see Deng back in power; and after the peasant revolt in December 1978, it was clear that the people saw Maoism as the problem, not the solution, and that Hua would soon have to relinquish any power he may still have had.
Hua held on to his formal position of leadership until 1981. As a sign of a new political atmosphere, he was not so much purged as allowed to fade into obscurity, and he actually held onto his Central Committee position. But at the 3 rd Plenum of the 11 th Central Committee in December 1978, the Maoist period of China's history essentially came to an end. The new leadership under Deng Xiaoping set about overturning the very basics of Mao's notions of politics, economics and society. Economic development became the paramount goal, and as Deng had said before the Cultural Revolution, anything that helped the economy to move forward was now legitimate irrespective of its impact of the cultural and social revolution.