The Black Death of 1347 to 1352 and the subsequent outbreaks of the plague were 'the most devastating natural disasters ever to strike Europe'. Although it is impossible to calculate the exact death toll of the Black Death, as there is limited evidence, 'to maintain that one European in three died... cannot be wildly far from the truth'. As there were a number of social, economic and political changes that occurred around that time, the Black Death can be viewed as a turning point in the history of Europe; F. A. Gasquet believed it to have formed 'the real close of the Medieval period and the beginning of our Modern age'. On the other hand, there are worries that too great a significance has been placed on the impact of the Black Death. Philip Ziegler, for example, argues that 'in the long run things would have followed the same course, even though there had never been a plague'.
There were a number of economic changes that occurred as a result of the Black Death. As Ziegler observes ' one third of a country's population cannot be eliminated... without considerable dislocation to its economy and its social structure'. The initial response of many was to flee from the plague. Others preferred to indulge in life's pleasures rather than work. This, along with the high death toll, meant that posts went unfilled and services unperformed. On the other hand, more jobs were created, both in towns and in agriculture. For example, gravediggers and physicians were in greater demand than before. Also, there were more jobs available on the land; where before there had been an excess of labour, there was now a shortage. This had a major effect on the established system as 'labour began... to understand its value and assert its power'. Workers could demand higher wages and better conditions because, if the landlord refused, they could easily find work elsewhere.
Thorold Rogers suggests that the ' Black Death was a stimulus towards... the disintegration of the manorial system'. Villeins began to feel that their positions were unfair as they could see the high wages of those not bound to their lord by obligation. The 'scales were... tipped against the land owner'. Laws such as the Statute of Labourers were passed to protect the landlord by checking increased wages and the free movement of labour. These laws were largely ignored. Landlords also tried to maintain power by stepping up the level of fines in their courts. As a result, 'relations... became more confrontational' between the workers and the landowners. In this way, it can be argued that the Black Death caused the Peasants' Revolt of 1381. As Ziegler maintains, 'if there had been no Black Death, tension and bitterness would never have risen by 1381 to the level that it did'. The situation after the outbreak of the plague highlighted existing grievances of the peasants and showed up the flaws in the existing system.
Although the peasants revolted against the landowners in 1381, there was an increase in the standard of living of many as a result of the Black Death. The increased availability of jobs and higher wages meant that workers had more money to spend on luxury goods. For example, a ploughman in Cuxham was earning around 2s before the Black Death but this increased to around 10s 6d afterwards. David Herlihy comments on the fact that silk became more sought after than wool, 'indicating smaller, but richer markets'. There was also an increase in the brewing of beer, which 'indicates an improved standard of living'. People had better diets than before because there was an increase in the production of meat and dairy produce. With less of a demand for food, land that had previously been used for crops was freed for use as pasturage or forests. The economy had become more diversified as a result of the Black Death.
The time after the Black Death was ' a period of impressive technological achievement'. As the population had decreased, labour costs were high which meant that great rewards were given to inventors of labour-saving devices. Also, with less demand for food there was more room for innovation and experimentation. The depression of the fifteenth century led to the development of the labour-saving, light, one-slit plough. Away from agriculture, there were advancements in other areas such as the invention of Johann Gutenberg's printing press in 1453. This replaced the large teams of monastic copyists whose numbers were decreased significantly during the Black Death.
A major effect of the plague was that it 'undermined confidence in the Church's spiritual leadership'. It was observed that priests were just as likely to die of the plague than anybody else. As the plague was widely held to be a punishment from God for the sins of man, it was suggested that the Church was as corrupt as the laity. People felt let down by the Church, which they felt should have given them some warning about God's wrath rather than waiting till afterwards to condemn their wrongdoings. The depleting numbers of priests put a strain on the Church. They were unable to deal effectively with revolts or protest movements. There was a rush to replenish the priesthood. The usual rules of ordination were discarded, resulting in unsuitable candidates being accepted. The new recruits were less spiritual and not as well educated as former priests. They were not prepared for positions of responsibility and were ill equipped to give lead to a straying flock. Although the Black Death did not cause the Reformation, it created a state of mind in which doctrines were more easily doubted. The Church's 'unquestioned authority... was never to be recovered'.
Paradoxically, at the same time as the Church's authority was being undermined, there was a 'growth of religious fervour'. Pope Clement VI declared a year of jubilee in 1350 and many churches were built such as the Cathedral of Milan. There was an increase in the number of chantry chapels, which weakened the position of the monasteries. Ziegler asserts that the Black Death was the 'most important element in... [the monasteries] decline'. There was an increase in lay piety instead of people turning to the established Church. The Flagellants were a group that emerged as a result of the Black Death. They would punish themselves for the sins of man by sleeping outdoors and whipping each other in public in the hope that God would take away his punishment of the plague. Groups like the Flagellants succeeded in 'supplanting the clergy in the role of intermediaries between heaven and earth'.
The psychological effect of the Black Death on the people was great. This is reflected in the artwork of the time, which shows an increased preoccupation with death. The motif of Three Living and Three Dead was common in pre-plague painting but became more plentiful and more shocking afterwards. The dead warn the living: "As you are now, so once were we. As we are now, so shall ye be." People were constantly reminded of their mortality. They were scared and wanted somebody to blame. For many this blame fell onto the Jews. There had always been tense relations with Jews in Europe but things intensified during the plague years. For example, in Strasbourg on the fourteenth of February 1349, nine hundred Jews were burned.
Although many changes appear to have happened as a result of the Black Death, its true impact may have been exaggerated. Michan claimed that 'the plague of the fourteenth century was no different to those which preceded or followed it'. In other words, it was not the nature of the Black Death that caused such great changes in Europe, but the 'man-made social factors' that were present at the time. By the middle of the thirteenth century, Europe was becoming 'uncomfortably crowded'. Villages expanded into towns and cities of ten or twenty thousand inhabitants. This overpopulation led to poor living standards, over-extended planting of wheat and a fall of productivity as the goodness was drained from the soil. Moreover, in the early fourteenth century there was a drop of around one degree Celsius in the temperature, resulting in a succession of wet summers and a loss of suitable farmland, as higher ground was too cold. This led to a series of famines; between 1315 and 1319 almost every country in Europe lost at least one harvest. There was a population decline of around ten per cent. Ziegler advocates that 'before the Black Death, therefore, most of Europe was in a in recession'. The fairs of Champaign, which were a sign of commercial success, significantly declined. The Black Death merely speeded up this degeneration. The Black Death can be viewed as a 'Malthusian Check' on the population of Europe that was necessary, and had such a great effect, because of the conditions of the time.
A number of the effects of the Black Death were only short term and evened out after a few years. For example, inflation of agricultural produce after the Black Death subsided and prices regained their previous levels. Wages also fell in a few years back to more usual levels. Although there were a number of technological advancements after the Black Death, many of the major breakthroughs of the time came before the plague such as windmills and complex field systems in agriculture and developments in wool and silk manufacture. Gutenberg's printing press was an advancement that came as a result of the population shortage after the Black Death; however, printing did not really become popular until the 1470s when the population was increasing. Also, the most important centers of printing were Venice, Rome and the Southern German cities where there was the fastest demographic growth. This suggests that the Black Death did not have a great impact on the technological advancements of the time.
Historians examining the Medieval period had previously over looked the Black Death. Henry only wrote fourteen lines on the subject in a study of twelve volumes. This indicates that the Black Death was not considered to have had a great impact on the history of Europe. Other explanations have been put forward for the decrease in population and the subsequent economic, social and political changes. Colin Platt suggests that 'it was famine not plague, after 1349, that remained the biggest killer' in more northern countries. He also comments on the fact that later marriages and families with fewer children was becoming normal practice and that this kept the population down more than the effects of the plague. As there is limited evidence from the period, it is impossible to discern exactly what was killing off so much of the population. Undeniably the plague was present, but its effects may have been exaggerated. Platt claims that 'more monks undoubtedly died of over-weight or of liver conditions than ever succumbed to the plague'. Graham Twigg, a zoologist, further suggests that the spread of anthrax was the predominant cause of death in 1348. Herlihy examined the Acta Sanctorum, which contained accounts of supposed plague victims. He found that freckles, which were more common to other diseases such as anthrax, not buboes, were the most common symptom described.
There have been a number of different interpretations on how significant an impact the Black Death had on the history of Europe. The population and commercialization of Europe was already in decline and 'continued deterioration... would have been likely, even if... [the Black Death] had never occurred'. It was a catalyst for events such as the Peasant's Revolt, the Reformation and the fall of manorialism, but was not a direct cause. It appears that 'the Black Death did not initiate any major social or economic trends but it accelerated and modified- sometimes drastically- those which already existed'.