Simmel's account is an attempt to describe a particular sensibility and a peculiar form of interaction in a modern metropolis. His thesis rests on the idea that not only is life in a modern metropolis more impersonal and individualistic than in pre-modern society, but that it is this very impersonality that allows individuality to flourish.
While most authors today would agree on a definition of the modern metropolis as a major city, large and densely populated perhaps including several independent administrative districts, and often regarded as the centre of a specific activity, a brief description of the distinction between pre-modern society and a modern metropolis is perhaps needed to understand the different premises Simmel starts from in his study. He believes the 'ancient polis' to have had the character of a small town. 'The incessant threat against enemies...brought about that stern cohesion on political and military matters, that supervision of the citizen by other citizens, and that jealousy of the whole toward the individually whose own private life was repressed to such an extent that he could compensate himself only by acting as a despot in his own household'(Simmel, 1971). He believed both to have a 'common prehistory and also common enemies in the narrow formations and groupings', and who's striving for self-preservation set them in conflict with the 'general' on the outside, as well as the individual on the inside. (Simmel, 1971)
One could argue that this comparison is not acceptable since in the different contexts the two different sorts of society would be very different. The types of governing for example would have been very different in a pre-modern society which may have to a large extent contributed to social relationships within the society. Simmel clearly regarded group size as a major determinant of variations in the structure of social relations, in the metropolis essay as well as in many other places.
While in the 18 th century there was a call for liberation from all the ties which grew up historically in politics, religion, in morality and in economics in order to permit 'the original natural virtue of man' to develop uninhibited, Simmel believed that the deepest problems of modern life arise from the attempt of the individual to maintain the independence and individuality of his existence against the sovereign powers of society and the weight of the historical heritage and the external culture of life. This is because in the 19 th century, apart from promoting man's freedom there was also a need to promote his individuality '(which is connected with the division of labour) and his achievements which make him unique and indispensable but which at the same time make him so much the more dependent on the complementary activity of others.' Simmel's attempt to examine 'the body of culture with reference to the soul' is an investigation of the relationship which such a social structure promotes between the individual aspects of life and those which transcend the existence of single individuals; and that 'the self-preservation of certain type of personalities is obtained at the cost of devaluing the entire objective world, ending inevitably in dragging the personality downward into a feeling of its own valuelessness'. (Simmel 1971)
In a modern metropolitan setting there is a tendency for people to be physically close to each other and yet socially relatively distant from each other. In a city, everyday individuals are bombarded with visual stimuli but their psychic capacity to assimilate all this stimuli is meagre. There is a deep contrast in the 'slower, more habitual, more smoothly flowing rhythm of the sensory-mental phase of small town and rural existence' and the 'rapid telescoping of changing images'. In order to cope with these disturbances and contradictions of events we create almost a protective shield for ourselves so that instead of reacting emotionally, we react primarily in a rational manner. This incapacity to react to new stimulations with the required amount of energy constitutes a blas attitude.
This has proved for many to be evidence of the fact that Simmel was very much a 19 th century writer. Some scientists today have argued that the body is able to adapt to such changes in environment over time, though one can not argue, coming from a rural setting the disturbing 'unexpectedness of violent stimuli' which occurs is a large metropolitan setting.
This blas attitude, combined with the fact that the city is the site of the money economy makes the characteristic mode of interaction in the city as one of reserve. There is a matter-of-fact attitude in the treatment of persons and things. Reserve becomes a survival strategy out of necessity.
While Marx wrote of money as a commodity, peculiar because it is a commodity upon which all other commodities are valued, Simmel writes of money as indifferent. He makes an analogy between the indifference of money to the peculiarities of things its value it expresses and the indifference of people to one another, thus, relationships are of interest only insofar as they offer something objectively perceivable. These relationships then are in sharp contrast with the nature of the 'smaller circle in which the inevitable knowledge of individual characteristics produces, with an equal inevitability, and emotional tone in conduct'. In a way one could also say that in a metropolis there is no moral pressure on such relationships. If one were never likely to come into contact again with that particular bus driver or shop salesman it would not be considered as to what they thought of you. Miligram has developed this idea further to explain a restricted sense of social responsibility and lowered expectations regarding traditional courtesies that have arisen in the modern city (Levine, 1976). There is also a higher division of labour and thus people's jobs are specialised. This means their encounters with other people are also specialised and do not require much of each other. This blas attitude can be described as where one is not interested in the other, but simply getting the job done with the other.
A criticism of Simmel though perhaps could be some of the particularly value laden statements he makes. 'They appear to the blas person in a homogenous, flat, grey colour.' Without any empirical proof one could question how he is able to come to these conclusions. Is everyday social interaction and observation enough to make these assumptions? One could also argue that his study shows the perspective of the middle class, relatively well off, white male who works. He does not look into the standing of, for example, housewives of the same class and economic background, even though they may have completely different social relationships with the rest of society, due to a completely different daily routine.
Other researchers, though, who have studied urbanism, have drawn similar conclusions to Simmel. As a natural structure Park suggested that the city obeyed laws of its own and there 'is a limit to the arbitrary modifications which it is possible to make in its physical structure and in its moral order.' Every device in the city facilitating trade and industry, in this study, prepares the way for further division of labour and further specialisation of tasks. As a result there is a continuous breakdown of older traditional, social and economic structures based on family ties, local associations, culture, and caste with the substitution of an order resting on occupation and vocational interests. This means that the growth of the city is accomplished by a 'substitution of indirect 'secondary' relations for direct, face-to-face 'primary' relations.' The institutions of socialisation are all modified to take on different roles, so the school takes over some of the functions of the family, and the 'church loses influence being displaced by the printed page. This may have the effect of separating the vocational classes so completely that they live in an isolation as complete as a remote rural community.' 'The great cities not only create occupational- but temperamental types as well. Experience is of an increasingly casual character excluding the more intimate and permanent associations of the smaller community. The individual's status is determined by conventional signs such as fashion and 'front' and 'the art of life is largely reduced to skating on this surfaces and the scrupulous study of style and manners.' This is correlated with a segregation of moral environments, a multiplication of competing milieus.'(Park, 1925)
The city then is a place of impersonality and reserve where we deal with each other on an objective basis. However, the paradox of urban life is that it is the very impersonality of our interactions with individuals that makes possible a greater development of our personality than was ever possible in a rural setting. Because urban life does not demand so much of us, much of our selves is left over for us to have the space to think, develop and reflect upon. 'The smaller the circle which forms our environment and the more limited the relationships which have the possibility of transcending the boundaries, the more anxiously the narrow community watched over the deeds, the conduct of life and the attitudes of the individual and the more will a quantitative and qualitative individuality tend to pass beyond boundaries of such a community'. (Weber, 1958) In the modern metropolis new forms of intimacy become possible. A kind of freedom then is made possible by this urban impersonality.
For this reason the city also provides us with a new idea about friendship. Social circles based on common interests tend to replace kinship and neighbourhood forms of association. Proof of this is evident as soon as one switches on the television and is accosted by American sitcoms all based on the idea of a group of friends and their relationships with one another, and the support structure they build for themselves..
The city if also an arena in which it is possible to find very extreme forms of eccentricity. Impersonality allows people not only to explore their inner selves but also allows them freedom to develop more quirky forms of outside display; eccentricity whose point is simply itself, simply to be different. Eccentricity then is a form of interaction. Perhaps one could argue that this need to be different stems from the feeling that with no distinguishing relationship with others, there is nothing about oneself that is special or unique. In a large city it is easier to feel insignificant.
Wirth developed this idea into a theory basically containing two arguments: a sociological one, quite Durkheimian; and a social psychological one derived from Simmel. First, on the structural level, population size, density, and heterogeneity (Wirth's definition of the city) lead sequentially to structural differentiation, formalisation of the institutions, and anomie. Second, on the individual level, urbanism (in the demographic sense) leads to high levels of nervous stimulation, psychological overload, and adaptation in the form of social isolation". (p189) Through careful inspection of a number of surveys and ethnographic studies as well as his own large-scale investigation, Fischer (1973) has raised considerable doubt about the validity of the thesis advanced by Wirth and others that isolation and social alienation become particularly acute in large cities. Simmel in particular did not depict the metropolis as a source of social isolation so much as he emphasized the new forms of association it made possible. (Fischer, 1972, cited in Levine, 1976)
The most original and distinctive aspect of Simmel's essay: the proposition that the great number of stimuli bombarding the residents of large cities produce such typical responses as aloofness, aversion, and superficiality in personal relations along with his ideas about the measurement of space and time, monetisation of values and the proliferation of cultural facilities, have already had an impact of knowledge on the development of general theoretical orientation of sociologists throughout the 20 th century, and will continue to so for a long time to come. Meanwhile the various paradoxes of urban life will carry on perplexing us as more of the world becomes more industrialised every day.