The history of English law is long standing and well established. As stated in Keeton's (1984:7) book, 'the doctrine of precedent inherently brings legal history to bear upon current judicial decisions.' Due to the distinctive nature of precedents, the specificity of cases had been coloured by its uniqueness and independence. Every verdict in individual cases had imposed a remarkable influence on the development of the law of tort. Many reasoning as well as rulings had even been extended into modern days.
According to Keeton's (1984) investigation, in early nineteenth century, the common practice of the society was politically incorrect. The concern over how to identify the problem of proximity had created a loud noise. Meanwhile, the whole system was still at embryo stage. Some might argue that when goods were sold from the manufacturer to distributors, those products were then expected to be resold to other retailers and eventually reaching the hands of consumers. Because of the unknown size of the public being involved behind, the society tended not to burden the manufacturers and sellers with too much pressure. Hence, it was generally accepted that the responsibility should not be passed onto their shoulders. Yet, a gleam of hope shined in this apparently desperate situation, lightened the darkness.
Originally, in  Heaven v. Pender
, the concept of negligence was not approved by Cotton and Bowen L.JJ.. After years and years of criticism, the importance of the duty of care had been stressed. And in law's term, a number of previous judges had tried to work out a formula to define the duty of care. Firstly, Brett M.R. provided a statement with a relatively wide meaning. He, became Lord Esher in later time, amended his idea by saying it in a less vague way. Then with Lords Atkin, Thankerton and Macmillan coming next, their comments given those days had inaugurated a new era in law of negligence.
At that time, the relevant law can be applied purely relied on the law of contract. It covered a very limited area as the linkage was being built up in between buyers and sellers only which had made it more difficult to make the manufacturer of defective products liable to third parties. The problem then came up, Mrs. Donoghue did not purchase the ginger beer in person (Adams, 2003). In this case, the right of making a claim was restricted to Mrs. Donoghue's friend (buyer) only. But, her friend did not suffer much. So, even if she had decided to engage in a lawsuit, the compensation could have been a pretty small amount which was insufficient to recover Mrs. Donoghue's harm, her physical illness and mental impact. However, as a third person, the bargaining counter of Mrs. Donoghue is very weak since she had no direct relationship with the seller. Moreover, the seller is just one of the retailers. To make it meaningful, the plaintiff had made up her mind to sue Stevenson, the manufacturer. And the final outcome had written a new page in tort law and case law. The results boosted popular morale and encouraged same type of cases being put to court.
The past experience shadowed a lot on tort law. It was always difficult to fit in several standard frameworks. In order to raise a practical claim, the plaintiff would need to look for particular pattern to follow under the spirit of common law. The winning of the case Donoghue v. Stevenson
 had examined the association in between a general public sentiment of wrongdoing and its responsibility. It had shown that the liability for negligence did exist, successfully opposing the general rule. Furthermore, the interpretation of Lord Macmillan had emphasized on the last few lines, "The grounds of action may be as various and manifold as human errancy; and the conception of legal responsibility may develop in adaptation to altering social conditions and standards. The criterion of judgment must adjust and adapt itself to the changing circumstances of life. The categories of negligence are never closed."
On the other hand, the dictum made by Lord Atkin had put forward a relatively concrete guideline for the posterity to follow. This valuable notion introduced was the "neighbour" principle. "The rule that you are to love your neighbour becomes in law, you must not injure your neighbour; and the lawyer's question, Who is my meighbour? Receives a restricted reply. You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour. Who, then, in law is my neightbour? The answer seems to be - persons who are so closely and directly affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in contemplation as being so affected when I am directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are called in question" addressed by Lord Atkin. Some sort of duty of care had been recognized to an outsider with whom it had no contract at all. It is also a fateful event to determine that a manufacturer did owe a duty of care to the ultimate consumer, not just buyers and sellers. Other than evidently outlined the method should be adopted to define the vicinity or proximity within reasonable range, the decision could never make it any clearer that the existing precedents was no longer an obstacle in developing the tort of negligence.
In handling Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co. , Lord Ried further agreed with Lord Atkin's speech. Thus he expressed his interest to regard Donoghue v. Stevenson
 as a milestone (Goldstein, 1987). Despite the fact that it was not belonged to part of a statute, still, the explanation was valid in many scenarios. In addition, the opinions mentioned above and by Lord Macmillan had turned into an extremely strong persuasive precedent. Although not compulsorily binding, they had been cited for hundreds time so as to support different convictions.
One point worthwhile to discuss was Lord Buckmaster's dissent in Donoghue v. Stevenson. The quoting of Cardozo's judgment in MacPhersonv. Buick Motor Co. It had definitely set up an example beforehand. This would probably be in favour of Mrs. Donoghue's condition. Yes, this was the point where it starts to differentiate. Lord Buckmaster denied the citation as appropriate since that was assumed only to 'dangerous articles'. Items like beer were well beneath the relevant topic.
Heading with this case's triumph, the court gradually extended the contractual guarantee to protect not only the eventual buyer, but also persons (e.g. family, friends and others) held close relationship with them (neighbouring effect). The USA had allowed the claimant to go on a direct claim against the manufacturer, provided that the skipping of procedures could allocate resources like time and money properly (Gerven et al 1998). It was not until the establishment of The UK Consumer Protection Act 1987 to obtain the similar outcome with USA. Referring to this victorious case, the general 'proximity' involved was totally granted on relationship and should not be confused with 'proximate cause' (Gerven et al 1998).
To begin with Donoghue v. Stevenson, other cases continued putting to law might not be confined to physical injury, but starting to expand to aspects like mental damage, nervous shock, emotional distress and even financial loss. The consequential chain joined up all those cases progressively. For instance, Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd v. Heller & Partners Ltd. , Smith v. Eric S. Bush
 coupled with T v. Surrey County Council (Percy, 1977). Implied in later case, Stennett v. Hancock, there is no any kind of formal or direct relationship in between the claimant and the defendant. Yet, by taking the neighbour test into account, the garage was found to owe a duty of care. The same applies in Grant v. Australian Knitting Mills Ltd. Tort seemed to have acted as an alternative way-out or route to seek indemnification. Last but not least, in impressive titles such as Malfroot v. Noxal Ltd. and Brown v. Cotterill, Lewis J. and Lawrence J. applied the principles being found in Donoghue v. Stevenson respectively, revealing the existence of duty of care (Percy, 1977).
With respect to the principles of UK law, the court usually exerted creative power in establishing case law (Adams, 2003). Even though common law had not been decreed by statute, it is influential to cases which would appear afterwards. To certain extent, those lengthy views done by judges were served as guidelines. Conclusively, before the hearing of Donoghue v. Stevenson, the fundamentals of the law of negligence had always been questioned. How to prove the existence of the duty of care? What were the requirements and limits? The prominent decision definitely answered all these exclamation marks.