When Cutter v. Eagle Star Insurance Co. Ltd [1998] came to the House of Lords, the material facts of the case had already been established during its process through both the County Court and the Court of Appeal. These were that Mr Cutter had been injured when some leaking gas had ignited in the car in which he was positioned in the passenger seat. These basic facts were not what were under dispute in the House of Lords; Mr Cutter had received damages from the driver of the car (who had lit the cigarette that ultimately led to the explosion) in separate proceedings. What was on dispute was whether the insurance company should pay Mr Cutter or not. The point of disagreement between the parties arose because the car had been parked in a multi-storey car-park, and the relevant statutory provisions provided that Eagle Star was liable to insure any person injured through 'the use of a vehicle on a road'.
The phrase 'on a road' therefore, was the point of argument between the parties; did a multi-storey car-park qualify as a road? Or, as the County Court and Court of Appeal had previously decided, did it not?
This phrase was consequently also the point of statutory interpretation which the Lords had to deal with. The basic principle of statutory interpretation is for the judiciary to discover the will of Parliament; to ask themselves the question, 'What would Parliament have wanted the outcome of this case to be?'.
In this case, the Lords used the literal approach to statutory interpretation. Using this method, they look, as the name may suggest, at the literal meaning of the words of a statute, and apply them. Had this caused 'inconsistency, absurdity or inconvenience', then the judges may have gone on to apply the golden rule. This is only ever applied where use of the literal rule would create an unjust or illogical outcome. Through this approach, judges can either choose between two conflicting definitions, as used in Adler v. George [1964] or simply apply the legislation in a way, although contrary to the written statute, that they believe Parliament would prefer to the literal application, as used in Re Sigsworth [1935]. In very rare cases, the mischief rule can be applied. This is where the judiciary can use existing common law rules alongside the rules established in Haydon's Case [1584] to decide what new statutory legislation was intended to do. This approach however, also had no place in the Eagle Star case because it was obvious to the Lords what the legislation was intended to do: ensure insurance companies paid out to those who deserved compensating.
The Lords themselves defined the point of interpretation as, "...the construction and application of the word 'road' in section 145 (3) (a) of the Road Traffic Act 1988." Their first point of reference was the intrinsic definition of the word 'road'. They stated that, "For England and Wales it [road] means 'any highway and any other road to which the public has access..." The Lords also looked upon the decision made in the Court of Appeal, and the references that Kilner Brown J. had made during that hearing. They took into consideration his citation of Oxford v. Austin [1981] R.T.R. 416 at pg. 418, and the quotation to which he referred that defined a road as, "...a definable was over which vehicles may pass which in plain common sense qualifies as a road."
Other sources upon which they looked were other sections of the Road Traffic Act 1988 itself, and also various other cases where the meaning of the word 'road' was put into dispute. The 1988 Act provided a very helpful phrase that suggested that Parliament intended to distinguish between roads and parking places. Section 25 starts with the words, "If, while a motor vehicle is on a road or on a parking place..." They also refer to the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984, because this Act also recognises the difference between parking places for vehicles and roads.
Their use of the 1984 Act aided their overall intention which, ultimately, was to find what Parliament would want to be construed from the word 'road'. They recognised that Parliament's distinction between a road a parking place can be found in the provisions forming Part IV of the 1984 Act, and that section 57 (1) (b) in particular suggests that Parliament would not intend for a parking place to be viewed as a road.
As well as using both intrinsic and extrinsic aides to their interpretation, the Lords also took into consideration the 'physical character and function' of a normal road. Through doing this, they became closer still to finding an exact literal meaning to the word 'road'. They came to the conclusion that a road usually has obvious limits and boundaries and serves as a 'means of access', whereas the primary function of a car park is to enable vehicles to 'stand and wait'.
Consequently, the Lords recognised that to give the 'road' and 'parking place' the same meaning would take the language of the Act 'beyond the literal meaning of the word[s]' and would be 'stretching the language', and therefore allowed the appeal of Eagle Star Insurance Co. Ltd.
In his final summing up, Lord Clyde expressed his feelings on the decision that he and his colleagues clearly had to reach. He stated that he felt 'sympathy' for the victims (Cutter was heard with another case), but that it was up to Parliament to decide how people in these circumstances should be compensated in the future. This point had been raised earlier in Clyde's speech when he stated that if the Act needed extending or amending, then that was a 'matter for Parliament to achieve'. This is evidence that although the judiciary invariably follow the rules of statutory interpretation to ensure that just outcomes are achieved, they often realise that Parliament has not legislated as fully as it could to achieve the maximum justice it could in our legal system.
The point of law which the decision of this case turned upon was whether or not a car-park should be included under the heading of a 'road'. The ratio decidendi therefore, was that it did not, and that only when victims were injured on roads were insurance companies obliged to compensate them.