The doctrine of consideration plays a vital part in English contract law. It states that for a contract to be legally binding, detriment or benefit must be conferred to one of the parties involved. Without consideration, a contract is declared legally void. It is therefore commonplace for the courts to have to deal with cases in which parties are seeking to prove the presence or lack of, consideration in their contract. Due to the common law nature of contracts, it is entirely up to the court to determine whether consideration is present or not, and the judges are only bound by the precedent set by the decisions in other courts involving similar cases.
One of these pieces of precedent that is cited as causing ambiguity was that which was set in the case of Williams v. Roffey Bros. (1991). The judges who sat on this case, through their decision, went against previous doctrine set in Stilk v. Myrick
, and stated that the benefit or detriment required to fulfil the need for consideration in a contract, should be viewed in a 'practical' manner, and not necessarily through the eyes of the law. This has obviously created uncertainty within English contract law, because it is now hazy as to which of the rules to use; that from Williams or that from Stilk.
In Foakes v. Beer
, a case decided using precedent set in Stilk, it was decided that the court should decide whether a benefit or detriment has been received as a point of law, not whether the gain or loss was a practical one, or one of any monetary value. This therefore, is another point of precedent that Williams has gone against, creating further ambiguity.
In Williams, the judges did not at any point overrule the rules laid down in Stilk, but at the same time, they only discussed the decision of the case; they did not apply it. The guidelines which Glidewell LJ set out in his judgement during Williams were said to be intended to hone and curb the way the Stilk principle is applied, but in no way were they intended to disregard it.
If the 'practical benefit or detriment' rule had been applied in the Stilk case rather than the 'legal benefit or detriment', the outcome of the case could have been very different. It could have been held that the boat's Captain had in fact, gained a practical benefit through his staff completing extra work, and consideration would have therefore been present. The decision therefore, could have been in complete contradiction of the one that was actually reached.
Conversely, if the Stilk rule had been applied in Williams, it would have almost been certain that the court would not have found evidence of consideration, and the outcome again, would have been in complete reverse.
It can consequently be said that the decision in Williams has created further ambiguity, because it has given judges in future cases a decision to make that could, in theory, cause the case to be decided in two completely opposing manners; that of whether to use 'practical' or 'legal' benefit and detriment as a way of discovering consideration.
The addition of a practical gain or loss to the doctrine of consideration could also create problems for the judiciary because it is their task to decipher what is or is not a practical benefit or detriment. If they apply the Stilk principle and ask if it was a legal loss or gain, then the decision is relatively easy; would the law see it as a valuable gain or detriment? However, if the Williams principle is applied, then it is purely the judges' discretion that will decide what is a practical benefit or loss, creating if not definite ambiguity, then surely uncertainty in English contract law.
Patteson J, in Thomas v. Thomas
 stated: "...consideration means something which is of some value in the eye of the law." This definition was used as binding precedent for many years, and it can be said that Williams does not contradict this, but does in fact agree with it. This is because now, the 'eye of the law' believes the practical, not the legal benefit or detriment to be of value, and this is therefore an argument against Williams creating ambiguity.
The other point of law that Williams raises, is regarding the 'Pre-Existing Duty' rule of consideration, which is currently in flux, and has been since long before the Williams decision. The question posed by this arguably indefinite rule, is that if A already had a contractual duty to B to complete a duty, and if B subsequently promises to pay A more to complete his contractual duty, does A provide valid consideration by completing the task that he was already contracted to complete? Stilk, a case that I have already mentioned, is again the leading authority on this rule. It suggests that in the above scenario, valid consideration is not provided. Again though, Williams has gone against the decision in Stilk and suggests that yes, valid consideration is provided. This is another example of Williams creating ambiguity in the law of contract, because not only does the decision differ to what precedent expects it to be, but it is the complete opposite of this.
The Williams case has been cited very few times since the decision was made in 1991. It is yet unclear whether this fact indicates that the decision is of little practical significance to English contract law, or whether it has made little impact upon it as a whole. This could therefore be an argument against it having created further ambiguity in the doctrine of consideration, because something that is hardly referred to is unlikely to have a detrimental effect upon such a large area of contract law as consideration.
In conclusion, I personally feel that the decision in Williams v. Roffey Bros. has not caused further ambiguity in the scope of consideration in English contract law. This is because although it has been cited alongside Stilk, it's contrary, in Anangel Atlas Compania Naviera SA v. Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Co Ltd
, Hirst J stated (at page 545) that: "...the ratio of the Williams' case is that, whoever provides the services, where there is a practical... benefit or...avoidance of disbenefit...there is good consideration and it is no answer to say that the promisor was already bound, where, on the other hand, there is a wholly gratuitous promise Stilk's case still remains good law." This suggests that both the Williams decision and the  Stilk decision now apply, but in very different circumstances, and the judges have realised this and have applied the rules in the relevant places. The lack of citation of Williams is in all probability evidence that the circumstances in Foakes and Stilk are far more prevalent than those in Williams. I feel the decision simply showed how the law is moving; this is towards finding the intentions of the parties rather than the legal aspects of their contract. Therefore, the addition of the Williams decision to the already large bank of precedent concerning consideration is simply a step towards a fairer way of deciphering contracts, not a step towards an ambiguous, complex set of rules that do not achieve the decisions that should be achieved.