A common replacement for the phrase 'vicarious liability' is the Latin expression 'respondeat superior'. This literally means, 'let the principle answer'. This is a very apt description of the English law relating to tortuous vicarious liability. Our common law dictates that when a tort arises inside an employee's 'scope of employment' (usually described as the normal tasks they are expected to carry out in the course of their job), the employer will also incur liability for his employee's actions and any subsequent consequences.
Of course, this seemingly harsh approach requires some guidelines to ensure that employers are not simply used as a way for employees to 'pass the buck' as it were. The most questioned point of fact in cases of vicarious liability is whether the employee was actually an employee. There is no specifically defined test to establish this, but the intention of both parties, the degree of control the employer has over his employee, and the employee's 'integration' within the business are among the factors taken into consideration by the courts. If an employer-employee relationship is found, then vicarious liability is enabled.
The main justification for this imposition of liability (seen by some as a form of strict liability due to the lack of examination of the ACTUAL liability of the employer) is that it allows all victims of a tort to receive the compensation they deserve due to most employers being more affluent than their workers. It is also said that the principle of vicarious liability actually allows business to operate more freely. One of the validations of this argument is that if an employer knows that whatever his employees do he can resolve the situation without too much of a slur on his company's reputation, then he will probably be freer throughout the running of his business. It also allows employers to make arrangements for the possibility that they could be taken to court by either taking out insurance or increasing prices to allow them to have the necessary funds to finance such an action. This consequently means that they will know exactly what their finances will be used for, and how much they can afford to spend on other things.
However, many people would argue quite the contrary: that the system of vicarious liability actually makes the workings of a business less free. For example, in the case of Century Insurance v NIRTB, it was held that a worker carelessly throwing a match used for lighting a cigarette was acting within his course of employment. Surely therefore, it is very difficult for employers to predict what they will and will not be liable for, and therefore makes their finances more unpredictable, because claims arising from the torts of employees may be a lot larger than predicted.
Consequently, many people have argued that the scope of vicarious liability is far too wide, and that set guidelines as to who can be sued for what should be laid out. Others argue that any tort is only ever the fault of the defendant, not a third party who was assuming his employee was acting correctly. This leads to the question of whether an employer should still be sued even if the employee cannot. In the case of Broom v Morgan, a wife was injured by her fellow-employees actions. Her fellow employee was also her husband, and at this time spouses could not sue one another. However, it was deemed by the courts that the employer of the couple could still be sued, and he was consequently held liable. This caused great controversy, as the employer in this case took full liability for the tort, whereas it is usual that the defendant retains responsibility for his actions as well as liability being imposed upon his employer. This consequently brings the freedom of businesses into question - is a business free if it can be sued for things even the defendant is not liable for?
On the other hand, victims of torts deserve compensation, and if, as is usual, the employer is in a better financial position to provide this, then surely they should. After all, in the employment of their workers, and the direction of them to complete certain activities, they are taking the risk that something will go awry. They also make the profit from their employees' actions, so surely they should use some of the profits to insure against actions resulting from incidents that occur during production. As in the Broom case (detailed above), surely if the victim could not claim compensation from the person who directly caused the accident, then she should be able to claim the compensation she is rightfully owed from the employer. This justification is also reinforced by the argument that if it were not for the employer, then the employee would not have been carrying out his duties required of him. Therefore, through a rather complex chain of causation, the employer is ultimately culpable.
Vicarious liability encourages employers to take precautions against one of its employees committing a tort. For example, they may employ more cautious recruitment techniques, or more rigorous training for new employees. They may make sure inspections are more detailed, or they may devise a strict quality control procedure. If these or any other safety measures are taken, then not only will the employer be less likely to have an action taken against him due to it being less likely that an employee will be responsible for a tort, but the employee will also be more at ease over such things, creating the much valued 'good working environment'. For example, in the case of Tarry v Ashton (1876), an employer was sued for a gas lamp that fell onto the victim's head due to the careless nature of the employee's work. Had a stricter inspection of the employee's work been employed, this may never have happened and the action may never have been brought.
These extra precautions however, may increase the production costs of businesses by a substantial amount. For example, taking out liabilities insurance can be very expensive, as can be employing a separate inspector of workmanship or purchasing extra safety equipment. To compensate for these costs, businesses will increase the price of their products: an obvious disadvantage to the consumer. However, it is said that if the costs of tort cases are spread over the whole consumer base, then this will ensure that all victims will be awarded the compensation they deserve.
Consequently, although the principle of vicarious liability at first sight appears to be an unfair imposition of liability rather than a compromise, it can be proven that it does actually work to the advantage of all the parties involved. The business is made more predictable for the employer, the employee does not have to worry unduly about mistakes he could possibly make during his employment, and the consumer is almost guaranteed the compensation they deserve. As well as this, everybody involved with the business will be dealing with a (hopefully) safer and better managed organisation.