Subsequent to the chain of events explained, it is probable that Felicity and Amy would be held liable under English law for at least one offence each. I intend to assume throughout this examination of their circumstances that there is no reason why either defendant should not be prosecuted under English law, including the fact that they are both above the age threshold of criminal liability. I assume this because Felicity has previous criminal convictions.
I shall start by exploring the possibility that both Amy and Felicity could both be held liable for theft, regarding their successful acquisition of two mobile telephones. They would both be held liable for theft if they did not use the rulers to scare the victims in the process of stealing the first two mobile 'phones.
The offence of theft is described in section 1(1) of the Theft Act 1968. The actus reus of theft requires that the defendant 'appropriates property belonging to another'. Under section 5 of the 1968 Act, property is regarded as belonging "to any person having possession or control of it, or having in it any proprietary right or interest". 'Appropriation' is a very vague word, and is not defined in the Act. Consequently, any act that takes the rights of ownership from the owner and places them with another person is an appropriation. In the case of Morris (1984), this was confirmed, and this view was furthered in Gomez (1993). Amy and Felicity both have the required actus reus of theft because it is unquestionable that they appropriated two items of property belonging to other people.
The mens rea of theft is that the appropriation was committed 'dishonestly' with 'the intention of permanently depriving the other of it'. It is blatant that the defendants did not intend to return the mobile telephones, as their sole purpose in stealing them was to make money from doing so. Amy and Felicity also do not have any legal excuse for their appropriations, making them unquestionably dishonest.
The incredibly broad nature of the actus reus of theft has caused much controversy. The main criticism appears to be that due to the wide scope of the actus reus, the main burden of proof upon the defence becomes disproving dishonesty, which, due to the lack of statutory excuses for appropriation, has developed into a particularly arduous task. Therefore, the English law of theft is often criticised, although valid, realistic reforms have yet to be suggested.
If Amy and Felicity used the rulers they were carrying in their pockets in order to aid them in their attaining the telephones, they could be found liable for robbery.
Robbery is detailed in section 8 of the Theft Act 1968. The actus reus of robbery does not require the defendants to actually be armed - they simply need to have made or sought to make their victims fear some sort of harm. Felicity and Amy agreed to carry the rulers so that if needs be, they could scare their victims by making them believe they were armed. Consequently, it would be difficult for the defence to prove that they were not guilty of robbery if they had indeed used the rulers.
However, even though they could have been convicted of robbery, this does not mean that their crime was fairly labelled. Regardless of gravity, all people using force during a theft are labelled 'robbers'. This means that everyone from a highly dangerous, professional bank-robber, to a young teenager committing an impulsive 'bag-snatch' will be labelled equally. This is clearly unfair. Consequently, many have demanded that for this offence to be tiered according to severity and danger of the acts involved. As the law stands however, no reforms are on the horizon, and all forceful thieves are still being labelled robbers, regardless of the exact crime they committed.
The law of robbery is also questioned in relation to its sanctions. If Amy and Felicity were to be found guilty of plain theft, they could be sent to prison for a maximum of seven years. If they committed simply the act of scaring the victim, this would probably be construed as common assault, the maximum penalty for which is six months imprisonment. If however, they committed the two acts simultaneously, and were subsequently convicted of robbery, their maximum sentence would be life. The just nature of this huge increase in sentence for the addition of common assault is very questionable, although policy reasons such as protection of the public and the possible dangerous nature of such an offence are often cited as rationalization of this seemingly absurd maximum sentence for all levels of robbery.
Amy's looking through Caroline's coat with the intention of stealing her mobile telephone could lead to both Amy and Felicity being convicted of attempted theft. Due to the lack of force used to actually attempt to acquire the 'phone (the force used was entirely independent of this act), I think it unlikely that attempted robbery would be the charge.
Amy's attempt was a complete one (meaning that she carried out the whole act, but simply did not reach the outcome she had desired). Due to both her and Felicity being part of the prior thefts (or robberies as it may be), it is likely that Felicity would also be held liable as part of a joint enterprise. In the case of Easom (1971), it was decided that if a person was found to be searching a container (in Amy's case, jacket pockets) in order to steal something, they should be charged with attempted theft. Therefore, it is possible that Amy and Felicity would be charged with this.
I shall next discuss the stabbing of a ruler into Caroline's eye. This is clearly an unlawful act, and also one of a violent nature.
At the very least, Felicity could be charged with assault occasioning actual bodily harm, which is described in section 47 of the Offences Against The Person Act 1861. This offence is committed when the defendant inflicts an "injury (although no need for it to be permanent)... not so trivial as to be wholly insignificant..."
. Obviously the injury was not wholly insignificant, because it caused Caroline to loose the sight in one of her eyes. The mens rea for assault occasioning actual bodily harm is recklessness or intent. I feel it could be shown very easily that Felicity at least intended to cause Caroline some harm, even if she did not intend to stab her in the eye with the ruler, but instead to simply hit her face with it. Consequently, Felicity could be charged at least with s47 assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
I however, feel it is more likely that Felicity would be charged with grievous bodily harm under section 18 of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861. The usual actus reus for grievous bodily harm is causing 'serious harm'. The Charging Standards for GBH however, state that if a permanent loss of a sensory function is caused by the injury, then this will make the defendant liable to be charged. If the stabbing of the ruler into Caroline's eye meant that her sight was lost not merely temporarily, it is likely that Felicity could be charged with GBH.
The mens rea for GBH is intent to cause the injury inflicted, and the maximum penalty is life imprisonment. If it could be proved that Felicity maliciously stabbed Caroline in the eye with the intent to do so then she could be sentenced to go to prison for life. Her possession of a weapon could lead a court to assume intent, although the question of whether possession of a ruler amounts to possession of a dangerous weapon would be up to the court to decide. If however, they could not find intent, Felicity could be charged with grievous bodily harm or wounding under section 20 of the Act, which states that if she was proven to have acted recklessly towards ANY injury (not just GBH) then she could be found guilty of the offence and sentenced to up to 5 years in prison.
The very broad nature of the mens rea element of section 20 has lead to much condemnation of the law. This is because if the defendant foresaw that they could cause any type of harm, not simply the serious harm they actually did cause, then they could be guilty and liable to serve a five-year sentence. It has suggested therefore, that the Act should be reformed so that, in accordance with the principle of fair labelling, only those who commit the most malicious of violent acts be sentenced to the most harsh of sanctions.
The death of Delia was, in accordance with the Homicide Act 1957, an unlawful killing: a homicide. This act states that for a person to be guilty of any homicide, their acts must have caused the unlawful death of a living human being under the Queen's (or King's) peace.
For Felicity to be charged with the murder of Delia, it would have to proven that she had either the intent to kill or cause grievous bodily harm. If the court were to determine that a punch to the face would almost virtually certainly cause death, even though Felicity only meant to cause Delia serious injury, then Felicity could be found guilty of murder. This wide ranging mens rea for murder has come under a lot of criticism for many reasons, the main one being that is it really fair to label someone only wishing to cause GBH a murderer? On the other hand, if someone is willing to take the risk of harming someone so seriously that they die, should they not face a harsh penalty (in the case of murder a life sentence)?
In the case of Felicity however, it is more likely that she would be charged with unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter. To be guilty of this, the defendant must have had both the actus reus and mens rea of the objectively dangerous, illegal act that became the cause of death. The unlawful and dangerous act in this case is the punch to the face. It is obvious that Felicity had the intention to do this, and she could therefore possibly be charged with this type of manslaughter, under the guidelines set out in Church (1996).
The defences that Felicity could use are few, if any. She was not provoked, had no abnormality of mind that could lead to a decision of diminished responsibility. Consequently, it is highly probable that she would be convicted of manslaughter, if not murder in relation to her part in Delia's untimely death.
Amy may also be liable to be charged with the manslaughter of Delia and the harm caused to Caroline. Under English law, anyone found to be an accomplice to a crime is punishable for the crime that their collaborator committed. In the case of Amy, she could be liable for all the crimes Felicity is found to be guilty of. The principle behind this is that the risk lies in taking the initial risk, not committing the crime itself.
After the decisions in Chan Wing-Siu (1985) and later Powell (1999), it is now enough that the accomplice realised that "in the course of the joint enterprise the primary [Felicity] party might kill with intent to do so, or intent to cause grievous bodily harm". Consequently, if a court could prove that Amy knew it was likely that Felicity may cause someone either serious harm, or to die in the process of their thefts, she may well be charged too. Amy's knowledge of Felicity's violent temper and previous convictions may help a judge or jury in their decision, as would their joint decision to carry rulers (although again, whether a ruler qualifies as a dangerous weapon would be up to the court).
In the case of accomplices, judges have sentencing discretion, which means that the principle of fair labelling is more easily kept to, as people with more liability, in line with usual policy, will usually receive higher penalties. However, even if she had made Felicity promise not to use the ruler as a weapon, or not to hit anyone, Amy could still be liable as an accessory to grievous bodily harm and/ or murder. Whether this is fair labelling or not is a matter of opinion, although many believe that accomplices should not receive such harsh penalties as the primary parties who actually committed the felony.
After close examination of the given situation, I believe it likely that both Amy and Felicity would be charged with theft or robbery, depending on their use of the rulers, and one additional count of attempted theft. These convictions would be completely fair, as the girls took the victims' property completely dishonestly, with the sole intention of making money from their transgressions.
The convictions for the other offences however, would be more difficult. Felicity's stabbing of Caroline could lead to a conviction for either assault occasioning actual bodily harm, or section 18 or 20 grievous bodily harm. I believe that section 18 GBH is the most likely charge here, due to Felicity carrying a 'weapon', and then stabbing it into the particularly vulnerable area of the eye. This would also, I feel, be a fair conviction, as stabbing a ruler into somebody's eye is clearly a dangerous act, causing the victim severe pain and possibly permanent damage to, or loss of their vision.
Felicity's possible conviction for unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter may be slightly more controversial. This is because she may have only intended to cause Delia a small amount of harm, but due to the unfortunate chain of events caused by this act, a death was caused and Felicity could go to prison for life if the judge deemed this an appropriate sentence. The fairness of convicting someone with no intention for the crime they ultimately committed is contentious, and possibly indicates that the scope of our manslaughter law is far too wide, and should, through reform, be narrowed.
However, I feel the most difficult charge to justify would be if Amy were to be convicted as an accomplice to Felicity's violent offences. Her knowledge of Felicity's violent nature would not necessarily mean she foresaw that her accomplice would stab a seemingly harmless ruler into the eye of a victim; after all, the rulers were there to scare their victims, not blind them. The nature of the death of Delia would also make the decision of the court more complex - could Amy have foreseen that Felicity would have punched a random railway passenger, causing her death?
In conclusion, although it is impossible to say how an English court would decide in relation to both Amy and Felicity's cases, I feel that in light of their circumstances the explanations I have provided are the most likely to be taken under English law.