Judicial review is the process through which the judiciary can be required to examine the legality of an executive action or decision to act. If the courts find that a public body has exceeded the lawful authority conferred upon it, then they will then enquire into the process by which the decision was made, not the subjective precision of the decision itself. Unlike in the appeals process, the court will not then substitute the unlawful decision with that of its own. The remedies available through judicial review are limited to the private law remedies of an injunction, a declaration, or damages, added to by the prerogative orders of a quashing order, a mandatory order or a prohibiting order. All judicial review remedies are utterly discretionary, leading to a certain amount of indeterminacy within the area. It would therefore be almost impossible to advise X, Y and Z as to the exact course of proceedings that they would be subject to should they decide to seek leave for judicial review. It is possible however, to explore all of these possible courses in as much detail as possible to allow each pupil to make the best decision.
If any of the students decide to seek judicial review of their case, then they will have to follow a very strict set of rules that govern this application. Perhaps the most urgent consideration would be that their application would have to be made within three months of the school's decision. The relevant legislation provides that leave from the High Court must be granted before such an application can be made. This application for leave must be made ex parte to a single judge, and this decision can be made without a hearing, unless the student requests one. It appears, through judicial statements, that the usual test the judge will apply when deciding whether to grant leave will be whether the applicant has an arguable case. The person bringing the proceedings must also prove that they have some interest in the subject-matter of the litigation (locus standi), and the body involved must be exercising a public law function. Whether the students themselves or their parents bring the applications for judicial review, there will be obvious standing as they are directly involved with the decision, and a school is operating the public function of education. If leave is granted, then the student may proceed with his or her case. If the judges deem the case to be undeserving of judicial review, then leave will not be granted.
Student X was permanently expelled from ABC College in accordance with their drugs policy. It shall be assumed from the information given that X was given a full hearing before the described panel. X claims that had the panel examined a medical report he brought before them, his second positive result could have been explained by the short amount of time between the two tests. The teachers though, refused to look at this evidence.
This refusal by the school to view evidence submitted by X could give rise to one of the grounds of judicial review, namely the right to a hearing. Even though X had a hearing, if he was unable to represent himself satisfactorily this may be a ground for review. In the case of Ridge v. Baldwin
, it was stated that an individual whose rights had been severely affected by a decision should be afforded an opportunity to hear and refute the case against them. If X could prove that is rights had been harshly affected, then he may be able to use this precedent to his advantage. It is possible however, that the court would find, as they did in Glynn v. Keele University, that no representation that X could have made would have affected the decision reached by the panel, and therefore even though there had been a breach of natural justice, X would not be able to claim any remedy.
X could, in relation to the school panel not being prepared to hear his evidence, cite the ground of review of non-citation of relevant considerations. X would have to prove that, had the school heard his medical report, then the decision they reached would have been altered. However, in the case of Creednz Inc. v. Governor General
, it was stated that a consideration is legally relevant if it is something that the decision maker is obligated to take into account, and is 'not merely a factor which may properly be taken into account'.
X has suggested that the policy itself, that of automatic exclusion from school, is irrational and/or disproportionate. To take the intimation of irrationality first, X could use the principle of 'Wednesbury unreasonableness'. This case is arguably the leading authority on judicial review, and Lord Greene's judgement in this case is frequently cited in modern judicial review cases, as it lays down many basic principles surrounding judicial review. In his judgement Lord Greene asserted the courts' right to intervene in relation to the legality of a decision 'on the basis of applying a test of unreasonableness'. This test, as defined by Lord Greene, is that a decision will be held as unreasonable when it is "so unreasonable that no reasonable authority could ever have come to it".
It is highly unlikely that X could successfully argue that the decision reached by his school to impose an automatic permanent expulsion for a second positive drug test was Wednesbury unreasonable. It is doubtful that no other school would have such a policy or indeed would already be imposing such a procedure. Therefore, I feel it highly unlikely that unreasonableness would provide a successful ground for X to claim judicial review.
Proportionality is a ground for review that is commonly used in Europe, and states that any administrative measures must not be more extreme than is absolutely necessary for obtaining the desired result. This principle has begun to emerge into the English courts due to their involvement with European Union law. Although proportionality and rationality are commonly cited as being so similar 'it is not possible to see daylight between them', there are stark differences in the way the judiciary apply the principles. Proportionality requires the court to judge whether the action executed was actually necessary, as well as whether it was in the scope of the authority's powers. If however, the court does rule that a local authority decision was disproportionate, then this may cause them to have to substitute their judgement for that of the authority. The English courts have therefore limited the use of proportionality for the time being. X would therefore struggle to use this ground in court, unless of course he decided to take his case to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
Student Y feels that she was unfairly treated during her hearing after a first positive test for cannabis. Y has alleged that three members of the panel of four teachers were biased against her for various reasons. Due to these accusations, Y may be able to use the rule against bias as her ground for bringing her case to review.
To prove bias, Y must follow the relatively vague precedent that has been set down by the courts. In 1993, the House of Lords confirmed 'real likelihood' (although referred to it as 'real danger') as the appropriate test for bias, as opposed to giving the courts a choice between this and 'reasonable suspicion'. Consequently, Y would have to prove that the facts of the case would give rise to a 'real danger' that any of the three allegedly biased teachers were in fact partial.
The first teacher, Y alleges is prejudiced against her because she had previously made a complaint (that was later dismissed), about his behaviour towards her. Y could claim that this teacher was biased if she could prove that this prior dealing with him created a 'real danger' of unfairness. In R v. Handley
, it was held that a history of personal hostility could be enough to render a panel member as biased. Consequently, I feel it likely that Y could put a credible case forward proving that this teacher was in real danger of being biased against her.
The second teacher was a known anti-drugs campaigner, and due to the nature of her offence, Y argues that this would have made him biased against her. There is much case law both supporting and challenging Y's argument. In R v. Sussex Justices ex p. McCarthy
, it was held that membership of an organisation with interest in the dispute at hand will be sufficient evidence to render a decision unsound. In the more recent case of R v. Horseferry Road Justices, ex p. Pinochet Ugarte
 Lord Hoffman's association with Amnesty International rendered the primary decision of the court void, and a complete reconsideration by a newly constituted House of Lords was ordered. The decision in R v. Deal Justices
 however, stated that a justice of the peace could not be disqualified from hearing a case merely because he subscribed to the society initiating the prosecution. Y would have to prove that her teacher was very actively involved in anti-drugs campaigning before he would be prohibited from hearing her case.
Teacher three fell asleep during Y's hearing. In Red Bank Manufacturing Co v Meadows
, the plaintiffs argued that the original decision reached by a tribunal had been biased as one of the panel members had appeared to fall asleep, much similar to Y's situation. The original decision of the tribunal in this case was upheld, with the court ruling that 'transient' matters such as a sleeping panel member would not be good enough to render a decision biased. Y may therefore struggle to maintain that the third teacher falling asleep was a ground for judicial review.
Y could argue that the possibility of bias among the majority of the panel members had been a breach of her Article 6(1) ECHR right that states that any determination of "civil rights or obligations" must be decided "by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law". If Y could prove that her education at ABC College was a civil right, then it is possible that instead of judicial review, she could make a claim in the field of human rights.
In summary of the case y could bring in judicial review, I feel it possible that the first two teachers could be proven to hold a 'real danger' of bias, due to teacher one's prior dealings with Y, and teacher two's known anti-drugs beliefs. Y may have difficulty in proving bias in the case of teacher three however. If the first two teachers were found to be biased, Y would have a good chance of not only gaining leave for review, but also of succeeding in any subsequent proceedings.
Student Z was expelled from ABC College after a first positive test for the drug cocaine. Z has contested this decision, claiming that the panel took his grades, as well as the possibility of saving funds into account when reaching their decision. In a judicial review hearing, Z could argue that the panel took irrelevant considerations into account when exercising their discretion, therefore rendering any decision they reached ultra vires. An irrelevant consideration is usually defined as a legally irrelevant factor deliberated upon in the process of exercising discretionary powers. For example, in R v. Secretary of State for the Home Dept. ex p. Venables [1998] AC 407, the Home Secretary was found to have misdirected himself when he took into account the public clamour for severe punishment of the defendant. If Z therefore could prove that the teachers' consideration of his school grades could be deemed as taking into account irrelevant issues, then he may have a very good chance of succeeding in the judicial review hearing.
Z could also rely upon another ground of review, namely improper purpose. This ground states that an authority must only exercise powers for the purpose for which they were conferred. In a case similar to that in which Z finds himself, it was decided that if an education authority was permitted to dismiss staff on 'educational grounds', then it had acted ultra vires by dismissing teachers in order to limit expenditure. A further decision however, in Sadler v. Sheffield Corporation
, stated that if the original policy grounds could be satisfied (in this case, that Z had in fact had a positive drugs test) then the irrelevant considerations would not necessary render any decision made invalid. Therefore, Z would have to, in a review hearing, provide evidence that the panel taking extraneous factors involving an improper purpose into consideration was the primary reason behind his expulsion.
Though this exploration of the possible routes X, Y and Z could take has led to many possible conclusions, there are no certainties due to the vague and unpredictable nature of judicial review.
The first hurdle of the process, that of gaining leave for judicial review, from the evidence provided, would be the stumbling block for student X, as his medical evidence is not legally required to ensure his hearing is fair. He would also find it incredibly difficult to prove that the policy ABC College had adopted was so unreasonable that no other school would have considered it. His proportionality argument would, by the English courts, probably be denied time, due to their reluctance to include it into our judicial review procedure.
Student Y in all probability has a higher chance of gaining leave for review, as her case could quite easily be proven to violate the right to a fair hearing. If she were to fail at this stage, Y could possibly take her case to the ECHR, and claim a violation of her Article 6(1) right to a fair trial by an unbiased panel.
Student Z may find it more difficult to get leave for review than student Y, because it would be down to the discretion of the judge in the Administrative Court as to whether the consideration of Z's grades, and the purpose of lowering school expenditure were irrelevant and improper enough respectively, to give Z the opportunity to have his decision judicially reviewed.
In regard to the possible remedies the students could claim, I feel that all three pupils could apply for quashing orders in relation to the decisions against them, and then a second hearing in front of an unbiased panel, taking into account no irrelevant considerations, and hearing all germane evidence. It is improbable that the court would order ABC College to alter its drug-testing policy, as the policy does not go against the intentions of Parliament, and it is also commonly stated that local authorities are empowered to do  "...anything which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the discharge of any of their functions"
.
Had the students appealed to a Local Authority board, and then applied for judicial review of this secondary decision, it is likely that their chances of granting leave would be increased. This would be because, although judges dislike using the 'floodgates' argument, (as they say that any case meritorious of review should be granted it), them granting review to three disgruntled schoolchildren after a school-panel decision, may indeed cause an influx of similar applications. If the children went through a local authority appeal before their applications however, the courts may consider themselves as the pupils' last resort to be given a just hearing. It would consequently be in the best interests of X, Y and Z to attempt to have their cases heard at local authority level before trying for judicial review.