When attempting to recover damages from Slowe and Wheezy Bus Company, Laura will be able to rely upon both statute and common law. The applicable statute law is the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, and the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999 (hereon in UCTA and the Regulations respectively).
The relevant field of law in this case is the area of exclusion clauses. These are terms in a contract that seek to exclude liability, and are most common in contracts that have not been freely negotiated, or are based on the standard terms of one of the parties. These clauses have been described in the common law as "...a shield to a claim for damages"
.
Before using statute law to endeavour to invalidate the clause in question, Laura could use the common law rule of incorporation to try and prove that the term was not ever part of the contract she made with Slowe and Wheezy. In a regular, written contract, a signature will normally indicate that all the terms of a contract have been agreed to, unless of course there is evidence of misrepresentation, fraud or similar. Laura however, was not required to sign any documents when purchasing her coach ticket. The term that Slowe and Wheezy wished to incorporate into the contract was displayed on a notice. Such a notice can be an effective disclaimer of liability, but only if reasonable steps have been taken to bring such a thing to the attention of the other party at the time that the contract is made. If the term is communicated after this point, then it will not be of any effect.
Laura could use the decision in Olley v. Marlborough Court Ltd. to her advantage. It was held in this case that a notice excluding liability displayed in a hotel bedroom was not part of the original contract made, as the agreement had been made before the guests had any chance to read the notice. Laura could argue the same- her purchase of a bus ticket was the creation of her contract, and therefore she was made aware of the notice on the bus too late for this to be a term of her contract.
Slowe and Wheezy however, could also use this decision, as their company, unlike the hotel, had displayed a sign at the ticket-office stating that there were further terms exhibited inside the coaches. In Parker v. South Eastern Railway
 it was held that having their standard terms and conditions of travel available on demand in the station were sufficient notice of these terms. Slowe and Wheezy therefore could argue that Laura had reasonable notice of the term, because if she had asked what the further terms were, she may have been able to view them and subsequently could have refused to purchase a ticket if she deemed them unacceptable.
If it was found that under the general rule of incorporation the term was not part of the contract, then Slowe and Wheezy could argue that due to their previous course of dealings with Laura, she would have had imputed knowledge of the clause. They could use the decision in Hardwick Game Farm v. Suffolk Agricultural Poultry Producers Association
 to endorse their argument, as it was held in this case that a lengthy previous course of dealings would amount to sufficient notice and therefore incorporation.
Laura could argue however, that she had only made the journey 'from time to time in the past', and that in Hardwick the course of dealings involved three to four transactions each month over three years. The case of Hollier v. Rambler Motors (AMC) Ltd. may be more applicable to the case in hand, as it was held that previous transactions need to have been regular, and that three or four transactions over a course of five years was not sufficient. This point would be decided by the courts, taking into account the amount of previous dealing Laura had had with Slowe and Wheezy.
If, after the court had heard the previous two arguments, they decided that the term was in fact incorporated into the contract, then they would set about interpreting the clause to establish if it did in fact cover the situation at hand. In Canada Steamship Lines Ltd. v. The King
 it was held that if a term expressly excluded negligence, then effect had to be given to that provision as it was drafted. If however, there was no express reference to negligence, then the court should decide whether the words used could be interpreted to cover such eventualities. If the court doubts that the clause is able to exclude negligence, then the case 'must be resolved against the proferens'. The judgment refers to the doctrine of contra preferentum, which states that if there is any ambiguity, then this will work against the party seeking to rely upon the relevant clause. If the clause in the Slowe and Wheezy coach is found to be ambiguous therefore, the court will have no choice but to award in favour of Laura. If however, it is found to exempt Slowe and Wheezy from the negligence of their staff, Laura will have to resort to other statute-based measures.
Laura could first try to void the Slowe and Wheezy clause under UCTA. This Act can either render a term automatically void, or it can subject a suspicious term to a test of reasonableness. The Act is available to Laura as it was created to apply to exemption clauses appearing in contracts made between two parties, one of which acting as a consumer, one as a business. Laura would be defined under section 12 of the Act as a consumer, as she "...neither makes the contract in the course of business nor holds herself out as doing so." Slowe and Wheezy made the contract "...in the course of a business..." so are defined as a business under section 12. The Act also states that is irrelevant for its purposes whether the breach (in this case the negligence of the driver) arose directly or vicariously, meaning that the Act can apply to a member of the Slowe and Wheezy workforce.
The term Laura is questioning would not be made automatically void by UCTA. It would however, be liable to an assessment of reasonableness under s.2 (2), as it excludes liability for negligence. The test for reasonableness is found in section 11 of UCTA, and asks the question, 'was including the clause reasonable in the light of the knowledge of the parties on contracting?'. In this case, it may be found that it was reasonable to include such a term into the contract for travel, as it is common for travel companies to do so, as it insures that they are not liable for expensive breakages caused by the mistakes of their staff. This would also mean that Laura could have been assumed to have expected such a clause from a company such as Slowe and Wheezy.
On the other hand however, the clause could be argued as unreasonable, because it denies Laura her right to any remedy for the negligence of the coach driver. She could also argue that at the time of her purchase of a ticket, she did not have it in her contemplation that the driver would negligently break her mobile 'phone, or that if he did so, he or his employers would not be liable and she would not be able to recover damages.
The court may also take into account the considerations stated in Schedule 2 of the Act. These include questions such as, 'was there comparable bargaining strength?'. The answer to this question would make reference to the fact that Slowe and Wheezy were acting with far more bargaining power, as they were using their standard terms. Laura therefore, had almost no bargaining power, as travel companies do not usually negotiate their terms and conditions with individual passengers. However, Slowe and Wheezy could argue that, if another coach company ran coaches from the Rotten Row Bus Station to Sweet Valley, then Laura could have travelled on one of their buses: acceptance of the Slowe and Wheezy terms may not have been compulsory.
Under the test of reasonableness, the courts exercise a large amount of discretion, and it would therefore be a question for them to solve as to whether the clause in question should be made void, or be allowed to exclude liability.
If Laura failed under UCTA to get the result she desired, she could apply the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999 to her situation. These Regulations only apply to 'contracts concluded between a seller or a supplier and a consumer'. Laura qualifies as a consumer as she is 'any natural person who...is acting for purposes which are outside her trade, business or profession', and Slowe and Wheezy are acting in the course of business (also described in Regulation 3 (1)).
Some terms, as in UCTA, are rendered automatically void by Schedule 2 of the Regulations. This exemption clause however, is not covered by any of the Schedule 2 situations. The Regulations can still be used however, as the term could be covered by Regulation 5. This Regulation states that if a term has not been individually negotiated, it will be considered unfair if it causes an imbalance of rights between the parties, to the detriment of the consumer. The term in this case has not been individually negotiated, as Regulation 5 (2) states that if the consumer was unable to influence to content of a term then it has not been so.
Laura could confirm that the term was definitely not individually negotiated, because she had no idea it existed until she had made the contract with Slowe and Wheezy. She could further this by saying that the clause did cause an imbalance of rights between her and the other party that was to her detriment, as she lost her right to sue them for damages caused by their negligence.
It is unlikely that Slowe and Wheezy could counter this argument very successfully, as it seems obvious that they did not negotiate with Laura, she simply purchased a ticket with no knowledge of the term in question. This term also does cause an imbalance of rights, as the coach driver was immune from Laura exercising her right to sue either him or his employers. Slowe and Wheezy finished with the larger amount of rights, therefore making the clause detrimental to Laura.
Consequently, it seems that Laura would be highly likely to win her claim. At common law, if it is proven that the clause was not part of the contract at all, she will be able to claim from Slowe and Wheezy. If the term was held to be part of the contract, and was also held, during the ensuing interpretation, to exclude negligence, then Laura would be able to proceed to use the statutory provisions surrounding exclusion clauses. If the clause was found to be ambiguous, then the court would employ the contra preferentum rule, and construe it in Laura's favour anyway, again meaning she could move her case on. Even if the clause was found to exclude negligence entirely, Laura could still claim that this was an Unfair Term, either under the Act or the Regulations. Therefore, it is likely that under either UCTA or the Regulations of 1999, Laura would be able to find some remedy.