Due to the wide scope of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, to write a report covering all aspects of its implementation in the Russian Federation would be unsuitable. This report shall therefore concentrate upon one of the issues that has emerged as particularly pressing within Russia. This matter is the state care children receive when they are left with no parental care. The relevant Convention articles shall be divulged and explained throughout the course of the report.
The aforementioned concern that this report will concentrate on was brought to the fore by various sources. Non-Government Organisations, as well as United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child, highlight this issue as especially problematic within the Russian Federation, as does the considerable amount of international media coverage of this concern.
The Russian Federation itself has recognised that this problem needs urgent State attention and has subsequently begun to take some of the necessary action. As this report will reveal however, this considerable problem will require lengthy, expensive State involvement.
It is obvious from even a basic study into the workings of the UNCRC in the Russian Federation that there are still some serious flaws in its implementation. These defects seem to be due to the lack of funding available to help the State improve the implementation of this Convention. There is serious consideration needed surrounding most areas of children's rights, as is evidenced from the Committee on the Rights of the Child's reports regarding Russia.
The Committee has recommended that Russia strengthens its links with non-governmental organizations. The NGOs themselves, in their commentary of 1999 stated that NGOs were being deprived of government support due to the Law on Social Contracts not being passed. By 2002 however, 120 organisations with international or inter-Russian status whose basic work involved children's rights were registered with the Russian Ministry of Justice. Further evidence of NGO involvement in implementation was the First All-Russian Conference of NGOs, "Civil Society for the Children of Russia" which took place in March 2001. Here, more than 100 organisations from all over Russia congregated to discuss the rights f children in their nation. This shows that the status of NGOs in Russia is improving, giving the Russian Government opportunity to allow these organizations to take some responsibility for implementing and monitoring the UNCRC.
Public education about the rights of children is also a vital part of implementation (Article 42 of the Convention encourages wide dissemination of the rights given by it). 2001 was the Russian Year of the Child, and the volunteer movement in relation to children is growing rapidly. This would indicate that the public of Russia is gradually coming to appreciate that their children deserve to have their rights realized, and that action needs to be taken to achieve this.
Perhaps the biggest issue surrounding Russian implementation of the Convention as a whole is funding. Although there are not necessarily State funds available to spend on children (and it is inappropriate to discuss the complicated economic issues surrounding this in this report), there are international lending organizations that would be able to help. The World Bank is already financing various medical and educational programs, and the Committee has stated that it would be suitable for other agencies to help in a similar manner. This would allow Russia to fund any schemes necessary to ensure the rights of its children. It would also however, require the Federation to succumb to large amounts of debt that would need to be repaid as soon as the economy became more stable. Any loan would also enable Russia to tackle its main problem in relation to children, that of families living in poverty. Child benefit payments are currently in heavy arrears, and this needs to be resolved to ensure that family life is as fulfilling as it can be for children.
Overall, Russia has come some way to improving its implementation of the Convention in the 13 years since it ratified. These improvements however, are not enough, and various sources of evidence suggest that children are still not being afforded all their rights. Article 4 of the Convention recognises that it may not always be economically possible for a State to implement all of the Articles immediately, but it also states that this should be done as soon as possible. Russia therefore needs to re-evaluate its systems and take heed of all recommendations made by the committee, not just for care of orphans, but for all of the areas covered by the Convention.