The position of women in the period of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries has long been described as one of subordination. Patriarchy, a system that places the authority of men over that of women in both, the public sphere of society, and the private sphere of the household, was evident in both law and custom. Women were excluded from government offices, barred from educational establishments and excluded from most professions and trades. Within the household, husbands had authority over all members and also had control over women's moveable property. Despite then the position of women appearing seemingly the manifestation of this patriarchal authority, social realities were less extreme then law and tradition would suggest. Within business, women could conduct trade under legal fiction and were able to find employment where guilds did not operate. In the household, parenting was conducted as a joint responsibility and many poor families also relied upon a wife's earnings to supplement the husbands. The extent, however, to which patriarchy was seriously challenged, remains slight. Although it was perhaps more secure on paper than in practice, by no means were women's positions equal or comparable to those of men. It is also important to consider the changing position of patriarchy throughout the period and its regional and national differences within Europe, as its security was neither static nor uniform.
Patriarchy was clearly crafted by civic legislation, laws governed potential powers, marriage, property and 'so much more'. Common law excluded women specifically from roles as judges, arbitrators, surety, and witnesses in criminal proceedings or to testament. Common law and borough custom further governed the legal position of women in trade, preventing them from owning property or making contracts. In France, Salic law also prevented women to succeed to the titles or offices in the family and to inherit property. In England, property inheritance was governed by the Statute of Wills Act, removing restrictions on the distribution of property by the father to his children, excluding women from the process. The role prescribed to women under the law was then one of subordination, placing restrictions upon their positions in both the public and private spheres, patriarchy, therefore, seemingly evident. The extent to which these laws were enforced and how they operated in reality, however, could be seen challenge these restrictions placed upon women and therefore also the security of patriarchy. In the household, business and within the community, the position of women can be seen to have been greater than that was prescribed to them.
The family defined the ideals of the gender system, as relations between husband and wife provided a model for all relations between men and women. Control and hierarchy within the household were held with high regard, with the father residing as head of the family unit. His role as husband was to protect and provide for the family, disciplining its members and ensuring good religion to the servants and children. At the same time, wives joined their husbands in the governing of the house, and were often responsible for the day-to-day education and supervision of both children and servants. Within such an environment, patriarchy could be seen to have been secure. Despite wives' abilities to command power over her children and servants, this power was derived from the authority of the husband, she did not have authority in her own right, therefore enforcing the patriarchal system. Wives were 'ideally meek, submissive and chaste', their children orderly and their servants honest, further representing the dominance of husbands within the household. The social realities of this period, however, can be seen to question these assumptions that female subordination was without challenges.
Women could be seen have played significant roles in the family economies of early modern England: supervising production, selling products in the markets and purchasing necessities for their families. Where production went on within the household, women provided labour, often performing similar tasks to those of men. In rural areas, wives were largely responsible for tasks within or close to the house, concerning both agriculture and trade. Borough custom in certain towns allowed married women to own property for the purpose of trade if the husband agreed to it. The position of married women within the economy would then appear great, however patriarchal authority could be seen to have remained largely unchallenged.
Despite female involvement in both production and trade, their positions were granted by the mandates of their husbands. Their roles within these processes would appear complementary rather than domineering, with all monies earned belonging to the family rather than to themselves. This, Merry Wiesner argues, supports the idea that women's work was a substitute for charity, whereas men's work was their right. This would seem to be supported by the fact that women were paid 'about half of what men were paid, even for the same tasks'. This was based upon the premise that they were either single and therefore only had themselves to support, or were married and so were simply helping to support their families. Married women's role within the economy would therefore seem to conform to the apparent patriarchal system, their ability to participate was granted by their husbands' consent. The position of single women and widows within the economy, however, can be seen to challenge the security of patriarchy.
Widows and single women had a different status to married women within the early modern period. The legal position of feme sole could be awarded to widows and single women, removing them from legal constraints that prevented them from conducting trade. Widows were conducting business as pawnbrokers and moneychangers and could be found running taverns, cookhouses and inns. Midwifery provided significant employment opportunities for women, granting status and a wage close to that of a journeyman. It was an area in which women could 'also own public recognition and respect', representing a status, beyond what could be expected as a woman. This would seem to represent a challenge to the security of patriarchy, as their status was not derived from male authority, rather from their own de facto power removed from the law.
Despite their relative freedoms, by no means were women's positions comparable to men. Even within these industries, women were prevented from conducting their business without restrictions, and many trades still remained closed. Women providing capital for investment were prevented from acting as representatives or to carry out long-distance trade themselves, removing their ability to ensure the safety of their returns. The changing economy during the latter half of the seventeenth century could be seen to have removed many of these apparent challenges to patriarchal security. Due to the expanding economy, women were increasingly pushed out of their occupations, as monopolies were introduced and output increased, leaving them unable to compete. The law's position and custom was resolved to permanently remove many of those occupations open to women, leaving spinning as the only possible employment. The increasing numbers of women involved within the textile industry can be seen to have increased the security of patriarchy. Production was placed within centralised locations under male direction and supervision, removing female independence and reintroducing the strength of patriarchal authority. Patriarchal could therefore be seen to have strengthened at the end of our period, adapting to the new economic conditions, reinforcing female subordination and restricting their de facto freedoms.
The protestant reformation could be seen to have further enforced the security of patriarchy. Despite protestant teachings holding the position of women in a 'high authority and equal respect' to men within the household, women's positions were still one of subordination in practice, law and tradition. Protestant teachings preached female vocations as 'wife and mother', viewing any productive labour as simply part of her domestic duty, a helpmate to her husband and as an example to her children. Such opinion, therefore, represented the subordination of wives to their husbands and to their families, seemingly enforcing the patriarchal construct. Women's abilities to live enclosed lives within the church were also ended, removing the value and worth of the life they had been living and also their choice to enter into such an existence. Alongside reforms made by the teachings of the church, bans were placed upon public rituals, lessening the role of women within processions and celebrations, in both their participation and organisation. The protestant reformation would then seen to have strengthened the position of patriarchy during this period. It enforced greater control over women's activities, confining them to the household, increasing female subordination and reducing their freedom of choice. Even in areas where the reformation was unsuccessful and Roman Catholicism was still dominant, the counter-reformation reinforced the ideal of the family, therefore still subjecting women to the subordination of their husbands.
There are other areas in which women could be seen to have, however, challenged the patriarchal construct. During the early modern period there were female heads of state: Isabella of Castile, Mary and Elizabeth Tudor in England and Mary Stuart in Scotland. Their positions as rulers would seem to directly challenge the security of patriarchy. The way in which they constructed their positions as rulers, however, was often one that would appear to subordinate themselves as women. Their status was rationalised by the principle of the monarch's 'two bodies'. They exhibited masculine qualities to minimise their weaknesses as women. Elizabeth I of England stated, 'I have the body of a weak and feeble women, but I have the heart and stomach of a king', seemingly embodying the concept of the 'two bodies'. Their positions potentially challenged the patriarchal order by commanding female authority, however the masculinity of their rule could be seen to have minimised this challenge, as it prevented women ruling as women. Their positions did not set a precedent for other females to follow; women remained subordinate and failed to greatly increase their influence within the world of governance, therefore maintaining the position of patriarchy.
Despite the fact that women were not largely found in formal political roles within early modern society, they did possess informal power. During the period there was a large public obsession with 'scolding women and domineering and unfaithful wives'. This obsession, David Underdown suggests, shows that patriarchy could not 'be taken for granted'. The increased occurrences of the charivari ceremonies across Europe were seemingly a symptom of this perceived rise of the domineering wife. This, along with the abundance of conduct books and the focus of sermons concerning the position of women can be seen to further show this preoccupation of the period.
Disorderly women were stereotyped as: the 'scold', the 'whore' or the 'witch', each potentially threatened the patriarchal order. Scolds and whores threatened the patriarchal ideals of women being meek, submissive and chaste. Witches were seen to have gone against the ideals of women being of good order and of good religion. Disorderly women were then seen to have challenged the security of patriarchy. Men of the period saw them as a potential threat to the patriarchal order, with anxieties and fears over women's assertiveness and independence in speech and action. In reaction, however, patriarchy authority was used to reduce such anxieties and restore the perceived patriarchal order. Female punishments for adultery were much more severe than those for men, carrying the death penalty in Germany, Scotland and England between 1650 and 1660. Women were also much more likely to have been tried for witchcraft in comparison to men, contributing to as much as ninety percent of the total, thousands more were burnt in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. Law and custom were then used as means to reinforce the gender hierarchies of the period, placing women back into their traditional positions and restoring their subordination to men.
During the early modern period gender relations were rarely confronted. Women did not question their subordination to their husbands. They were not rebelling against the place assigned to them in the social and gender hierarchies; rather they were finding ways to publicly resolve their concerns in a society that prevented them from doing so. Women increased their participation in certain types of political activities, particularly in riots and protests. They were often the instigators of food riots, protesting against the scarcity of food and of its price. Despite them acting in a way that was seemingly unfitting for a woman, the threats to patriarchy remained minimal. They were acting with the interests of their households, protesting against policies that appeared to interfere with their ability to sustain their families. Such activities, although challenging the perceived ideals of female behaviour, did not challenge the patriarchal constructs that placed the authority of men above themselves.
The position of women during early modern society would appear then to fluctuate, witnessing initial increases and then decreases in their positions of status. Despite early increases in many women's de facto independence within the economies of the period, many of these were seen to have declined due to the effects of increased commercialisation. Those women who still participated effectively within the market, did so by the mandates and authority of their husbands, not by their own status. The effects of the protestant reformation could be seen to have reduced the status and freedoms of women; preventing them from living enclosed lives and subjecting them to the sole vocation of wife and mother. Both law and custom of the period further represented the relative weaknesses concerning the position of women; with restrictions placed upon their property and also the severity of punishments that they were likely to receive. Despite the presence of female monarchs, women were still without a formal political role, marginalising them to informal influence and protest to vent their grievances. In such a society, the security of patriarchy would appear secure. Women were both on paper and in practice subordinate to male authority, what could be challenged however, is whether this security was uniform across Europe at the same time. Given that commercialisation and the effects of the expanding economies were seen as a cause which helped to enforce the gender hierarchy, the differing points in which these rises occurred across Europe would suggest that the onset of this patriarchal security varied from state to state. Therefore, although by the end of the period patriarchal authority was secure across Europe, its relative strength and the period in which it arose differed due to the dependence upon the development of state's economies.