The term Renaissance comes from the Italian word rinascita, meaning rebirth. The movement looked back to the superior aspects of ancient times and integrated them with the new developments of the time. The Italian Renaissance is generally associated with the fifteenth century. This period, however, can be stretched in either direction. For example, the term "Renaissance" has been used to describe some thirteenth-century artists, and the great artists of the Renaissance were active until the end of the sixteenth century. The rebirth of the visual arts was one aspect of the Renaissance but the development of humanism and the classical studies of the universities were as important. There were also advancements in music, literature, science and government practices during this period. How far Florence was responsible for these developments can be debated. Robert Black asserts that 'the elitism of Florentine society and the monopoly which the Florentine patriciate had over classical culture made Florence the first and greatest capital of the Renaissance'. Jocelyn Hunt, on the other hand, believes that 'the assumption that Florence was pre-eminent is... Burckhardtian, since, it is argued, the scholars of the Renaissance were based in Rome, and in the other universities'.
Burckhardt identified Florence as the 'cradle of the Renaissance'. It appears as though 'the components for a successful intellectual movement were all to be found in Florence at the start of the fifteenth century'. The city was wealthy, banking was highly developed, and papal revenues were often invested in Florence rather than the volatile and dangerous city of Rome. Florence had a high population. It was active in manufacture, trade and commerce. Textile production and metalworking were successful industries in Florence. The city was in a prime position for trade; it was close enough to the coast for sea trade but far enough to keep it safe from pirate attacks. It was also able to trade over the Alps and was close to the Middle East so merchants could bring back the luxury goods available there, such as silk and spices. Florence was primarily a city orientated towards craft-industrial production rather than trade like Venice. This appears to have been a more favourable environment for artists to be produced as 'it was only when Venice turned from trade to industry, at the end of the fifteenth century, that Venetian art caught up with that of Florence'.
Giorgio Vasari, a contemporary historian addressed the issue of 'the outsized contribution of Florence to the arts'. He believed that there were three factors that made Florence different from other Italian towns. Firstly, Florentines were free and, therefore, became critical and would not accept things that were not of the highest quality. Gene A. Brucker notes that ' this appreciation of quality, and a corresponding disdain for the shoddy and inferior, became a characteristic feature of the Florentine mentality'. Secondly, as Gregorio Dati, a contemporary Florentine, explains, 'Florence is situated in a naturally wild and sterile place', so that the people had to work hard, using their intelligence in order to live comfortably. They would travel and were innovative and experimental. Thirdly, the people had a 'greed for honour and glory which that air generates in men of every occupation'.
Wealthy citizens would spend their riches on art and culture. The amount they spent was seen to be an indication of their power and status. Florentine men did not own armies, rather hired mercenaries when they were needed. This meant that they had more to spend on luxuries. Giovanni Rucellai, a Florentine merchant, wrote in 1473 that 'earning and spending are among the greatest pleasures that men enjoy in this life'. He, himself, spent much of his wealth on the buildings of Florence, including his house and the loggia opposite, the church of Santa Maria Novella and the church of San Pancrazio. Commissioning artists gave them the opportunities to try out new styles and techniques as well as copying the styles of the ancients. Florence was important in the development of the Italian Renaissance because the artists working there were given these opportunities.
The Florentine political system was inspired by antiquity. It compared to those of the ancient Greek city-states or, as Evelyn Welch observes, 'Florence and Venice found their heritage in the Roman Republic'. The king, the Church and the nobility did not rule the Florentine people as in other places. Instead they ruled themselves, either by electing nine men for the Signoria or by holding office themselves for the two-month term. Committees were appointed to oversee administration. The government viewed everybody as equals, with nobody being above the law and everything being done to benefit the whole community. Michelangelo's statue of David was commissioned to depict the strength of Florence. David is an example of the Renaissance style of realism in art. Vincent Cronin has discussed the fact that Burckhardt took Renaissance Italy as a whole and made no distinction between what happened in republican Florence and other cities which were ruler over by tyrants. He argues that 'such a distinction is essential to an understanding of all but the most general points'. The political freedom that Florentine men enjoyed serves to explain Florence's leading role in the development of the Italian Renaissance. Cronin states that 'Florence was the power-house which generated far and away the largest number of influential ideas'.
In the late fifteenth century, the Medici family took control of most of the councils and committees, threatening the old system. They were firmly established in Florence by the second half of the fifteenth century. Cronin describes the fact that the Medici patronized art as a 'remarkable innovation, since Italy had no tradition of individual lay patronage'. Florence led the way in this new fashion. The Medici employed artists to enhance their status. Lorenzo de'Medici invested in art that would 'make the city of Florence famous'. The freestanding dome of Florence Cathedral, built by Filippo Brunelleschi, was the first of its kind. It was copied in other places such as Rome with the construction of St. Peter's. The dome was inspired by ancient architecture such as the Pantheon in Rome. Brunelleschi used the system of arithmetic proportions, which he had taken from the work of Vitruvius, in his design. Brunelleschi also used new techniques including line point perspective and innovations in engineering that inspired other Renaissance artists and architects. Florence's contribution to the Italian Renaissance's attempt to turn away from the medieval gothic style in architecture and return to the ways of ancient Rome and Greece 'was little short of astounding'.
Another reason why Florence took a leading role in the developments of the Italian Renaissance was the relationship between patrons and artists in Florence which was 'remarkable by comparison with conditions in other circles'. There was a friendly understanding between them which was in part due to classical texts which exalted the artist and emphasized the esteem that they received in ancient times. These texts 'were not lost on the Florentines'. The relationship between Cosimo and Donatello 'went much deeper than that of employer and employee'. Cosimo gave Donatello a pension in his old age, which was the first known instance of this type of help given to an artist. The 'championing of artists by Florence's most prominent citizen naturally raised their status'. Artists in Florence were allowed to use their own genius. Leonardo was educated in Medici Florence and was 'the culmination of the versatile artist whose rise took place in the city by the Arno'. When he moved to Milan, however, he was not understood. He painted the Last Supper in Milan but the Dominican Prior wanted him to work quickly and complained when he spent half a day looking at the painting without adding to it. Leonardo replied that 'men of genius sometimes accomplish most when they work least'. Similarly, in Rome, relations between patron and artist were not as amiable as in Florence. Cronin notes how 'painters were lumped together with carters and grooms' and were often given poor food. The artist Davide Ghirlandaio was served uneatable food while working in the abbey of Passignano and was so angry that he dumped his soup over the friar and beat him with the loaf of bread.
Dati said of Florence: 'so great is the number of talented and rich men that they are unequalled in the world'. The talented men produced the great works of the Italian Renaissance and the rich men enabled them to do so. Florentine artists and sculptors had 'immeasurable influence... on the future development of the visual arts in the renaissance'. Masaccio, a Florentine, was the first painter known to have adopted Brunelleschi's system of line-point perspective and make use of lighting and shading in his works such as the frescoes in the churches of Santa Maria Novella. Florentines also led the way in the revival of classical sculpture. Donatello was responsible for the revival of the classical art of large-scale bronze casting. He was also the first artist since antiquity to study anatomy and represent the nude in his works.
In Italy, painters, sculptors and masons often belonged to guilds. In some places, such as Milan and Florence, painters had their own guilds. Most of these were quite restrictive. For example, the guild in Padua forbade members to give or sell to non-members and did not allow work to be brought from another district to be sold in Padua. The guild in Venice was also restrictive. Albrecht Drer commented on the strict nature of the guild when he visited Venice in 1504, describing how they summoned him before the magistrates three times and had him pay four florins to the guild. The guilds in Florence, on the other hand, were not as powerful. The government held that not every craftsman had to join and it allowed people from other places to work in Florence. Peter Burke believes that 'this more liberal policy, which exposed local tradition to stimuli from outside, may help to explain Florence's cultural lead'.
Florence's important contribution to the arts can be seen in the proportion of Italy's cultural elite, the people whose creative abilities are recognized in society, which originated from around Florence. Burke has calculated that around 26 per cent of the elite came from Tuscany, which had only 10 per cent of the population, while the Veneto had 20 per cent of the population but only around 23 per cent of the elite. Burke believes that 'Rome's poor contribution needs emphasis' as it produced less than its share of Italy's cultural elite. Rome was no longer the beautiful, classical city that it was in ancient times. 'The Middle Ages reversed Augustus's boast that he had found Rome a city of brick and left it one of marble'. Materials from ancient monuments had been taken for other purposes and marble had been burnt for lime. Rome was in ruins with woods and undergrowth which sheltered foxes, wolves and hares. Rome's population was smaller then Florence's and was much poorer. This helps to explain Florence's dominance in the development of the Italian Renaissance.
Dante was an important figure in the development of Renaissance literature. He learnt the universal ideals explained by Thomas Aquinas in the Florentine schools. He wrote the Divine Comedy in the local Tuscan dialect instead of Latin. Brucker describes the Divine Comedy as 'a Florentine poem, replete with the particular values, emotions, and concerns of that community'. Florence was important to Dante and Dante was a challenge and inspiration for later generations of Florentine intellectuals. Giotto di Bondone was a Florentine artist in the fourteenth century who, like Dante, influenced later generations of Florentines. He was innovative in the way he painted frescos; he created naturalistic and lifelike scenes that were also grandiose and monumental by humanizing the wooden, stylised figures of Byzantine art. His scenes in Santa Croce from the life of Saint Francis are examples of this style. His frescos had 'a profound impact upon the revolutionary generation of Florentine artists in the early Quattocento'.
'The Florentine contribution to Renaissance culture was not limited to a few specialized areas; it encompassed many fields and disciplines'. The city's jurists, physicians and theologians made considerable contributions to their fields. In many aspects of the Renaissance, 'Florence led the way, Italy followed'. The work of the Florentines: Coluccio, Bruni, Poggio and Alberti, paved the way for educational, political and moral discussions in Ferrara; Bruni and Ficino's translations of Plato enabled Isabella d'Este's circle in Mantua to discuss Platonism; and Antonello drew on the geometrical notions evolved in Florence when painting his Virgin Annunciate. Lionello Venturi summed it up by his comment that 'the new Renaissance style emerged in northern Italy a generation later than in Florence, and as the direct result of work done on the spot by Tuscan artists'.
Florentine citizens were concerned with the study of the classics in the second half of the fifteenth century. Burckhardt asserts that the Renaissance came about because of 'those citizens, mostly Florentines, who made antiquarian interests one of the chief objects of their lives'. Niccolo Niccoli, a Florentine contemporary, told the young Piero de'Pazzi: 'if you do not study the classics, you will be considered a nothing'. In the study of the classics, 'Florence was ahead of the rest of Italy'. By the middle of the fifteenth century, nearly every prominent family in Florence, such as Strozzi, Medici and Rossi, had a humanist scholar among their numbers. It was also in Florence that the old Gothic script of angular closely spaced lettering was rejected in favour of the more rounded and spaced out script known as humanist miniscule. This style was adopted by the rest of Renaissance Italy.
Florence was an important center for the development of history writing until the sixteenth century. The Florentine Leonardo Bruni was a key figure in this development. He rejected the medieval style of writing history chronicles and revived the Roman historian, Livy's, model of writing the history of a city-state with an introductory book on the origins and the early history of the city followed by a detailed account of events, organized as a year-to-year narrative and grouped into books. He wrote the History of the Florentine People in this style. Bruni was also responsible for reviving the Ciceronian dialogue, text written as though in conversation, which was used by Cicero in ancient times. He wrote Dialogues to Pietro Paolo Vergerio of Istria in this style, which became the standard form of Renaissance literature.
Marsilio Ficino, leader of the Platonic Academy of Florence, was responsible for translating the works of Plato which were written in Greek. He also wrote his own philosophical works such as Platonic Theology Concerning the Immortality of the Soul. James Hankins has commented on the 'leading role played by Marsilio Ficino and Neoplatonic Philosophy on the cultural life of the High Renaissance'. The Platonic Academy of Florence was Ficino's primary vehicle for the spread of his ideas. There has been some debate over the significance of the Academy. Gustavo Uzielli, a Toscanelli scholar, has even suggested that the Academy was nothing but a fable. Arnaldo della Torre, on the other hand, wrote Storia dell'Academia Platonica di Firenze in 1902 in which the importance of the Academy was stressed. The authenticity of Ficino's letters, which Uzielli had suggested to be forgeries, was defended. Della Torre describes how the Academy was founded by Cosimo de'Medici in 1462 and how Ficino was appointed the head. According to Della Torra, the Academy held regular activities such as lectures, disputations and banquets. The Academy was made up of the Medici patrons as well as around one hundred prominent statesmen, poets, orators, doctors, lawyers and ecclesiastics of the later fifteenth century. James Hankins, however, suggests tah 'Ficino did have an academy of a sort, but if so, it was a thing quite different, and much less important, than has generally been thought'.
Coluccio Salutati, the owner of the largest library of ancient manuscripts in Italy after the death of Petrarch, lived in Florence. Attracting new talent into the city, 'he was perhaps the greatest cultural asset enjoyed by the city'. He was appointed first chancellor in 1375. Salutati's disciples included some of the next generation's leading humanistic scholars such as Leonardo Bruni, Pietro Paul Vergerio and Poggio Bracciolini. Being a statesman and a scholar, Salutati bridged the gap between the world of learning and the world of commerce and politics. Humanists would point to Salutati's reputation and political influence when critics would question the value of classical studies. Slautati was important in the development of the Italian Renaissance and he was a Florentine.
Florence had a key role in the development of the Italian Renaissance because its cultural pre-eminence coincided with the largest territorial expansion of the time. Between 1350 and 1490 Florence was in control of most of Tuscany. Florence fought against the papacy, Milan and Naples. In 1415, Bruni compared the victory of Florence over Milan, the capture of Pisa, and the defeat of the Ladislas, to the victory of the Roman Republic over Carthage. Antiquity was used to legitimize conquests and to establish and maintain authority by comparing the Florentine government with the successful Roman Republic.
Towards the end of the period of the Italian Renaissance, Florence was still a place of importance. Machiavelli was at work in Florence writing about how men should not only admire the ancients but attempt to put the Roman model into real practical use. His political thought was highly influential. Florence also had influence on the scientific developments of the Renaissance. Copernicus claimed that the earth revolved around the sun, not the other way round which is what had previously been believed. Cronin asserts that this claim 'was a choice, not a discovery, and the basis of Copernicus's choice-as later those of Kepler and Galileo-was the Platonic cosmology revived in Florence'.
Florence appears to have had much influence on the developments of the Italian Renaissance. Jocelyn Hunt, however, has argued that 'it may be the case that historians have examined the features which made Florence exceptional, and calculated that these are the essential preconditions for the Renaissance'. In this case, it would appear that the importance of Florence has been exaggerated. In the early stages of the Italian Renaissance, in the late thirteenth to early fourteenth centuries, 'Florence had a relatively minor role'. Florence had no unique connection with antiquity as Rome did. Its claims to antiquity were 'easily matched or surpassed by many other Italian cities'. It has been suggested that 'the new age began in Padua and the other urban communes of northern Italy in the 14th century, where lawyers and notaries imitated ancient Latin style and studied Roman archaeology'. Petrarch, perhaps the most influential figure of the Renaissance, never lived and worked in Florence. He achieved much greater fame as a writer than his Florentine equivalent, Salutati.
Petrarch recognized that Rome was the capital of the ancient world and, as it was the interest in the achievements of the ancient world that characterised the Renaissance, it has been suggested that Rome was the most important center of the Italian Renaissance. 'The classical revival was at its strongest in Rome, where the largest number of classical buildings remained to inspire the artist'. The pope was the most influential patron. Rome was important 'as a center of patronage which attracted creative individuals from other parts of Italy'. Nobody could outbid the papacy when commissioning the work of an artist. The pope's private library in the Vatican increased in size, containing 3,600 works by 1484, as Italian scholars began to search for the works of classical writers. Rome was an important center where 'the literary and artistic renaissance worked closely together'. For example, Raphael and his pupils painted a series of frescos in Agostino Chigi's Villa Farnesina near the Tiber depicting the story of Amor and Psyche from Apuleius' Golden Ass. Both form and content were taken from classical Roman art and literature. Fritz Saxl said that 'the Amor and Psyche paintings represent the greatest effort to illustrate pagan myths in the spirit of the classical marbles as they reappeared from beneath the Roman soil'.
Although Rome was left in ruins after the Middle Ages, it was still an inspiration to artists from all over Italy. Brunelleschi, a Florentine architect, chose to study in Rome instead of Florence. This was partly due to the fact that, during the period at the beginning of the fifteenth century, Florence was in a critical struggle with Giangaleazzo. He and his friend Donatello would systematically inspect and excavate the ruins of Rome with teams of labourers. Brunelleschi wished to discover how the Romans had built their vast constructions. He measured the thickness of walls, columns, arches, bricks and blocks of marble. The Pantheon was a huge inspiration, as it had not been touched since ancient times. Brunelleschi would remove tiles from the roof to study the ribbing of the shallow cupola. He looked at the number of square holes in large stones and decided that the Romans must have used some sort of machine to move them. This gave him the idea of the ulivella, a machine to move large stones by a crane without cords. Brunelleschi studied the ancient buildings of Rome for about twelve years. When the dome to Florence cathedral was being planned, a number of problems arose. The diameter of space to be spanned was 138 feet. The only cupola of a similar dimension was the Pantheon which Brunelleschi had been studying. Brunelleschi came up with a design for the dome and was awarded the commission of building it. The dome of Florence cathedral may have been the first of its kind but the inspiration and the savoir-faire came from Rome.
Brucker believes that 'Florentine intellectual life... was matched, to some degree, by Milan, Venice and Naples'. Rulers all over Italy tried to attract the great Renaissance artists and the other Italian cities, such as Milan, Urbino, Ferrara, Venice, Padua and Naples, soon became 'powerful rivals in the spreading wave of change'. Leon Battista Alberti worked on some of the most progressive architecture of the new Humanism in Rimini and Mantua, and Andrea Mantegna's paintings in Padua portrayed a personal formation of linear perspective, antiquarianism and realistic technique. The Venetian school was growing in strength with developments such as Giovanni Bellini's poetic classicism. Other cities took the lead over Florence in certain areas. Venice, for example, became the center of the new printing industry that enabled Renaissance literature to be widely circulated. Burke believes that 'the Venetian cultural achievement of the period... long received considerably less than its due'. He explains that this has happened because there were less studies of the social history of the arts in Venice than there were of Florence. Vasari, a Renaissance historian, is said to have had a 'Tuscan bias', which may have exaggerated Florence's role. There was no material to counter this view. There was an attempt in the sixteenth century by a Venetian to collect material on the lives of painters around Venice but this attempt was never completed and published. There was also no Venetian equivalent to Wackernagel's book on Florence. Burke has made an effort in The Italian Renaissance: Culture and Society in Italy, 'to avoid giving the Florentines more than their fair share of the limelight', by discussing important artists and writers from all over Italy.
Venice was also the 'musical center of Italy' during the high Renaissance. Venice was the center of trade with the east because of its prime position on the coast. It was a wealthy, powerful and cosmopolitan city. It was at a 'cultural pinnacle' during the sixteenth century with composers like Andrea and Giovanni Gabrieli, Adrian Willaert and Claudio Merlo thriving in 'a musical environment that called for grand works that reflected the glory of Venice'. There were processions, ceremonies and festivals where composers could exhibit their music. St. Mark's cathedral was the center of Venetian music where new styles and techniques were developed. The cathedral was built in the style of eastern basilicas with two choir lofts and two organs. Composers had to write for separate choirs and they used the effects that this could produce. Composers also had to write music that was more chordal with emphasis on sound and clarity of text to counter the effects of the acoustics in the cathedral. Composers used instruments in the choirs which was unusual. Justin Klotz asserts that 'throughout the... Renaissance, Venice, the "Most Serene Republic", was one of the most exciting cities in Europe'.
Florence did not lead the way in humanist and classical education. It was 'the custom of the city' for young boys to learn 'enough to work as a merchant' rather than learn about the humanist subjects of grammar, rhetoric, poetry, history and moral philosophy. Key humanist teachers of the Renaissance included Gasparino Barzizza, Guarino Guarini da Verona and Vittorino da Feltre, who were all active in Northern Italy, not Florence. Alison Brown observes how 'in one respect Florence was - or at any rate seemed to be - worse off than many of her neighbours: she lacked a well-established university'. A university had been founded in 1348 but it never achieved the status of the universities of Bologna and Padua. For a long time it only offered vocational training for local students in medicine, law and theology. It was always competing with the abacus schools which Florentine merchants favoured more highly. Humanist education did not become important in Florence until the second half of the fifteenth century and then it was predominantly for elite families.
During the Renaissance, the Medieval Latin language and spelling was rejected, as there was a desire to return to the purer Latin of ancient Rome. The leading centers of the rebirth of Latin in Italy were Padua, Arezzo, Bologna and Verona. It did not begin in Florence, only reaching it by around 1400. By the mid-fifteenth century Rome was dominant in the development of the new language. However, Florence did hold some importance because of the arrival of the Greek Manual Chrysolaras at the turn of the fifteenth century who taught and inspired many students including Leonardo Bruni and Poggio Bracciolini, who were to become important Renaissance thinkers. Bruni produced new translations of Aristotle's Greek text Politics and Ethics. Latin was derived from Greek so Chrysolaras, being Greek, was knowledgeable and influential. By the end of the fifteenth century, Florence became dominant because of important Florentine thinkers such as Angelo Poliziano.
In the late fifteenth and sixteenth century, Florence lost much of its influence as great artists such as Leonardo and Michelangelo were tempted away from the city and produced many of their masterpieces abroad. Leonardo had invented a number of military machines. After Florence had ended the war with Naples in 1480, Florentine politicians were only interested in keeping the peace and so Leonardo left Florence in 1482 to sell his war machines to other cities such as Milan.
Although other places in Italy such as Rome and Venice had important roles to play in the development of the Italian Renaissance, 'the names most clearly associated with the Renaissance remain those of... artists from Florence'. The conditions in Florence at the time made it the ideal place for artists and scholars to work. There were many wealthy patrons, a large collection of talented men, and a system of government that encouraged cultural development. As Hunt observes, 'Florence is certain to remain at the heart of any serious study of the origins and development of the Italian Renaissance'. The importance of Florence in the development of the Italian Renaissance has not been exaggerated. 'Every important Italian City had its Renaissance, but the Florentine, because it was the most complete and the most influential, has a special claim to be considered representative of the whole'.