Although the role of the people within politics has long been assessed and discussed, a consensus has failed to emerge, with much of the debate still centring upon the concept of 'politics'. With few formal and representative institutions during the early modern period, formal political participation of the people can be seen to have been minimal, seemingly reinforcing the assertion that they had no role to play in politics. Such an assertion however, can be seen to neglect recent scholarship, which suggests a less polar division between the people and politics, with a greater emphasis placed upon community involvement and the persist acts of resistance and rebellion. In order to then assess the role of the people in politics, we need to consider both the formal and informal ways in which the people participated. Most importantly we need to define the concept of 'politics', as our assessment ultimately rests upon its interpretation. Furthermore we need to consider the lack of homogeneity within the period. Divisions and differences can be found between as well as within composite states and kingdoms, making any over arching assessment problematic and difficult.
Andy Wood in his analysis of popular politics, charts the differing interpretations of the role of the people in politics, arguing that 'social historians of early modern England used to avoid politics'. Such an assessment raises considerable problems to our analysis, given that scholarship would seemingly neglect and ignore the role of the people in politics. It was not until the 1980s that a 'new' social history emerged, investigating and recognising; crime, urbanisation, disease, literacy, population growth and social change. These 'new' social histories recognised conflict, that was intense and protracted, which often resulted in collective protest, riot and demonstration; such investigations then provide us with evidence to suggest that the people did have a certain degree of power and discontent, but the question of their role within politics can still be contested. Wood argues that for many of these historians, it was still assumed that 'political' affairs were conducted only within established institutions, with the localism of early modern riots not guaranteeing their 'pre-political' character, and that these conflicts over resources possessed no inherent politics.
Such assessments can be challenged by 'post-revisionist' scholarship, which questions the validity of the clear distinctions between 'elite' and 'popular' politics, recognising the formation of a 'public sphere' of debate within early modern European towns. Politics can therefore be seen to include discussion, debate and action, fundamentally understood in social terms, as a manifestation of argumentation and contestation of disparities of power. With early modern notions of authority encompassing a whole range of relationships, between the young and old, men and women, employer and employee, rich and poor, and priest and parishioner, political behaviour therefore emerges when ever there are groups in opposition. Politics then occurs with any attempt to extend, reassert or challenge the distribution of power, thus, as Wood asserts, 'politics is dynamic, deriving from fluidity, change, interaction and conflict'. In our analysis of the role of the people in politics, we need then to identify when the boundaries between groups are in contention, in order to recognise the occurrence of political activity. By people, we are referring to the non-elites, those who were not part of the bureaucracy or aristocracy, and did not possess a title of nobility or lordship.
Within much of the Holy Roman Empire, there were few mechanisms of negotiation and reconciliation short of confrontation through which the elites and the people could resolve fundamental differences. Rural commoners were excluded from the territorial estates in which the Princes were able to bargain with their privileges subjects for taxes and support, seemingly removing the people from politics. At a local level, the manorial court did offer a forum in which popular interests found a voice, however the court was an ambiguous institution, 'always drawn uncomfortably between popular custom and the will of the Lord'.
A similar situation existed within England, with local rural politics existing within an institutional order through which lord conflicts and lord interests were mediated. In many parts of England prior to the end of the 1600s, the institutional focus of popular politics was focussed on the manor court. Negotiations took place between manor lord and his 'subjects' over the terms of rent, fines and manorial privileges; controlling access to water and commons, regulating the farming cycle and worked out the terms of temporary and permanent enclosure. Within England, there also existed the House of Commons, an arena for debate and representation. Although such representation was exclusive to those to which the franchise extended, it nevertheless provided a channel in which some people could play a part in politics, 'a complex procedure of consideration of issues in both the House of Commons and the House of Lords'.
Beat Kmin and Andreas Wrgler suggest further the presence of institutions that allowed the people a role in politics. There existed parliamentary institutions, the Landtag, across many states of the Holy Roman Empire; in Hesse, a diet for taxation met to form gravamina that were presented to the Landsgrave for consideration. Informally, the people also actively acknowledged their right to present petitions and grievances to 'exercise real influence on the process of legislation and administration'. MPs within the House of Commons accepted the right to petition, with an Essex MP receiving a petition containing over thirty thousand signatures. Where absolutism was not secure, rulers consulted subjects on a voluntary basis, and furthermore allowed gravamina to be presented in return for allowing the passing of taxation, suggesting a somewhat mutual and respective relationship. These acts of 'popular initiatives' can then be seen to represent the role of the people in politics, involving themselves in an ever more formalised manner.
David Sabean in his analysis of the period, also argues that there were institutions that allowed for the people to participate in. In the sixteenth century, inhabitants of the duchy of Wrttemberg won the right to be consulted about taxes and established a Landtag, where 'villages drove slowly back the influence of city magistracy'. Sabean argues that these villages were usually, at the local level, self-administering, who negotiated the right to elect the chief official by all adult males in the village. The administrative towns also shared the same processes of government, albeit they were slightly more complex; such evidence then suggests that during the period the people were able to involve themselves within some formal political activity, thereby challenging the notion of their exclusion. However, we should be careful not to over emphasise such an assertion and place it within its context.
It is important to recognise the differences within Europe during this period when assessing the people's involvement within politics, as there were clear divides between and within composite states and kingdoms. Wayne Te Brake in his analysis, argues that Louis XIV 'not only agreed to respect the differences between the pay d'tat and pays d'lection, but also accepted even greater limitations on his political and cultural sovereignty in newly acquired territories like Alsace and Lorraine, where he might not even be identified as King'. Likewise, both branches of the Habsburg Monarchy ruled far more directly over their domains or core principalities than their much more extensive empires. These differences represented differing opportunities for the people to involve themselves within politics, making overarching assessment difficult and problematic.
Te Brake argues then that in order to appropriately assess the people's part within politics, there is a need then to 'look outside of the normal channels of electoral politics'. 'Informal politics' are therefore of considerable importance, especially in these circumstances in which most people were excluded from formal political participation altogether. The people could be seen to form popular groups, representing themselves through collective violence in order to bring about, or change, elite preferences and behaviour, particularly when challenged by taxation.
Victor Magagna also rejects the notion that the relationship between the people and the elites was a static one, pointing to the outbreak of the Peasant War, which was 'an attempt to redefine Lordship and power'. The 1525 Peasant War, which spread across the Upper Rhine, Upper Swalsia, Franconia, Thuringia and the Tyrol within the Holy Roman Empire, were essentially political revolts against the Lords, stemming from religious tensions, manorial tithes and taxation. The demands of the revolt were formulated within twelve articles, many seemingly manifestations of political significance; the community 'ought to have authority and power to elect and appoint its own pastor', have access to land, hunt and fish freely, as well as dictating that 'punishments should be fair'. Their focus upon aristocratic power and abuses were articulated in a direct confrontation with the agents of aristocratic domination. Such demands and the formalisation of revolt marked the role of the people in politics, challenging their prescribed obedience.
French communities were also able to act politically. Although neither the King nor the aristocracy regarded ordinary rural people as anything more than a 'source of revenue', excluding them from the assemblies of estates and noble courts, the people were able to involve themselves within politics. Ordinary people were tied together in many ways, 'for many purposes and on many occasions', allowing them to challenge aristocratic power and authority. With an ever-expanding French bureaucracy directed by the monarch, the pressures of direct and indirect taxes increased many times over, causing much discontent and was thus a source for rebellion.
Charles Tilly in his assessment of seventeenth century France challenges, however, the notions that these rebellions were acts of politics, but rather acts of economic anguish. Many of the conflicts of the latter seventeenth century were subsistence crisis, 1693-94, 1698-99 and 1709-10, occurring during grain shortages. Although these revolts can then be seen to have been driven by economic hardship, their potential to represent political behaviour should not be dismissed. As Tilly concludes, efforts to seize peasant labour, commodities and capital 'violated peasant rights, jeopardised the interests of other parties in peasant production and threatened the ability of the peasants to survive as peasants'. The revolts then represented political acts, as they attempted to redress the power relationships between state and subject, by acting in a manner that extended beyond their prescribed status. Tilly's analysis thus needs to be placed within its context, where definitions of politics failed to extend beyond formal intuitions; reinterpretations of its constitution thus enables us to reinterpret Tilly's research as supporting the interpretation that the people played a part in politics.
Between 1548-1630 there witnessed earlier waves of tax revolts across the French Kingdom; Angoumois, Croquant and Gauntues during the 1500s, Nouveaux Croquant and Nu-Pieds in the 1630s. Magagna argues that these revolts 'throw into sharp relief the dynamics of community politics and bureaucratic domination in rural France', they marked not just the economic concerns but also the conditions of authority, where both the 'economic prosperous as well as the poor took part'. Such demands for the right of local communities to exercise ultimate and fiscal authority over the kinds of taxes that should be paid, marked the people's involvement in politics, undermining their exclusion, as on many occasions the tax collectors conceded to community concerns. There witnessed in 1528 and 1548 revolts in Bordeaux, on both occasions the royal collectors of wine and salt taxation were defeated, forcing them to concede to the city's unrest.
Outright rebellion and riot were often the exception rather than the norm, however James C. Scott argues that there witnessed 'a constant struggle between the peasantry and those who sought to extract labour, food, taxes, rents and interest from them'. Scott argues then that resistance could be represented by foot dragging, dissimulation, false compliance, pilfering, feigned ignorance, slander, arson and sabotage. 'Symbolic' resistance could also be located within the early modern period; malicious gossip, character assignation, nicknames and rumour, violated expected behaviour in an effort to advance the claims and interests against others. Although the impact of these actions upon the structure of power is not very appreciable, it still represented a means available for a subordinate class to clothe the practice of resistance with the safe disguise of outward compliance. Furthermore, as Scott concludes, these actions 'may force renegotiation of the limits of appropriate change, the course of subsequent development, and they may merely help bring the system down'. Such actions then challenge the notion that due to the lack of formal institutions and large persistent acts of rebellion, the relationship between the people and other groups was a static one. Although the manner in which the relationship was challenged appears hidden, it was an attempt by the people to defy obedience that was expected from them, thereby representing a political act by challenging the relationship between master and servant.
Magagna, in his research, points also to community politics, where the people could be seen to have been involved intimately 'to enforce ideals and held practices'. The relationship between men and women, master and subject and between different social groups, were maintained through such community mechanisms as the family, charivari and the scolds bridle, as well as through state law. Although the people were unable to influence much of the law, community practices were conducted at a local level and were frequently occurring, marking the people's involvement in politics. The relationship between men and women was one which was often contested, where both men and women behaved in ways that went beyond their prescribed ideal. Susan Amussen in her research presents evidence to suggest that women were often instigators of food riots, and participated in a variety of protests and rebellions. Challenges to patriarchy are only one such example of wider relationship contentions during the early modern period, thereby placing political acts at a everyday, local, and individual level.
We can therefore reject the notion that the people had no role in politics. Throughout the early modern period they were able to influence, to a limited degree, the formal institutions of the state, and far more forcibly their daily lives, through differing degrees of conformity and protest. What should be noted, however, is that experiences were diverse, with differing experiences between, as well as within states, and furthermore between different social groups. Although the term of 'the people' is a usual one, allowing us to investigate the relationship between state elites and the 'others' in society, it perhaps implies too greater homogeneity, distorting the realities of the period. 'The people', needs then to be far greater qualified, in order to recognise these differing experiences, allowing for more comprehensive studies and secure conclusions.