There is immense debate surrounding religious change in the early modern period, accounts differ over its pace, continuity with the past and leading impetus. Jean Delumeau argues that the period marked the first serious attempt to christianise rural Europe by attacking the pagan superstitions that were seemingly rife. John Bossy argues that the period witnessed a shift from corporate to individual Christianity, whilst Robert Birely and Ronnie Hsia emphasise the continuities during the period with the accommodation and retention of traditional religious culture and practice. Despite this lack of consensus, religious practices of the Catholic laity during this period can be identified, and the impact and effect of the Catholic Reformation can be measured. The extent of religious change ultimately, therefore, rests upon what we interpret Catholic practices to be at the beginning of the period, and how these then differed to those at its end. In practice, the change of religious behaviour would appear to be a combination of all three interpretations. Evidence can be found to suggest a more systematic process of christianisation, focused increasingly upon the individual, with the retention and adaptation of traditional religious culture and practice. We should however consider the lack of homogeneity regarding religious practice during this period as regional differences can be found within, as well as between nations, therefore making the question of change problematic.
Delumeau in his interpretation of the changes in religious practice during this period suggests a process of christianisation. Religious preachers actively sought to remove pagan and superstitious practices that were seemingly widespread, replacing them instead with a more Christian and evangelised belief. Delumeau argues that during the early period the religious instruction of the faithful had been 'sadly neglected'. During mass, people frequently sat on the alter steps or chatted during the service, lower people were often involved within scuffles and brawls and the church building was often too small and crowded. The people were often characterised by a profound unfamiliarity with the basics of Christianity and there persisted a pagan mentality and the occasional vestiges of pre-Christian ceremonies. Ceremonies of the 'dance of the cannons', or the 'blacked men' were common, and many superstitious practices surrounding St John persisted. What marked the period before the Council of Trent was, as Jean Delumeau then argues, endemic Christian ignorance, represented in both faith and practice, what followed was then an attempt to address these problems.
Fundamental to this process of 'evangelisation' was the role played by the priesthood and the Christian missionaries. The Council of Trent decreed that parish priests and curates resided within their parishes, reasserting their pastoral responsibilities, thereby increasing control over their parishioners' religious beliefs and practice. The ecclesiastical authorities made more frequent demands for austerity and dignity of life from the priesthood, and increasingly marked them off from the world with the wearing of cassocks. Seminaries provided intellectual and theological training, allowing them to instruct the laity more effectively. Within such an environment, the religious practices of the Catholic laity must be seen then to have changed, as following the proclamation at the Council of Trent, systematic Christian teachings were provided, delivered by a newly competent and educated clergy.
New missionaries across Spain, France and Italy were established such as the Jesuits, Capuchins and Lazarists, which reached to the rural peasantry more directly than ever before. The seventeenth century also witnessed the introduction of catechism manuals in an attempt to change the faithfuls' attitudes to communion and confession. These teachings were paralleled by the introduction of primary education in schools, which aimed at teaching children both religion and human letters. An emphasis was placed upon the learning of prayers and on practical good conduct and sensible behaviour. The effects, as Birely argues, were clearly visible. More 'folks' knew their catechism and could recite basic prayers, the faithful approached confession and received Holy Communion more regularly and matrimony and confirmation became more prominent as sacraments. The sacrament of confession that had fallen into widespread neglect in the late middle ages gradually also reappeared. The period clearly witnessed, therefore, distinct changes to Catholic lay religious practice, marked by increases in the attendance of ceremonies and also a wider awareness of religious obligations.
Despite Bossy's assertion that lay religious practice altered throughout the period, he refutes Delumeau's vision of a previously 'pagan middle ages'. The contrasts between pre-Tridentine Christianity based on natural allegiance, kinship, friendship and locality, to the later organised theological church, administrated by the official authorities, were less extreme than Delumeau suggests. Despite the lack of discipline and the spasmodic manner in which many obligations were undertook, the church was still the dominant institution in Europe, as its influence 'penetrated virtually every aspect of life'. Kinship and solidarity bound parishioners together and they assembled regularly in their parish church for religious practice. These differences in interpretation would seem to arise over what then constituted Catholic practice, Delumeau's emphasis upon religious practice and instruction contrasting with Bossy's emphasis upon communal behaviour. A balance can perhaps be drawn between the two. Despite the lack of formal instruction and the enforcement of discipline in the early period, lay religious practice was still widespread, however it manifested in different forms. What developed in the period was then the formalisation and standardisation of religious behaviour, based upon these traditional practices. This change in practice would seem to be reflected by Bossy's own research, which suggests that there witnessed a transition from collective to individual Christianity.
With the introduction of the confession box by the Milanese bishop Carlo Borromeo, the purpose of confession had clearly altered. Manuals were increasingly published, describing the act of confession, and there could be seen a shift on emphasis from social sins, such as charity and anger, to those of the interior, associated increasingly with sexual conduct. By changing the act of confession from a public, or semi-public event, to one of a more personal and individual nature, it altered what the sacrament was really 'felt to be for'. Confession had previously allowed for acts of satisfaction to be mediated, without involving interior sorrow for the offence committed, changes to its nature therefore altered individual reprieve. The shift of focus then moved away from the social relations of the community to the individual relationship with God. This is reflected also by changes to the meaning of 'Christianity'. Traditional definitions were associated with groups of people, this was replaced in the seventeenth century by a definition concerning a body of beliefs. Changes in practice then can be seen to have been significant, as they reflected changes in beliefs, with a shift from communal to individual relations with God.
Despite changes to religious practice, elements of traditional practice persisted, therefore challenging the extent of change during this period. Hsia and Birely's research into religious practice would also seem to support such an assertion, differing from Delumeau and Bossy by acknowledging a far greater extent in the continuity of religious behaviour throughout the period.
Although the piety became more personal, a communal character was retained. The feast of Corpus Christi continued and associated processions that dated back to the early thirteenth century persisted. Pilgrimages that had long been popular as a way of sending favours from God through the intercession of the saint, expressing thanks, and under taking penance were revived in the later sixteenth century and flourished anew in the seventeenth century. Hsia argues that what people demanded were 'saints of old, proven in their ability to intercede in the court of heaven, bringing immediate relief to afflicted bodies'. Where new cults of saints were successfully established, the focus of worship was still focussed upon traditional custom. The cult of St. Ignatius in Alsace was integrated into traditional healing with water blessed on his feastday given to heal possession and relieve cramps. The Jesuit missionaries adapted their methods of instruction to include traditional practices. They developed a theatrical method in their delivery of St Ignatius's spiritual exercises and sang vernacular hymns to popular tunes. They also retained the traditional elements of practice; statues, crucifixions and other objects to attract attention continued to be integral to service. Older medieval traditions were also frequently elaborated and expanded upon, so that continuity with the early period was evident. Religious practice could be seen to then have retained many of its traditional characteristics, however, although such characteristics persisted it should not dismiss the elements of practice that had significantly changed. The development from corporate to personal Christianity and the wider dissemination and awareness of religious obligations were significant developments to lay religious practice throughout the period; therefore the retention of traditional customs should be placed within this wider context of change.
Despite changes seen in religious practice, these changes neither occurred at the same time nor were uniform in their extent across Europe. National differences 'marked the very inception of Tridentine reform', whereas the decrees of the Council were readily adopted in Spain, Belgium, Italy and Poland, their implementations in France and Germany 'lingered' until the eighteenth century. As Birely emphasises, the situation in Spain was different from that in Germany, and the situation in England different from that in France, where change occurred then, it did so within the context of its region. The rate of change also can be seen to have differed within regions. Cities such as Munich, Lyon and Barcelona first felt its effects, 'often with the foundation of a Jesuit college'. This change then enveloped the hinterland and later extended beyond to the countryside. Regionally, Northern Italy, the Spanish Netherlands and the Rhineland, Alsace and Lorraine and parts of the Iberian peninsular felt is effects among the laity by the late sixteenth century. Much of France did so in the first half of the next century, and only in the second half did the Catholic reform take hold within Austria and Bohemia. The rate and extent of change can be seen then to have differed greatly throughout Europe, with different regions experiencing changes to religious practice at different times to others. This then poses problems of identifying the extent of change in lay Catholic religious practice, as its extent differed within and well as between nations.
There can then be seen to have been significant changes in lay Catholic religious practice throughout this period. There witnessed a shift of emphasis from corporate to individual Christianity, and a formalisation and standardisation of religious behaviour, despite the retention of many traditional practices. Christian teachings were provided and delivered by a newly competent and educated clergy which resulted in increased attendance at church and also a far greater lay awareness of religious obligations. Although there existed continuities in practice throughout the period, the changes that occurred can be seen to have been significant, affecting both the notion of Christianity and Christian behaviour and also the relationship between Christians to God. Despite the rate of change occurring at different paces and extent across Europe, change did occur, and this change, to a large extent, was significant and far reaching.