The foundations of the group of historians now known as the Annales 'school' were laid when in 1929 Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre published the journal Annales d'histoire conomique et sociale. Since this pivotal moment, the Annales have been credited with undermining the positivist definition of historical fact, destroying the taboo on unwritten evidence, imposing a dialogue with other disciplines, discrediting the history of events, and rejecting the primacy of political history. Importantly, this tradition cannot be attributed to a single historian, nor has it employed a 'clear-cut' paradigm. 'Their work is united, however, in terms of theoretical and methodological principles embodied in the journal Annales: conomies, Socits, Civilisations whence their name derives." Trevor-Roper helpfully captures these elements of unity, emphasising their attempts to grasp the totality and cohesion of every historical period, their conviction that history is at least partly determined by forces which are external to man, and their determination to reduce areas of incomprehension by rigorous statistical analysis. Fernand Braudel's contribution to the Annales tradition, although significant, should be therefore, placed within a wider tradition of conjectural fluidity and development. Far from betraying this tradition, we can credit Braudel with furthering the principle for which the Annales stood most, promulgating an ideal of histoire totale.
Braudel led the Annales group of historians from 1956 to the early 1970s. La Mditerrane et le monde Mditerranen  l'poque de Philippe II, published in 1949 and proclaimed as Braudel's most profound and influential work, epitomises his method of historical investigation and writing. Indeed, Trevor-Roper affirms, 'no single book so amply and vividly illustrates, in its practice, the whole philosophy of the Annales school." However, as Febvre himself notes, La Mditerrane 'gave us an entirely new dimension and one which, in a sense, is revolutionary. The book is a manifesto, a sign. And, I have no hesitation in saying so, it is a milestone." For Braudel did not follow the newer approaches to economic and social history embodied by Bloch's and Febvre's work, choosing not to refer to Bloch's innovative analyses of agricultural patterns of production, nor employing Febvre's idea that religious, literary, and cultural activity is coerced and guided by 'mental tools' characteristic of a given period. Instead, Braudel envisaged three layers of historical time, each moving at a different speed, and each aligned with different historical topics. Anna Green and Kathleen Troup provide us with a useful synopsis,
Although Braudel thus ignored what seemed to many historians in the 1940s to be the most significant achievements of the first two editors of the Annales, he echoed and extended their most signal ideological directives, the synthesising of history with other social sciences, the use of statistical analysis, and the attempt to capture histoire totale.
Febvre and Bloch rejected the near-monopoly of French history by political and diplomatic topics, an approach they condemned as 'sterile'; instead, they wanted to break down the boundaries between the human sciences, with historians incorporating as many of these disciplines as possible in their work. Bloch, arguing in The Historian's Craft, affirms that 'we have no other remedy than to substitute, in place of the multiple skills of a single man, the pooling of the techniques practiced by different scholars." Using a metaphor of a searchlight, Bloch affirms that 'danger threatens only when each searchlight operator claims to see everything by himself, when each canton of learning pretends to national sovereignty." Such a metaphor propagates interdisciplinary collaboration. Febvre, furthermore, is in agreement,
For Febvre, collaboration therefore allowed the added benefits of scale and efficiency, the ability to approach questions and topics previously denied by their complexity, a solution to the task of writing histoire totale. Braudel, far from contradicting such a proposition, is in full agreement, arguing that 'each science encroaches on its neighbours, all the while believing it is staying in its own domain... but the crucial thing now is to get together." 'I would hope that the social sciences, at least provisionally, would suspend their constant border disputes over what is or is not a social science... rather let them try to trace those lines across our research, and make possible the first stages of some sort of coming together." The coming together of the different social sciences, sociology, history, and economics, therefore provides a unifying methodological approach to the Annales tradition, propagated collectively by Bloch, Febvre, and indeed, Braudel.
Although sometimes mocked and ridiculed for their overuse of quantification, statistical analysis and graphical representation, the Annales group of historians avidly employ such methods to help construct their histoire totale. Bloch, writing in The Historian's Craft, propagates the use of scientific modes and methods of investigation, 'to conform to a sort of pan-scientific ideal." With the belief that history is 'vastly indebted' to 'this great scientific effort', Bloch concludes that 'it has taught us to analyse more profoundly, to grasp our problems more firmly, and even, I dare to say, to think less shoddily." Indeed, Braudel is in agreement, and has helped to initiate a strong focus on quantitive history among the historians influenced by him. Samuel Kinser, in fact attributes the use graphical representation to represent historical change as one of La Mditerrane's chief attractions, Braudel proving 'unusually adept at presenting immense bodies of documentation in summary visual form." Braudel, by readily employing the Annales statistical methodology, seems far from contradicting the Annales tradition.
Although criticised for its omissions, such as culture, agriculture, law and religion, Braudel's La Mditerrane converges with Febvre's and Bloch's aim of writing a total history. Bloch, arguing in The Historian's Craft, outlines his struggle to 'penetrate beneath the mere surface of actions, rejecting not only the temptations of legend and rhetoric, but the still more dangerous modern poisons of routine learning and empiricism parading as common sense." Braudel, writing some years later, agrees with this notion,
It is this sense of purpose that provides the Annales with an enduring tradition, rather than a clear single paradigm. Braudel, writing his in his Personal Testimony, affirms that the Annales, 'despite their vivacity, never constituted a school in the strict sense, that is to say, a pattern though closed in upon itself. On the contrary. The password for the Annales was nothing more than passion for the past - but that is a great deal." Furthermore, Braudel adds, 'and joined with that passion there was the search for all the new possibilities, a readiness to accept changes in the way problems were put, according to the requirements and logic of the hour.'
 La Mditerrane is not, therefore, in the narrow sense a paradigm, nor has it been literally imitated by anyone, because it offers an image of Annaliste history more than a method. Braudel's work, then, gave to the Annales group of historians something more than a model, he offered to them, and to all of his readers, 'what may be called an inspiring suggestiveness." And it is with this that we must judge Braudel's contribution to the Annales tradition, a tradition built upon a specific context, reasoning and purpose.
Trevor-Roper contends, 'French in origin, French in inspiration." Braudel, by asking 'is it by chance that Henri Berr, Lucien Febvre, March Bloch, and myself all four came from eastern France? That the Annales began at Strasbourg, next door to Germany and to German historical thought?' shares this sentiment. The political context of the 1920s, the inherent anti-Germanic feelings, the destruction of the First World War, and the embarrassment of invasion and occupation, provide numerous explanations to help account for the Annales conception. Bryce Lyon asserts, their 'reaction is easy to explain... their memories of the Franco-Prussian War and of the German annexation of Alsace plus their involvement in the war of 1914-18 made them little receptive to German historical ideas." Their distinctive 'Frenchness' can therefore be explained by the context in which the Annales began, and what they were reacting to. With the belief that they study of history in France was in the doldrums, lagging far behind such study in Germany, England, and the United States, the Annales set out to bring France to the forefront of international research and investigation. Hexter affirms,
The goal of the Annales from the outset, therefore, was to undo the work of the Sorbonnistes, to turn French historians away from the narrowly political and the narrowly diplomatic, to turn them toward the new studies in history, especially toward social and economic history. Braudel, in sharing this outlook and sense of mission, thus conformed to the Annales tradition, helping to make 'history one of the most important subjects in French academia, and, as institutional and pedagogical leader of the Annales group of historians... provided intellectual and financial support for a burgeoning French historical profession.'
Structurally, much of the Annales also remained consistent throughout Braudel's period of leadership. The Sixime Section of the cole Pratique des Haute tudes, founded in 1947, continued to promote a variety of Annales research. The VI e Section's structure, rules, and methods of recruitment remained flexible, and free from the regulations and obligations of the French university system. Braudel did much to help further propagate Annales research, establishing the Centre de recherches historiques, and another dozen research teams and laboratories attached to the VI e Section. Braudel's tangible legacy, those belonging to the 'third generation' of the Annales group of historians, although focusing largely on statistical aspects of investigation, seizing upon the use of the computer as a tool, continued to pursue the totality of history, adding emphasis on the mentalits of past societies to the already formidable range of new topics. Braudel, therefore, did much to remain consistent with the Annales tradition.
Interestingly, Lyon has recently asserted that had Bloch survived the Second World War, he would probably have repudiated the kind of history he had embraced between 1919-1939. Lyon affirms, that Bloch, having fought on the losing side and living in a defeated and partly occupied nation, solemn about the 'shortcomings and failures of both himself and all Frenchmen', regretted that he and other individuals did not act. Lyon concludes, 'living daily amidst unpleasant realities, he had to admit that the individual in history cannot be ignored, that human frailties and strengths influence the course of history, and that chance, destiny, and the unforeseen must be taken into account." Although it is difficult for us to satisfactorily investigate such an assertion, it does raise a number of important points. Firstly, if Bloch was willing to challenge his theoretical interpretations due to changing circumstance and personal experience, then context must be seen as an important factor governing the Annales tradition. Secondly, flexibility, fluidity, and development are permitted attributes of the Annales method of history. And thirdly, a clear goal and sense of purpose must be seen as driving the Annales theoretical and methodological principles.
In conclusion, we can therefore reject the notion that Braudel betrayed the Annales tradition. Although we should credit the Annales group of historians with employing a distinctive theoretical method in which to record and investigate the past, these distinctive elements cannot be attributed to a single historian, nor contained within a clear-cut paradigm. Rather, the Annales 'tradition' rests upon its place within the journal Annales: conomies, Socits, Civilisations, a unifying embodiment of its guiding principles. Braudel's contribution to this 'tradition', although significant, and somewhat revolutionary, ought therefore, be placed within this wider tradition of conjectural fluidity and development. Far from betraying this tradition, we can credit Braudel with furthering one of the Annales foremost important principles, promulgating the attempt to capture history in its totality through methodical innovation and continued historical investigation.