Max Weber's Protestant Ethic has been one of the most significant and well publicised disputes of twentieth-century scholarship. The associated literature largely portrays, incorrectly, a monocasual relationship between the development of a Protestant ethic and the emergence of modern capitalism, neglecting the more pluralistic explanation, which Weber himself puts forward. Within the Protestant Ethic, Weber identifies the separation of the business from the household, book- keeping, science, law, education, citizenship, climate, and biology as factors that influenced, and were influenced by, the spirit of capitalism and consequently modern capitalist culture. For Weber, the formation of the Protestant religion in the sixteenth century preceded the emergence of this spirit. Thus, Weber argues, the emergence of modern capitalism was facilitated by the formation of the Protestant religion, for it encouraged attributes that were conducive to its progress. These developments of religion, which were lacking in the East, help then to explain the economic divergence between Western and Eastern civilisations. Implicitly, given the pessimistic tone in which Weber concludes, the Protestant Ethic also unveils the dangers of capitalist development. Labour, rather than a religious calling, can develop simply into an economic function as a means in itself. As a result, it is not difficult to conceive how the pursuit of wealth can develop to exploitation. However this was not Weber's primary concern, and this is where his enquiry falls down. It wrestles between Marx's deterministic approach to history, with the all-encompassing nature of capitalism, and the individual and socio-political factors that affect its development and emergence. It is not explicitly an attempt to explain the divergence of Western and Eastern economic development, merely it is the examination of religion's contribution to the emergence of a specifically Western worldly culture. Given Weber's pluralistic approach and his acknowledgement of sociological and historical context, any specific explanations of Eastern development (or apparent lack) need then to be formulated tentatively.
Weber argues in a limited sense, 'so far as economic documents permit us to judge', that capitalism and capitalistic enterprises, have existed throughout history. By capitalism, Weber refers to the pursuit of profit by means of continuous, rational, capitalistic enterprise. Western capitalism, defined by the rational organisation of free labour, was however distinct, and it is the emergence of this rationality that underpins Weber's explanation and development of modern Western culture.
As Weber acknowledges, the East possessed geometry, natural sciences, and chemistry, but what was lacking was a method of experiment and rationality. In India, mathematics existed, but it failed to develop both modern arithmetic and book-keeping. Weber concludes, that it was only in the West that science existed at a stage of development that today we would recognise as 'valid'. For Weber, this was explained by a lack of economic progression, for capitalism made use of science and mathematics as a means to further its own interests and advancement.
Weber applied this same rationale not only to the sciences, but also to realm of politics. Systematic forms of thought, 'so essential to a rational jurisprudence', could only be found in the West, embodied by Roman and Western law. Weber continues, affirming that 'in fact, the State itself, in the sense of a political association with a rational, written constitution, rationally ordained law, and an administration bound to rational rules or laws' was known only in Western civilisation. Again, this was explained by the same notion of development, 'for modern rational capitalism has need, not only of the technical means of production, but of a calculable legal system and of administration in terms of formal rules." 'For without the rational capitalistic organisation of labour, all this, so far as it was possible at all, would have nothing like the same significance, above all for the social structure and all the specific problems of the modern Occident connected with it.'
In both cases, in the sciences and politics, the differences of Western and Eastern development were driven by capitalist trends. The emergence of rational capitalism then provides the mechanism for explaining the economic divergence of Western and Eastern civilisations. It is the explanation of this emergence that Weber formulates in his thesis of the Protestant Ethic.
Weber places a great emphasis upon the part played by religion, arguing that this, more than anything else, 'created the differences of which we are conscious today', hinting conceivably at the divergence between Western and Eastern civilisations. Amintore Fanfani is also in agreement, arguing that capitalism has relations with various religions, 'because these, in seeking to discipline the spiritual powers of man, can, in combination with other social phenomena, destroy it, check it, or stimulate it." For Weber, business leaders and owners of capital, skilled labourers, and even more the higher technically and commercially trained personnel of modern enterprises, have been overwhelmingly Protestant. Minimising the part played by historical circumstance, Weber affirms that economic conditions appear to a large extent as a result of religious affiliation, explored by Weber extensively by the notion of 'calling', itself a product of the Reformation.
The Protestant notion of calling refers to 'the valuation of the fulfilment of duty in worldly affairs as the highest form which the moral activity of the individual could assume." As a result, it placed religious significance upon everyday-worldly activity. Weber argues that as a consequence of this process, the psychological effect 'was extraordinary powerful', dictating the manner in which those of the Protestant faith viewed their existence. Ernst Troeltsch is also in agreement, asserting that as a result, 'it laid the foundation of a world of specialised labour, which taught men to work for work's sake." Unwillingness to work became symptomatic of a lack of grace, the enjoyment of wealth as the consequence of idleness. Time wasting, the first and in principle the deadliness of sins, determining the pace and direction of human activity. It acted powerfully against spontaneous enjoyment of possessions, restricting consumption, whereby luxury exemplified an idolatry of the flesh. In short, the Protestant notion of calling can be viewed as a determining factor of modern capitalist development, for it encompassed the Protestant faith, powerfully encouraging attributes of thrift, frugality, labour, and economy, attributes that for Weber, were lacking in the East.
Malcolm MacKinnon is however hostile to Weber's argument, asserting that 'it is wrong for two reasons." Firstly, MacKinnon argues that there is no crisis of proof in dogmatic Calvinism that tenders an absolute guarantee of assurance from the use of good works and introspection. This seems, however, to be a misrepresentation of Weber's argument. Weber does not suggest that good works provided an absolute guarantee of gaining assurance and salvation, merely that they provided a means to remove self-doubt and apprehension, 'getting rid of the fear of damnation." Secondly, MacKinnon argues that works in dogma and pastoral advice have nothing to do with earthly toil but are spiritual duties that call for the enactment of the Law. Weber would largely agree to this statement, as 'the salvation of the soul and that alone was the centre of their [Protestant's] life and work. Their ethical ideals and the practical results of their doctrines were all based on that alone, and were the consequences of purely religious motives." However, Weber also concedes, 'we shall thus have to admit that the cultural consequences of the Reformation were to a great extent, perhaps in the particular aspects with which we are dealing predominantly, unforeseen and even unwished for results of the labours of the reformers." Therefore, although labour was performed as a spiritual duty, it had unforeseen and unintended results, facilitating unknowingly the emergence of modern capitalism.
Weber argues that this Protestant attitude and behaviour contrasted starkly to the period to which it proceeded, as neither the Catholic peoples nor those of classical antiquity 'possessed any expression of a similar connotation for what we know as a calling." For Weber, it was the duty to this calling that characterised the social ethic of capitalistic culture, and in a sense, was 'the fundamental basis of it." Without the sense of this calling, individuals failed to conform to capitalistic rules of action. The earning of money within the economic order failed to express a moral virtue or proficiency of grace. Countries where economic actions went unchecked, Weber argues, failed to emerge, for the ruthless acquisition of wealth persisted unchallenged. Those orientated to the exploitation of political opportunities and irrational speculation, failed to rise, or even to develop at all. The placing of religious significance upon human activity therefore encouraged an attitude towards life, to which Weber assigns 'the spirit of capitalism', a spirit distinct to the West.
As we have seen, the spirit of capitalism was not a merely a business astuteness, as for Weber this was common enough, it was rather an encompassing ethos. Its significance can therefore not be understated. However, this spirit, in order to emerge, had to fight its way against a whole world of hostile forces. The most important opponent, 'in the sense of a definite standard of life claiming ethical sanction' was, Weber argues, associated with traditionalism. And for Weber, it was religion, and religious upbringing, which offered the greatest success in overcoming this traditionalist hostility, and therefore providing a path to capitalist development. The importance of this emergence was clear, as the motivational force towards this expansion of modern capitalism was, Weber argues, 'above all', the spirit of capitalism. This spirit, and more importantly the emergence of the Protestant faith as a precursor to it, therefore can be attributed to the divergence of Western and Eastern economic development. It offered a weapon against traditionalism, a way of viewing life, and a means of dictating human activity and action.
Associated with traditionalism, economic development was also determined by the ability for 'men to adopt certain types of practical rational conduct'. Such conduct, Weber argues, could be obstructed by spirituality, as magical and religious forces, and the ethical ideas of duty based upon them dictate human activity. The choice of occupation, for Weber, is therefore to a large extent, a manifestation of religious affiliation, whereby Catholics are more likely to remain in their crafts than attend institutions preparing for technical, industrial and commercial occupations. The religious atmosphere in the community and the parental home, therefore determines choice, and through this choice, professional career. Weber argues then that the Protestant tendency to develop economic rationalism was therefore a product and manifestation of the spirit of modern capitalism, itself a product of the Protestant faith. Although more explicitly used to explain the differences between Protestant and Catholic economies, it has far greater significance. Given that any spirituality can place obstacles and limits upon economic development due to their influence upon human activity, it marks another factor in determining the divergence of economic developments between Western and Eastern civilisations. As Weber concludes, 'the principal explanation of difference must be sought in the permanent intrinsic character of religious beliefs.'
Ideologically, there then appears to be a number of distinct factors determining economic development. Concepts of 'calling' and 'capitalist spirit' emerged with the Protestant religion, challenging norms of traditional behaviour and human activity. Concurrent to these were also practical factors, which both influenced and were influenced by these ideological developments. Weber argues that the modern rational organisation of the capitalistic enterprise would not have been possible without two other important factors: the separation of business from the household, and closely connected with this, rational book-keeping. For Weber, where these 'indispensable requisites' lacked, the onset of large-scale industry, trade and organisation of free labour was impeded, and consequently, the onset of modern capitalism was obstructed.
Biological and environmental factors are also not rejected by Weber as an explanation behind economic divergence, but are minimised due to problems deriving from quantification, arguing that there is no way of 'exactly or even approximately measuring either the extent or, above all, the form of its influence on the development investigated here." Still, Weber argues that 'the author admits that he is inclined to think the importance of biological heredity very great', and hopes that through progress in racial neurology and psychology, it can be satisfactorily explored further to assess its contribution to economic divergence.
An inherent pessimistic tone is present within Weber's analysis for the future of economic progress. Seeing the spirit of capitalism and capitalist enterprises as indifferent, and even hostile to the church, 'where religion appears to them as a means of drawing people away from labour in this world', Weber's tone remains sombre. Weber continues, 'in fact, it [the capitalist spirit] no longer needs the support of any religious forces, and feels the attempts of religion to influence economic life, in so far as they can still be felt at all, to be as much an unjustified interferences as its regulation by the State." Weber concludes that 'the Puritans wanted to work in a calling; we are forced to do so. This order is now bound to the technical and economic conditions of machine production which today determine the lives of all the individuals who are born into this mechanism..., with irresistible force." Thus, this progression has brought us to the current state of affairs; the attempts to justify the spirit of capitalism, generally abandoned by all. As Kemper Fullerton concludes;
And it is with this that we may also explain the divergence of Western and Eastern economic development, the exploitation of the East by the West, for the spirit of capitalism progressed unchecked and unbound.
We can challenge, however, the extent to which we these factors outlined within the Protestant Ethic, do adequately explain the divergence of economic development, as despite acknowledging the varieties of Protestant doctrines, Weber treats them, for the purposes of his investigation, as a homogenous entity. As Weber accepts, Calvinism, Pietism, Methodism and the Sects of the Baptist movement, for their dogmatic differences over doctrines of predestination and justification 'prevented the maintenance of unity in the Church." In addition, Weber proceeds to state, that even these religious ideas appear artificially simple, 'as they could at best but seldom be found in history. Ephraim Fischoff concludes in his critique of Weber's Protestant Ethic, Weber's general view remained that 'human affairs are infinitely complicated, with numerous elements interacting; and it was his unshakable conviction that to attribute casual primacy is to be guilty of oversimplification." For these reasons, Weber seems to provide evidence to undermine his own assumptions and conclusions. In order to assess the role of religion in the emergence of a capitalist spirit and culture, it seems valid to suggest that these dogmatic differences should be more greatly drawn out, for as Weber concedes, each State had its own nuances of spirit and progress in the emergence and formation of a capitalist culture.
Weber's pluralistic approach within the Protestant Ethic provides a useful tool in explaining the economic divergence of Western and Eastern civilisations, accepting that numerous factors contributed to its eventual progression. The emergence of the Protestant religion, although not quantitatively proven as the key distinguishing determinant, highlights the duality of religion, for it both liberated the West and stagnated the East; possessing the ability to both remove, and implant, values within society. Protestantism fostered a spirit of capitalism, although not exclusively, encouraging attributes of thrift, frugality and labour, aiding the transition to a modern capitalist economy. Weber, rejecting the primacy of economics in historical processes, therefore presents a 'mulitvocal' and 'polymorphous' view of causation, a whole number of factors then playing a part in explaining the economic divergence between Western and Eastern civilisations; factors which still to this day are debated and analysed by a variety of contemporary commentators.