The requirements for the Space Shuttle were that the system could be justified economically and had to encompass all space business. This conflict of requirements eventually led to a compromise been formulated. However, NASA developed a system that is made up of three parts; an Orbiter with three Main Engines, two Solid Rocket Boosters, and an External Tank. The Space Shuttle has not met any of the original requirements including reliability, maintainability, cost, or safety.
There is no crew escape system in the Space Shuttle because NASA thought that it was safer than all other spacecraft.
During the development of the Space Shuttle the three parts of the Space Shuttle system (four if you count the main engines as been separate) were tested separately on the ground. The overall Space Shuttle System as a whole was only tested in reality on its first flight! Prior to this the overall system was tested using modelling. In Figure 1 we see the Orbiter part on one of its 'Approach and Landing Tests'. These tests proved the Space Shuttle's ability to land safely.
The first launch was four years behind schedule mostly due to problems with the main engines and heat protection tiles. Irrespective of this NASA went over budget by 15%. The Space Shuttle Columbia was the first to launch and before it was destroyed had undergone many developments during its life including second generation main engines and a new 'glass' cockpit.
On was the 17 th day of the mission, Saturday 1st February 2003 the crew underwent standard procedures to prepare the Space Shuttle for return to the Kennedy Space Centre. This firstly involved finishing any remaining experiments and storing them safely for the journey back to earth. The external payload doors and covers were closed. Next the crew prepared themselves and the Space Shuttle for the de-orbit burn, re-entry and the scheduled landing at the Kennedy Space Centre. The re-entry program was loaded into the Shuttle's computer system. The last step of preparation before the de-orbit burn was to orientate the Space Shuttle at the right angle.
In the Mission Control Centre at 2.30 a.m. the Entry Flight Control Team began duty. They completed checklists for de-orbit and re-entry. The weather conditions at the Kennedy Space Centre were analysed by weather forecasters and pilots in the Space Shuttle Training Aircraft. They concluded that all weather conditions were acceptable for the scheduled landing. This was 20 minutes before the de-orbit burn was to be started.
Just after 8.00 a.m. a poll was held in the Mission Control Room for a GO or NO-GO on the de-orbit burn. At 8.10 a.m. the Shuttle crew were notified the decision was a GO for the de-orbit burn.
Columbia was flying upside down and tail first 175 miles above the Indian ocean at 8:15:30 a.m. when the de-orbit burn was commenced. This burn, that slowed Columbia from 17,500 MPH, lasted 2 minutes and 38 seconds. After the burn the Shuttle was orientated the right way up, nose first ready for re-entry.
'Entry Interface' (EI) is defined as the point at which the descending Space Shuttle begins to become affected by the Earth's atmosphere. This is at approximately 400,000 feet above sea level and happened when Columbia was over the Pacific Ocean at 8:44:09 a.m. (EI+000 seconds).
When the Space Shuttle entered the atmosphere the impact with air molecules caused heat to be produced. Over the next six minutes this caused temperatures on the wing leading edge to reach up to 2,500 F. At EI+270 abnormally high strains were detected on the left wing leading edge spar. However, this data was stored in the Modular Auxiliary Data System, not transmitted to Mission Control or seen by the crew.
The next scheduled part of the re-entry flight plan was carried out at EI+323, this was to roll Columbia to the right as part of a banking turn to increase lift and reduce the rate of descent and therefore heating. The Space Shuttle was travelling at the very fast speed of Mach 24.5 at this time.
With its speed now reduced to Mach 24.1 at EI+404 the Space Shuttle experienced the highest levels of heating. This heating started when the Shuttle was around 243,000 feet above ground and lasted for 10 minutes. At EI+471 when the Shuttle was 300 miles off the West coast of California the temperatures on the leading edge of the wings would have been about 2,650 F. When it did cross the Californian coast at its peak this temperature would have risen to 2,800 F. This occurred at EI+557, 231,600 feet, Mach 23. 20 seconds later at EI+577 it was seen from the ground that debris was shedding from the Space Shuttle.
At EI+6 13 the Maintenance, Mechanical, and Crew Systems (MMACS) officer reported that four hydraulic sensors in the left wing had failed as they were showing a reading below their minimum. Wing leading edge temperatures would have reached 3,000 F at EI+683 as Columbia crossed the states Nevada and Utah, before crossing into Arizona at EI+741. The craft was rolled the other way from a right to left banking turn. By the time the Shuttle had crossed into New Mexico wing leading edge temperatures would be reduced to 2,880 F at EI+831.
In re-entry, superheated air of at least a few thousand degrees Fahrenheit entered the leading edge of the left wing. This would not normally happen during re-entry, however, on this occasion there was a breach in one of the panels of Reinforced Carbon-Carbon at this point. These extreme temperatures caused the thin aluminium spar structure of the left wing to melt more and more until the structure was weakened beyond tolerances. This caused aerodynamic forces to increase, but at this point the on-board computer simply made adjustments by steering to keep the Space Shuttle on its correct flight profile throughout re-entry. At this time nobody, neither on the ground or the astronauts on board, knew anything was wrong. This is because the flight data during re-entry is not transmitted to Mission Control. Instead it is collected and stored in the Space Shuttle.
The heavily damaged left wing was subjected to increasing aerodynamic forces due to denser atmosphere as it descended lower on its flight-path. While the Shuttle was travelling at Mach 19.5 a Thermal Protection System Tile was shed at EI+85 1. At EI+906 pressure readings were lost on both left main landing gear tyres.
The crew were informed that Mission Control saw the readings, were evaluating them and that they did not understand the last transmission. When it was above Texas, eventually the wing completely failed and so control of the Space Shuttle was lost. This loss of control occurred when Columbia was travelling at least 10,000 MPH. The crew responded to Mission Control but it was broken up as the Shuttle disintegrated at EI+969.
81.7 seconds after launch multiple pieces of hand-crafted insulating foam became separated from the left bipod ramp section of the External Tank. Video evidence, however, shows only one piece, approximately 243" by 153" of unknown thickness but described as 'flat', struck the wing. NASA believed that foam loss can only occur if the foam itself is faulty in the first place. However, this alone, may not be the reason for foam loss. The foam that came off and struck the Shuttle during launch is low density, consisting of small hollow cells and has variability across its structure. There is no known way to assess the foam on the bipod ramps on the external tank physically. There are several theories why the foam comes off during launch, as it has occurred on numerous previous launches but never caused a problem. The 'Cryopumping' theory exploits cracks in the foam connected to voids in the foam near the cryogenic tanks in the external tank. The extremity of low temperature may liquefy the air in these voids which may boil later in the launch as aerodynamic forces heat the foam exterior. If this continues and the liquid evaporates pressure can build up and cause the foam to break off the external tank.
The foam impacted the Space Shuttle at a relative speed of 545 MPH since as it fell away it slowed down quickly because it is of low density. The impact had no effect on the launch or the mission as the Shuttle orbited the earth. The impact was in the immediate vicinity of the lower half of Reinforced Carbon-Carbon (RCC) panel number 8 and had in fact caused a breach in the Thermal Protection System on the leading edge of the left wing.
In re-entry, superheated air (~5000 F) was able to enter through the leading edge insulation due to this breach in the Thermal Protection System. In the back of each RCC panel there is a slot which in the case of panel number 8, superheated air would have been able to pass through and damage the Thermal Protection System behind it. It caused the thin aluminium spar structure of the left wing to melt more and more until the structure was burned through.
From the time sensors appeared to fail because the wiring to them had been destroyed, and the layout of the wiring to these sensors, the following was discovered:
The breach started in the upper two-thirds of the spar before expanding downwards in the direction of the underneath of the wing.
By EI+522 this breach was more than 9 inches long.
The superheated air was now able to enter the mid-wing section.
Damage did not spread into the wing cavity forward of the left wheel well until at least EI+935. Therefore the breach was aft of the cross spar.
For 15 seconds after EI+555 the temperature rose on the fuselage sidewall and left Orbital Manoeuvring System pod. The latter of these was later found, through hypersonic wind tunnel testing, to be caused by damage to the leading edge of the left wing near RCC panel number 9. At this point, the superheated air had been in the mid-wing section since EI+487 entering at a temperature up to 8,000 F. The shape of the wing is supported by aluminium trusses that will have melted at 1,200 F.
Although the flight computer was counteracting it, to keep the Shuttle on its pre-planned flight path, it was actually tending to roll to the left due to a loss of lift on the left wing. At EI+602 this changed to tending to roll right due to increased lift from the left wing. This is thought to have resulted from high temperatures in the mid-wing section damaging wing skins as well and thereby modifying the overall shape of the wing. As the RCC panels were damaged further drag also increased and contributed to more left yaw on the Shuttle. With the wing this badly misshaped the flight control systems counteracted this using aileron trim.
By EI+727 Mission Control had received temperature rises in hydraulic lines inside the left wheel well. Again at +790 they received another indication of a problem, this time the tyre pressure sensors indicated quick heating then blow-out of the tyres. However, they did not know both of these were due to superheated air and the Shuttle could not have recovered from damage inflicted due to the breach when it was this far gone.
Minutes later, at EI+9 17 the Shuttle experienced large increases in positive roll and negative yaw due to increasing drag and lift from the left wing which for the first time modified the re-entry path. The heavily damaged left wing was subjected to increasing aerodynamic forces due to denser atmosphere as it descended lower on its flight-path. The signal was lost just 6 seconds later. The flight control system tried to counteract this too using yaw jets on the right hand side but it was not enough and control was lost at EI+970 when Columbia was travelling at least 10,000 MPH.
In the short term, to prevent this accident a number of additional checks should have been carried out before the launch and once the shuttle was in orbit.
A visual inspection should have been carried out on the leading edge of the left wing either by a camera on a space station or an astronaut conducting a space walk outside of the Space Shuttle. A rescue mission would have been implemented if experts on the ground looking at these pictures could see the breach in the RCC panel. It should not be considered that the astronauts could have repaired the Space Shuttle without the proper equipment. It would have been impossible to foresee the need to include a 'RCC panel repair kit' onboard the Shuttle since they are only used during re-entry.
The problem of the foam coming off the bipod arm was known about before and had been observed on numerous occasions, even though it had never caused problems before. They should have had some sort of procedure that allowed for problems like this to be fixed, in case it caused a problem. The overall design of the system was never supposed to be able to tolerate what happened.
As the re-entry of Columbia was expected to be a normal re-entry, there was no way for the crew to survive a break up of the Shuttle during re-entry. I think perhaps that this issue will need addressing in light of this accident so that if it comes to it the crew can escape from any potential accident. In aircraft this would be in the form of an ejector seat and/or use of parachutes. There are several technical difficulties associated with implementing this in the Space Shuttle since it needs to protect the crew from the extremes of temperature experienced while in space and during re-entry. Extra seals and hatches on the exterior of the Space Shuttle would pose as weaknesses. Therefore I propose that a modification should be made to the Space Shuttles or implemented in a next generation of re-useable space going craft. This would take the form of a capsule within the craft where all the normal crew fittings and environment are located. This would be connected to the main body of the craft but able to quickly to break away from it and activate its own parachute system to bring the crew down safely. This is necessary due to the very small amount of time before the crew or ground control may be aware that the craft is in danger of disintegration.
Other recommendations relate to the issue of re-using external tanks and other fittings in the launch process. If foam can come off the external tanks, then by using new tanks for every launch this problem can be avoided in the future. An alternative to this should be to redesign any parts of the system that are known to have problems starting by accurately defining the specifications and tolerances of all the parts that do not have problems. Then the system as a whole should be more acceptably safe.