For this she wouldn't have a claim against David for the extra 3 weeks, even though due to causation he caused it eventually. This is since the contribution by the junior doctor's mistake was significantly large and he was not a competent doctor. In Cheshire, R v [1991] here the chain of causation was not broken by the hospitals negligence since
In Angela's claim the doctor was a junior doctor and so this does not apply. Therefore the junior doctor's negligent act is independent of her initial accident and does break the chain of causation. Angela may make a claim for damages as a result of negligence on the part of the junior doctor.
John claiming damages for nervous shock from witnessing the accident is classed as a 'secondary victim'. However, since he narrowly escaped injury and was involved immediately as a participant in the events he is therefore also classed as a 'primary victim'. In both points of view the defendant is the Taxi Company / Driver (David) so there is in fact only one case for negligence to claim here.
If Mike had previously been exposed to lethal doses of radiation then he would either have already been dead and not killed in the accident (as lethal implies enough to kill) so someone would have been standing in his place in the queue and could have been injured or killed. There are many possibilities to consider. So it is possible that John and/or Debbie would not suffer nervous shock, if Mike or no-one else was killed or injured. If it was someone else hit by the taxi they might have survived like Angela. Or Mike could have been said to be more likely to die from the accident anyway because he had been previously exposed to radiation.
In Paris v Stepney borough council the magnitude of risk was far greater. It is different here, however, since the taxi driver could never have been aware of Mike's recent exposure to radiation it is impossible for him to have taken any extra precautions to account for this.
The 'but for test' would not apply in this case since Mike may have died later as a result of cancer regardless of whether the taxi hit him. The courts would ignore this as in Smith v Leech Brain & Co [1961] showed that wrong doers must take their victims as they find them and therefore in this case the fact that Mike was more likely to die in a crash as a result of his earlier exposure to lethal levels of radiation may mean nothing in reducing David's liability. The accident was reasonably foreseeable if the taxi company allowed their drivers to race competing firms. Therefore, they are still liable for claims for all the damage.