The brief was to produce a report on the company, identify the issues the company faces and provide recommendations for PCD Maltron.
The main issues are Marketing, IPR, Finance and Innovation. The marketing focus should be more towards securing distribution channels and advertising using real data that proves the effectiveness of the products. The interests of the company should be protected by getting a patent. The company needs modernisation, both in the manufacturing methods and business strategy. This should be achieved by getting financial and business help from a Venture Capitalist company.
This report contains an analysis on the current market that PCD Maltron is in and what the company can do to better its position within this market. The nature of the report is a detailed review of the market followed by a look at the main issues the company faces and recommendations to address the issues. A lot of the market research conducted uses data from the US but most likely reflects similar situations in other well developed countries.
In 2000 the total keyboard market was $2.2 billion (Venture Development Corporation) and ergonomic keyboards are a growing share of this. 21.7% of keyboards for North America were of the ergonomic type in 1999. This percentage is expected to increase to 27% by 2004 indicating string growth in the market. Furthermore, there was an increase in the percentage of ergonomic keyboards shipped to OEM's (Original Equipment Manufacturer, the commonest distribution channel) from 1.2% in 1995 to 9.7% in 2000.
There is not a single main competitor in this market as it is quite fragmented. Most of these ergonomic keyboard producers are small and private firms all with different strategies. The main competitors are Kinesis ($230, contoured design), Datahand ($1295, split armature attached to chair) and Microsoft ($40, Natural keyboard). The larger companies such as Microsoft opt for standardised products and mass production with their input devices. This is why there is room for smaller companies like Datahand serving niche segments; hopefully PCD Maltron can find a similar niche.
As the automation of all work tasks increases, more workers are exposed to the hazards of RSI. There is data to show that RSI has increased steadily over the last ten years. Data processing product applications (data entry) had 57% of the total application market in 1995 and are forecast to grow at 11.6%. The combination of increased growth rate here and increased RSI should attract more competitors to the ergonomic keyboard market meaning PCD Maltron will have to compete with more alternative products. The basis for competition is as follows:
Ease of use: Innovation aims to reduce the risk of RSI while increasing comfort and efficiency. This has lead to many different types of ergonomic keyboard - vertical, split, cordless, Datahand, command chair etc.
Quality and Reliability: Keyboards are usually used for the whole of the working day so most manufacturers of keyboards offers some form of money back guarantee to attract potential customers.
Utility: Function and benefit for the price - Microsoft Natural is $40 and the Datahand is $1295 because they approach the problem of RSI from different directions and with different prospects in mind. If two products have a similar function then price is usually the most important non-product factor involved in the decision to buy.
The barriers to entry are lower than they could be, largely due to the fragmented nature of the market. The technological barrier to entry is quite low because of the rigid QWERTY key layout and the fact that ergonomic design is not necessarily dependant on technology but rather on research. Other barriers to entry are Product Awareness and Distribution Channels. These are low too because there is no significant public awareness for a particular model or manufacturer of ergonomic keyboard and the distribution is much the same as any other accessory type product; preferred vendor lists, mail order, online etc.
Trends in the market support the prediction of market growth, but also suggest higher barriers to entry are to come. This will be caused by more regulations and guidelines from governments for companies and their employee's needs. As awareness for RSI increases, companies spending on ergonomics increases as they turn their attention to the matter. More employees will then begin to realize their right to request ergonomic products in the workplace and so the target customer segment widens. This, however, will inevitably make it harder to define a product as "ergonomic" which means the barriers to entry will be higher.
The customer (businesses where end-user's work) needs are different to the end-user's (data entry users and graphic designers etc) needs. For the end-user primary needs regarding keyboards, the following were identified in a study by Key-Bowl:
For the businesses, RSI causes considerable cost due to workers compensation (an average of $29,000 per claim according to the National Council on Compensation Insurance (NCCI in the US), disability claims, lawsuits, medical costs and reduced productivity, among others. Indeed, there was 308,000 injuries in 1995 resulting from repetitive motion (General Accounting Office (GAO), US), which accounts for 60% of work-related illness and 32% of injuries that result in days away from work. On average this is 18 days away from work as a result of injury from repetitive motion (1995, Bureau of Labor Statistics, US). Injuries due to typing are of course a certain fraction of all these numbers, but the number still remains large. The total cost of RSI's to business is estimated to be $20 billion annually (august 1997, GAO).
The decision to purchase a new piece of ergonomic equipment is typically as follows. An employee who is experiencing a discomfort states the request for a new keyboard to the purchasing department or the business management. The employee receives a list of approved vendors or recommended ergonomic products or catalogues from the preferred vendors (who usually have set up some deal with the business to arrange discounts). As an ergonomic keyboard manufacturer the aim should be to get on the approved product or preferred vendor lists as well as improving general employee awareness as to the alternative keyboards available to the standard 15 ones that come with PC's.
A small piece of market research comes from page 2, paragraph 2 of the PCD Maltron case study supplied for this report. It states that two thirds of sales are for the single left or right hand only type keyboards. This indicates a large possible market gap, twice as big as for the standard RSI reducing model. I was unable to find any other information about keyboards for the disabled apart from Voice Recognition which when the technology has developed significantly enough may pose a very serious threat to the ergonomic keyboard market.
The report has used the data found from the extensive market research to relate to PCD Maltron's situation and identify issues that the company needs to address to move into a stronger position in this market.
PCD Maltron needs to modernise the products appearance and possibly consider giving customers the option of having the traditional QWERTY key layout. They should attempt to secure distribution channels by selling through OEM's which will also help to raise the awareness of the products and their benefits to both customers and end-users. Real data proving that the keyboards really do save businesses money in the long run must be presented as a selling point. To finance the expansion of the company by using a low cost assembler and pushing the advertising side of things the company should look to using Venture Capitalism as a source of finance. The key product elements should be patented to protect them.