In order to find a valid contract the courts must be satisfied that both parties intended to create legal relations. It is therefore their role to objectively examine both the context of the agreement and the behaviour of the parties and to draw reasonable inferences from this. Where there is no express statement of contractual intent, the courts must examine "hidden policy considerations." The main aspect of these considerations is the context in which the agreement is made. The courts apply presumptions according to whether the agreement was made in a commercial or domestic environment to draw conclusions regarding contractual intent. There are other considerations which may rebut these presumptions. This doctrine and approach has been supported and criticised, I therefore aim to explore and balance these arguments in order to provide my own analysis of the doctrine.
The doctrine of Intention to create legal relations is an essential aspect of any contract; in addition to finding offer, acceptance and consideration, "an agreement will not constitute a binding contract unless it is one which can be reasonably regarded to have been made in contemplation of legal consequences." Collins' Statement concerns the objective way in which the courts interpret the 'animus contrahendi'
. The parties cannot state what they believed their intentions to be; it is for the court to decide this based upon the concept that "if a reasonable person would consider there was intention to contract...the promisor will be bound." The courts examine the intentions of the parties through hidden policy considerations such as "the language they use and the circumstances in which they use it." They consider the context and apply a presumption as to the intent of the parties.
One must first consider domestic and social agreements; it is usually in this context that "one party intended a legal agreement and the other wanted the agreement to be merely morally binding." The presumption in a domestic context is that there is no intention to create legal relations. Case law highlights how the courts use "hidden policy considerations" of context to exclude domestic agreements from contract law. The leading case is Balfour v Balfour
; a husband, living in Ceylon promised to pay his wife, living England, 30 in expenses. They separated and the wife attempted to enforce the agreement. Finding that the agreement was not an enforceable contract, Lord Atkin essentially excluded domestic agreements from the ambit of contract law. He examined hidden policy considerations, concluding that because the agreement was made in the domestic environment "they did not intend that they should be attended by legal consequences." The decision in that "every house is a domain in which the King's writ does not seek to run" is supported by Jones v Padavatton
 where the court refused to uphold a contract between mother and child. This extends the concept of excluding domestic agreements from contract law. Other instances of application show that the courts infer intent from the relationship of the parties and context of the agreement.
It has been argued that the domestic presumption is one of public policy aiming to keep agreements made in the environment of "love and affection" outside the jurisdiction of the "cold courts." Appleby argues this is "a policy decision leaving various types of agreement outside the ambit of the law." The divisions put in place are a matter of public policy, aiming to protect the privacy of family life. Atiyah supports this view stating that the decision in Balfour
 depends on "the courts view that it would be unseemly distressing to allow husbands and wives...to use the court as an arbiter for their matrimonial differences." One must question whether this approach is incongruous with today's society. Freeman argues that the decision in Balfour,
 a Victorian marriage, is outdated thus the approach taken by the courts to establish intent "no longer reflects realities nor is it inline with the developments taking place within family law."
However, the courts apply other hidden policy considerations in determining contractual intent; it is possible for the presumption to be rebutted. If the relationship is at "breaking point" when the agreement is made the courts may rebut the presumption, such as in Merritt v Merritt. The contract was agreed when the couple had separated and were therefore not living 'in amity." The courts upheld the contract stating that 'they do not rely on honourable understandings...they intend to create legal relations." In cases such as Parker v Clark
, intent was established from detriment incurred. The courts therefore objectively assess the relationship between the parties; these too are 'hidden policy considerations.'
Within the commercial context the presumption is that there is intention to create legal relations. This presumption is difficult to rebut; the onus "is on the party who asserts that no legal effect is intended...the onus is a heavy one." Cases such as Esso v Commissioners of Customs,
 where Esso ran a campaign giving a world cup coin to motorists who bought petrol, highlight the difficulties of rebutting the presumption. Lord Simon stated "the whole transaction took place in the setting of business relations." His examination of the context led him to conclude that there was contractual intent. This indicates the courts' unwillingness to examine any further hidden policy considerations within the commercial context. One could argue that this is a sensible approach as it allows for certainty within the commercial world.
It is however possible to rebut the presumption. One way to do this is the use of honour clauses such as in Rose and Frank v JR Crompton
 which stated that the parties "honourably pledge themselves...with mutual loyalty and friendly cooperation." Similarly in Appleson v Littlewoods
 it was stated that a competition was not to be "legally enforceable or be subject of litigation." In both instances the statements were held to negate contractual intention. These are express statements that there was no contractual intent. In a commercial context the courts will apply a presumption that there was intent to create legal relations. This is essentially the only hidden policy consideration; successful rebuttals are usually express statements.
It has been argued that the doctrine of intent to contract is unnecessary. Hepple states that 'the fact that they have cast their arrangement into the form of a bargain...provides an extremely practical test of...intention." This critical analysis is supported by M Furmston who points out that 'A proposal cannot properly be regarded as an offer unless it indicates an intention to undertake legal obligation." This suggests that it is unnecessary to find intent through hidden policy considerations; it could be found through the presence of the other aspects of a contract. It is true that the law of contract existed without the doctrine until the nineteenth century but its removal now would create a far more complex situation.
In conclusion, the courts rely on hidden policy considerations to help them establish the presence of intention to create legal relations. These hidden policy considerations are the behaviour of the parties and context of the agreement. Where intent is not expressly stated the courts take an objective approach, considering all the factors of the agreement. The context of the agreement is the most powerful influence on the court's decision, but other considerations can be taken in to account to rebut the initial presumption. I therefore agree with Collins that the most appropriate way for the courts to establish intention is studying the wider scope of the agreement.