The landmark decision in Pepper v Hart
 to relax the exclusionary rule regarding the use of Hansard has received much comment and criticism. One must consider the advantages of using parliamentary material as an aid to statutory construction as it allows the courts to "give effect to...the intentions of parliament." Yet on the other hand there are huge concerns regarding the constitutional implications of the decision and it's affect on the concept of the separation of powers. Furthermore one must consider the financial and practical implications of the decision; increased time and expense inevitably linked with using Hansard is a disadvantage. One must therefore decide whether the advantages of using Hansard outweigh practical and political objections.
Pepper v Hart
 involved school masters from Malvern College who partook in a concessionary scheme which meant their sons were educated at one fifth of the normal fees. It was not disputed that the fees were a taxable benefit under s.61 of The Finance Act 1976. However, the issue was "what is the cash equivalent of the benefit?" This Phrase was defined in section 63 of the 1976 Act. The school masters argued the "cost of the benefit was the marginal cost to the employer providing the benefit" and was therefore nil. It was originally held as correct, yet the crown contended this and argued that the expense incurred in educating the taxpayer's sons was the same as a fee-paying member of the public. Their appeal was allowed. The issue was therefore placed before the House of Lords.
The point of law presented to the House of Lords was whether or not the courts should relax the exclusionary rule and be permitted to examine the proceedings in parliament prior to the enactment of s 63 in order to firmly establish their true intentions. Seven Law Lords decided, in a 6:1 majority, that
This decision has been both commended and criticised. It changed the role of the courts with regard to statutory interpretation and it is therefore important to study subsequent cases to examine its application.
The decision in Pepper
 has been applied in a number of subsequent cases such as R v Warwickshire County Council. This case concerned the interpretation of s 20 (1) of The Consumer Protection Act 1987 where the words "any business of his" were scrutinised. The court allowed reference to Hansard which clarified these words. This case and others, highlight the way in which the House of Lords intended Hansard to be used: It shows that the decision has placed the courts in a position to more accurately interpret the intentions of parliament. In Beckett v Midland electricity
 Lord Phillips stated that using Hansard "immediately made clear what had previously been obscure." Holland supports the use of Hansard stating that "there are certainly undoubted advantages in making use of all relevant materials to interpret a statute." Therefore both case law and academic writing highlight that there is support for the argument that the courts should not "blind themselves to a clear indication of what parliament intended."
However, subsequent cases have also questioned and refined the decision.
There have been questions raised as to exactly when reference to Hansard should be permitted, what an ambiguity is and how clear the explanatory ministerial statement must be. In R v Secretary of state
 their lordships refined the rule, agreeing that "resort to Hansard as an aid to interpretation is the exception rather than the rule." Peacock,J who refers to the judgement of Lord Browne-Wilkinson as "deeply flawed" supports this approach, stating that the courts should "treat the development in Pepper as a limited exception to the rule." This cautious approach is extended further by Lord Browne-Wilkinson who refined his own decision in Melluish v BMI
 warning against over-use of Hansard and stating that the ministerial statement must be "directed at the very point of litigation." It was the case of Wilson
 which most "tamed and muted" the decision in Pepper
. This case refined the decision so that it is now to be read in a narrow way; it essentially accepts that the parliamentary context of the legislation is of use, but direct ministerial statements should not be accepted as law.
It has been argued by some that the decision to relax the exclusionary rule raises "serious constitutional objections." Lord Steyn suggests that an individual's statement cannot "represent the intentions of parliament i.e. both houses." This is an important point to consider. It has been taken to a further extent, some arguing that ministers may make deliberate statements which can be referred to in later litigation. Lord Steyn describes this as "a constitutional shift in power from parliament to ministers." This has serious implications as parliament are the supreme law making body in the UK and if individual ministers are able to use the relaxation of the exclusionary rule to have more influence over the law then the constitution is threatened. The decision in Pepper blurs the lines between parliament and the judiciary, thus disturbing Montesquieu's concept of the separation of powers. Kavanagh is deeply critical of this effect has on the constitution and commends the decision in Wilson.
One must also consider that use of Hansard may result in "an immense increase in...cost of litigation." It is clear that using Hansard makes litigation a more lengthy and consequently more expensive process. This has social implications which may restrict access to justice to those who cannot afford the cost of lengthy litigation. Davenport points out that "The cost of legal services is largely governed by the length of time occupied in providing them. Will clients really have confidence in the legal system if they see such items on their bill?" The accessibility of Hansard must also be considered: White suggests that "apart from those in London, it is highly unlikely that Hansard will be readily available." Therefore, the decision in Pepper
 has social implications. If use of Hansard is to be limited by access and cost of litigation it does not deliver the justice it is supposed to. Lord Steyn refers to use of Hansard as an "expensive luxury" which "has substantially increased the cost of litigation to very little advantage." Therefore, the use of Hansard in finding justice must be juxtaposed against the practical problems it creates.
In conclusion, there are advantages of using Hansard. It is beneficial for a court to place itself in a position of clarity with regard to the intentions of parliament. One must however consider political objections to the relaxation of the exclusionary rule, which question the effect the rule may have on the constitution and the concept of separation of powers. The practical and financial disadvantages of the rule are also of some substance; increasing the cost of litigation may create the paradox that a rule designed to increase justice may actually prevent a part of society from accessing it. Whether we should follow Lord Steyn's advice to fully re-examine the case remains to be seen. For the instance therefore, we must trust the courts to use their discretion, as shown in cases such as Wilson
, ensuring that the rule is not taken too far.