Charles Darwin provided the first explanation for the means by which evolution takes place. This was by the process of natural selection. A key aspect of Darwin's ideas was that species were not immutable, that they could change in their essential characteristics. It had been a common belief that species were immutable because of the writings in the Bible. Genesis mentioned the species that God had created and it was assumed that only God could create new species. Darwin was worried about the implications of his ideas. In January 1844 he wrote to J. D. Hooker claiming that it was 'like confessing a murder' to suggest that species were not immutable. However, many of Darwin's ideas had been in discussion by earlier natural historians and Romantic thinkers in the decades before he published his Origin of Species by means of Natural Selection in 1859. Romanticism began in the mid-eighteenth century and reached its height in the nineteenth century. The Romantics questioned old beliefs, requiring proof before they believed in something. They would study nature closely and believed that man was closely linked with the natural world. In this way Darwin was also a Romantic thinker.
Darwin's theory of evolution involves natural selection, which comes as a result of 'a severe struggle for life'. Those animals with characteristics better adapted to their environment will survive to breed and pass on those characteristics while the less well adapted will die off; 'nature was seen as discarding as well as developing various forms of life'. H. Honour suggests that Darwin's theory of evolution was 'based on a distinctly Romantic notion of conflict'. The Romantics rejected classical notions of harmony and order, instead celebrating the wild and chaotic aspects of nature.
Instead of merely accepting old beliefs, Romantics looked for other answers. They looked to nature as a tool for learning instead of books written by the ancients. Wordsworth takes this view in his poem "The Tables Turned". He writes: 'Books! 'tis a dull and endless strife: / ... Let Nature be your teacher'. Darwin adopted this philosophy, studying nature closely. This is how he arrived at his theory of evolution. While employed as a naturalist on the H.M.S. Beagle, Darwin observed the wildlife on the Galapagos Islands. He noticed that there were thirteen species of finch, all with slight variations. He saw that the finches had different shapes and sizes of beaks depending on what their food source was. Those finches eating insects and small seeds had beaks that were small and thin, ideal for catching insects and picking up small seeds. Those finches eating large seeds, on the other hand, had large, short and wide beaks that were capable of crushing the large seeds. These observations of the natural world helped Darwin come up with the idea of natural selection. The finches with beaks better adapted to the food supply were more likely to survive and pass on the same characteristics to successive generations.
Darwin's grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, had ideas on the mutability and evolution of species before his grandson. In The Temple of Nature in 1803, Erasmus writes: '... as successive generations bloom, / New powers acquire, and larger limbs assume'. Erasmus' ideas on evolution and the natural world 'powerfully influenced' the Romantics. Samuel Taylor Coleridge complimented him as having 'perhaps, a greater range of knowledge than any other man in Europe'. Mary Shelley referred to the 'experiments of Dr. Darwin' in the introduction to the 1831 edition of Frankenstein. Mary Shelley was influenced by Erasmus' ideas that new species can be created. Victor Frankenstein, in the opening pages of the novel, says to Captain Walton: 'A new species would bless me as its creator'. She is questioning the old beliefs that God was the only creator of species.
The Romantics believed that if you understood nature, you would attain a greater understanding of yourself. 'Romantic poets and writers were hinting at the biological connectedness of all living things'; for example, Coleridge spoke of the 'one life within us and abroad' in "The Eolian Harp". It was believed that Man, the animals and all of inanimate nature were linked. This went against the ancient idea of the Great Chain of Being where man was above nature in the hierarchy. In the Romantic view of nature 'animals were regarded not so much as sub-human as other-than-human'. The natural world was not as ordered as was once believed. Darwin's theory of evolution concurs with this line of thinking. He asserted that 'man and the lower animals do not differ in kind'. J. Howard notes how 'Darwin... used human behaviour to illustrate aspects of animal behaviour', further suggesting their link. The Romantics also attributed human characteristics and emotions to nature. William Wordsworth, in "Lines Written in Early Spring", humanised nature when he mused that 'every flower / Enjoys the air it breathes', and John Keats personified a nightingale in "Ode to a Nightingale" by giving it human feelings with its 'soul abroad / In such an ecstasy'. William Blake also 'hints at a link between human and nonhuman nature'. In "The Human Abstract" he writes:
The metaphorical tree in the human brain unites man to inanimate nature. This relates to Darwin's theory that Man evolved from more primitive forms of nature.
After looking at all the evidence for evolution, Darwin speculated that 'probably all the organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one primordial form'. This concept has been alluded to in the writings of some of the Romantics. For example, in his "Ode to the West Wind", Percy Shelley writes: 'The sapless foliage of the ocean, know / Thy voice, and suddenly grow grey, with fear'. The plants of the sea respond in the same way to the changing seasons brought on by the west wind as the plants on the land. This is a 'typically Romantic image of sympathetic interactions across... boundaries'. It is implied that sea plants and land plants behave in similar ways because they have a common origin. The Romantics were not evolutionary thinkers, but their view of nature was similar to Darwin's in the way that they could see 'one grand natural system' instead of individual species with no interaction or variation.
Some of the Romantics believed that understanding nature and becoming one with the natural world would bring them closer to the divine. Lord Alfred Tennyson, for example, in a poem entitled "Flower in the Crannied Wall" writes:
They believed that all of nature was divinely ordered and they thought that evolution could have been part of God's plan. This is where Darwin's theory countered this Romantic view. In his Origin of Species he explains how natural selection does not proliferate characteristics that are beneficial to another species, claiming that he 'would almost as soon believe that the cat curls the end of its tail when preparing to spring, in order to warn the doomed mouse'. Natural selection is selfish. It does nothing for the good of another species. For Darwin, this detail 'discriminated between providential creation and evolution by natural selection'. Also, the randomness of natural selection with chance mutations and the struggle for survival 'sounds more like a game of genetic Russian Roulette that the kind of mechanism that would have been instituted by a wise and benevolent Creator'. Darwin describes evolution in a purely naturalistic manner, removing the supernatural element. In explaining the world 'the naturalist has abolished... God'. However, not all Romantic thinkers still attributed the workings of nature to God. Keats' ode "To Autumn",
contains no allusions to the divine. Nature controls it's own processes. 'Keats's "nature", like Erasmus [and Charles] Darwin's, exists without need for, or appeal to, any form of "super nature".'
'In the century before Charles Darwin, a wide range of scientists and writers saw human beings as organisms with important connections to their environment'. This included the Romantics. Darwin's theory of evolution did not counter the Romantic view of nature. There were many similarities between Darwin's ideas and those of the Romantics. They could see that nature was not static and unchanging, but that it was a dynamic system that ever changing. The Romantics had a sense that Man was connected to the natural world. Darwin took this idea a step further in his theory of evolution. Although Darwin's purely naturalistic and secular theory opposed the views of some of the Romantic thinkers such as Tennyson who believed that nature was God's creation, certain Romantics like Keats where questioning the divine nature of world.