On the 20 th of February 1909 the first futurist manifesto was printed in the Italian daily circulation 'Le Figaro'. It's author Filippo Tommaso Marinetti had written it from a luxurious 'Villa Rossa' in Milan and pointed to the Parisian public as the target of 'incendiary violence.' Although Paris, enjoying its title as 'cultural capital of the world' was regularly a victim of attacks on the establishment the manifesto showed radical ideas of performance the world had never seen before.
Marinetti had lived in Paris from 1893-1896 and had enjoyed living in a circle of friends involved in the arts. Amongst these friends was Alfred Jarry. Marinetti was heavily influenced by Jarry's controversial attitudes to the theatre and many of his ideas for futurist performance can be seen in Jarry's play 'Ubo Roi.'
'Ubo Roi' debuted at Lugne-Poe's Theatre de l'Oeuvre on the 11 th of December 1896 and was modelled on schoolboy farces and puppet shows. The play was a curious ensemble of ideas, which Jarry set up in the preface. These ideas were often contradictory to stimulate the audience. Jarry wrote how Ubo was to wear a horse head of cardboard 'as in the Old English theatre'. This showed an interest in theatrical history but in contrast the costumes were too show 'as little colour and historical accuracy as possible'. Jarry played with theatrical convention by not using a curtain and although only using one set also using a man in evening dress to hold up signs indicating the scene. The set itself was a curious mixture of 'indoors and outside at once' emphasising Jarry's desire to show simultaneous ideas in the same setting. Jarry desired 'Ubo Roi' to provoke reactions in the audience and actively made an effort to aggravate the audience. During the first performance Jarry himself came out only to sip from a glass for ten minutes without any other action. The first word of the play was 'shit' which was then followed by Ubo slaughtering his way to the throne. Fistfights broke out in the orchestra and the audience left either loving the play or hating it. Jarry had achieved his goal.
The futurists took ideas from 'Ubo Roi' such as the ensemble of ideas and abandonment of convention but it was the drive behind these ideas, the violence and riotous affect Jarry had on an audience, which Marinetti was inspired by can be clearly seen in extracts from the first futurist manifesto.
The manifesto set out in clear terms the futurist's intentions to counter convention and to do so in a highly aggressive manner. This kind of thinking had never been done before; previous performances before had been created to entertain not to irritate; this was clearly not the case with the futurists, later renaming their manifesto 'The Pleasure of Being Booed.'
The first futurist night took place on the 12 th of January 1910 at the Teatro Rosetti in Triest. The venue was specially chosen to provoke conflict for Triest was the border city in the unstable Austro-Italian conflict. The futurists stirred up trouble, publicly insulting the Austrian police and from then on police watched futurist events closely, labelling them as troublemakers.
The futurists were important in performance innovation, as it was the first time a group of artists, poets, painters and performers came together to work under one aim: They wanted to shock, revolt and simply provoke response, good or bad. They were rebels against anything conventional, be it political or artistic. This complete rejection of anything prior to them allowed the futurists make significant innovations in performance, as they were free from any previous rules.
Futurist nights took place under the loose term of variety theatre. The lack of structure allowed any artist, author, actor or technician to take part and by including all forms of art the futurists were able to disrupt the people's views on a variety of different mediums on one place. The brief staged performances were called 'synthetic theatre' with the intention to 'compress, into a few minutes, into a few words and gesture, innumerable situations, sensibilities, ideas, sensations, facts and symbols.'
In Bruno Corra and Emilio Settimelli's 'Dissonance'. A lady and page took to the stage dominated by 'thirteenth century environment' and 'thirteenth century costumes' and spoke with romantic, poetic speech.
The performance deliberately sets up the audience with an expectation for a thirteenth century context and then in typical futurist manner these expectations are played with. A man who casually strolls on stage wearing modern dress interrupts the lady and page. He needs a light for his cigarette so he asks the page.
The page replies that he hasn't in the same modern speech and the gentleman leaves. The page resumes speaking in the poetic thirteenth century way until the curtain drops. This is a good example of futurist ideals. It shows a complete disruption of convention, which the futurists often achieved by simultaneous realities. In this case the speech and dress conveyed two completely different contexts, modern and historical. Disrupting the expectations of the audience mocks and annoys the audience forcing them to re-evaluate their ideas on art.
Futurist performances could be described as unfulfilling in the context of plays the audience would have expected. The futurists revelled in their own ability to suggest what the audience wanted and then keep it from them causing considerable frustration among the spectators. In 'Feet' the curtain is raised but only one foot of the ground to allow the audience to only see the feet of the actors. The actors convey seven scenes through use of their feet but the scenes are unrelated so any sense of deciphering the scene is futile. Synthetic theatre thrived on teasing the audience's expectations of theatre for a plot or characters or context and then denying it to stir up a response. Futurists often embraced tricks to annoy the audience further than their performances would allow, such as double booking the auditorium or sticking glue to the seats.
The best example of this 'tease of convention' is in Francesco Cangiullo's 'Lights'. The curtain is raised on a neutral stage but then the theatre is plunged into three minutes of darkness. 'Various actors scattered in the auditorium excite the spectators and encourage their shouting' of 'Lights!' The shouting increased until everyone in the audience was shouting and then the lights were turned on as bright as they would go. At exactly the same time the curtain fell. 'Lights' is a very good example of futurist work as it directly involves the spectators; the darkness makes them nervous and the shouting, the action in the performance is provided by the audience themselves. The audience wanted light and were denied it. This provoked the riotous and aggressive shouting and although light was given it was only for a brief second. The futurists were the embodiment of violent rebellion and public upheaval and in 'Lights' they drew their audience into taking part as rebels themselves.
Futurist synthetic theatre often went to even greater extremes, denying the audience even human interaction and taking performance to new places. They played with everything, embracing new technology to battle conventional art forms with new modern styles. Rossulo's 'Noise Music,' which combined the sounds of trams, exploding motors, trains and the shouting of crowds, battled the public's perception of music and often left them screaming for 'no more'. Painting was brought into a world of three dimensions in futurist ballet and 'Fireworks', a 1917 performance by Balla, was based on one of his paintings. The painting was performed through 'Light Ballet' with the stage and audience being lit and unlit. In five minutes forty-nine different settings were created. Perhaps the greatest display of the futurist embrace for technology is shown through aerial ballet. In 1919 Fedele Azari embraces aeroplanes as a new form of performance as 'Ariel Ballet' and its ability to embrace the most spectators in the shortest time. This idea can still be seen today in the aerial display shows.
Futurism was the movement that defined all movements in art after it. Although previous art movements had brought together painters, actors and poets under one title never before had their impact on the entirety of art been so great. Futurism wanted to distance itself from anything that had been done before and therefore pushed art to new things as it in such dramatic extremes. By abandoning anything that had gone before the futurists broke the mould and allowed any artistic movements afterwards the freedom and context to work under. The futurists were rebels and should be credited, as the first movement to redefine the rules of performance, without their ingenuity art would never have progressed as far as it has done.