Ibsen and Strindberg's early social plays explore the society present in Europe. Both playwrights were particularly interested in the idea of determinism and the role that it plays on humanity. The plays I will explore in this essay, A Doll's House and Ms. Julie, are each used to articulate the playwrights' differing theories on the importance of free will and determinism. The plays, including such dramatic elements as the characters and scenery, are used as visual representations of the playwrights' study into European society. The female protagonists' interaction with the other characters causes them to realise to what extent life is determined and if there is enough strength in their independence to take control of their own lives. Through Nora and Julie the audience experience the pressures of life present in Europe in the nineteenth century. The finale of each play presents them with the writer's conclusion to the dominance of either determinism or free will.
Ibsen believed that there were 'two kinds of conscious, one in man and a quite different one in women. They do not understand each other'. He wrote this in a brief memorandum, attached to the first draft of A Doll's House, called The Tragedy of To-Day. In the note Ibsen describes the affect of a male dominated Europe and explores the suppressing effect this has on women. He wrote that 'a woman cannot be herself in the society of to-day' for she is always under the influence of man 'who judge feminine conduct from the masculine standpoint'. It is clear that A Doll's House directly confronts this issue with each character representing a different aspect of Ibsen's contemporary society. Torvald is the personification of the unthinking control men take over a woman's life. Torvald is obsessed with superficiality and throughout the course of the play Ibsen shows how Nora only fits into Torvald's life as another part of his aesthetic fantasy. Torvald refuses any ugliness to enter his life, and, in turn, Nora's. By denying Nora a full representation of existence, Nora has become ignorant to any other options in life other than the ones shown to her. Society's suppression of women has given Nora no chance to develop naturally and this comes at the loss of finding her own personality. A Doll's House is the story of a woman discovering that her life is based on false notions and realising that there are possibilities outside the house.
The play is full of images that suggest Torvald's obsession with superficial attractiveness and Nora is introduced to the audience as a material possession, just another aesthetic creation of Torvald. In the original stage description the beautiful decorations and 'well-bound books' set up Torvald's aesthetic ideals before Nora enters carrying 'a number of parcels (Pg.1)' another symbol of materialism.
The festive setting helps Ibsen to emphasis Nora's predicament. Her entrance is coupled with the entrance of the Christmas tree and this dual entrance suggests a link between Nora and the tree; they both represent an interference with nature. The tree has been taken out of its natural environment and placed inside, then covered up. This alteration from its natural state to an artificial creation symbolises Nora's transformation under Torvald at the loss of her natural personality. Nora's realisation of her determined situation can be mapped throughout the play through her relationship with the festive backdrop present in the play. In Act I Nora's jolly demeanour blends in with the festal setting but as the play develops Nora's growing despair contrasts dramatically. By Act II the tree has been 'stripped of its ornaments' and displays 'burned down candles on its dishevelled branches (Pg.29)', representative of Nora's increasing discovery of herself.
Krogstad and Rank are the personifications of the darker aspects of life that Torvald keeps away from his and Nora's home; representing guilt and sorrow respectively. Torvald distances himself from Krogstad and sordid law cases but 'by attempting to exclude conflict, guilt and sorrow from their lives, Torvald and Nora are evading human wholeness for a doll existence'. As Krogstad and Rank become more prominent figures in the house they enlighten Nora to the imperfect world outside of the house. Ibsen uses dramatic visuals in his staging to contrast Nora's happy home with the sinister figure of Krogstad. His first entrance comes while Nora is playing with the children and his threatening presence contrasts dramatically with the 'shouts of laughter' (pg. 18) from the mother and child. Although Torvald had dismissed Krogstad from his life, the side of life he represents inevitably filters into the Helmers' home.
The visiting characters are embodiments of the life Nora has never seen before; aspects of her character she had never fully realised. Torvald and her father kept her like a child and Ibsen best presents this through Torvald's fantasy of Nora as his 'young bride' (Pg.58) brought home for the first time. Nora starts the play as this child like figure of her husband's fantasy indulging in the name-calling but by Act III she rejects Torvald's smothering. She has realised that she shares an affinity with Krogstad and his guilt, while Rank serves as a reminder that she is as negatively affected by heredity as he. Rank pays for his father's hedonistic lifestyle and dies because of it; through Rank's death the audience see Nora's spiritual death, brought on by Torvald and her father.
This idea of Torvald moulding Nora at the expense of her character is shown in a multitude of ways throughout the play. Within the first few pages Torvald scorns Nora for her decision to go shopping and for eating macaroons, later on he takes over Nora's creative decisions by advising her on her costume and directs her dance, the tarantella. Nora's dance is a perfect visualisation of Torvald's grip over her. Ibsen's choice of dance further enhances the negative affect Torvald's smothering attitude. The tarantella is a dance associated with the convulsions of a tarantula's victim after it has been infected by the spider's poisonous bite. The parallels are clear, Ibsen is telling the audience that Torvald's influence over Nora is killing her and suffocating her personality. Nora dances with increasing ferocity suggesting the torment present over her lack of control over her own life which is represented when she 'suddenly stands still' (Pg.49) when the music stops. Nora has no input into her own life; she literally dances to her husband's tune.
Torvald's suppression of Nora is not treated by Ibsen as a specific case; instead the private environment displayed on stage, The Helmer's home, becomes a microcosm of the society present in Europe. When Mrs Linde comments 'I have witnessed incredible things in this house (pg.54)' it is with a sense of irony for Torvald's suppression of Nora is not shown by Ibsen as an extraordinary incident but as a commonplace situation. When Nora leaves at the end she says she is in need of education, not in terms of knowledge, but in terms of discovering whom she really is. Nora describes how she was 'simply transferred from Papa's hand to yours (Torvald's)' (Pg.66). This suggests a hereditary link from Nora's father to Torvald: This is representative of all men. Ibsen creates the Helmers as everymen figures for their time; their interaction is representative of the European culture that unthinkingly determining a woman's role leaving no freedom for growth. The movement of the table in the final act is a simple but striking image that the audience can relate to and imagine taking place within every home. By writing Nora's departure from the marriage Ibsen is telling the audience that even though we live in a deterministic society everyone has the freewill to break free from convention, even if it will be very difficult.
It is as if Strindberg wrote Ms. Julie in a direct response to this feeling of hope and optimism Ibsen creates at the end of A Doll's House. Strindberg's play places a strong emphasis on determinism but presents life as ultimately absurd; nothing you do is of any consequence. This is the line of thought Strindberg takes in Ms. Julie. Both Jean and Julie are determined characters seeking to escape in the same way as Nora. The difference between the two authors is that Ibsen saw escape from determinism as a possible feat and Strindberg did not. Ms Julie is a play with two central themes that determine personality and divide the characters; they are gender and class. Jean and Julie's relationship is an attempt to overcome these divisions; they act against determined behavioural patterns and exercise their free will, but they do not succeed. Strindberg uses Jean and Julie's interaction to show life as utterly absurd; through their mutually destructive relationship the audience sees how any attempt to force a change in life will ultimately fail.
Jean and Julie's relationship is brought about by their twinned desires to leave the constraints of their life behind them. Jean and Julie's dreams allow Strindberg to explain their frustrations visually, albeit through the audience's imagination. In both dreams there is a common theme of height; in Julie's dream she is 'on top of a high pillar' while Jean 'lies under a tree, in a dark forest' (Pg.12). The pillar and tree are symbols of the social scale but it also a prominent phallic image. Julie is not only separated from the rest of humanity by her social class but also by her bizarre sexuality; raised as a man by her mother she was dressed 'in boy's clothes (Pg.30)' and has not developed as a natural woman. Strindberg describes Ms. Julie as 'a half woman locked in a desperate struggle with her own sexual nature; she belongs to a class that no longer has a meaningful role' This alienation is represented by the pillar in the dream and the desire to fall and sink into the ground reflects Julie's desire to die and abandon the life she was given.
Jean also wishes to escape the life that he was given. His desire to climb the phallic tree and steal the egg symbolises his attempt to reach a higher class through sex. Strindberg shows the audience Jean's desire through his interactions with other characters; in a similar way that Ms. Julie descends to the kitchen or the party, Jean attempts to rise at every opportunity. Jean plays the aristocrat with Kristin in the first scene when he scolds her for not warming the plate and then demanding a better glass for his wine. This contrasts directly to Julie's comment 'I've simple tastes. I'd rather have beer than wine' (Pg.9). The visual contrast between beer and wine is another symbol of their differing desires and lives. Both Jean and Julie envision each other as a way of transcending the class boundaries but after their union they only bicker and argue as they realise their dreams cannot be achieved.
The protagonist's vision of a successful dissolution of classis ruled out by Strindberg from the very start of the play. The abortion mixture Kristin is cooking up at the beginning of the play foreshadows Ms. Julie's death. Ms. Julie's dog has been 'at it with the mongrel from the lodge' (pg.4) and has become pregnant. The two dogs represent on a general scale the merging of two different classes and on a specific scale Jean and Julie. Their union can only end in disaster and death which is visually represented by Kristin's cooking of the mixture.
The divisions of class and sex are also emphasised before the first word has been spoken in the play. After the curtain is raised for the first time the audience witnesses conflicting visuals. The action takes place in the kitchen containing the 'metal utensils' (Pg.1) suiting the servant's workplace while the arched entrance to the right and the grand garden in the background are representative of the high class environment the servant's work in. These images emphasis the differences between the two classes present in the play but they are also used to set up the differences between the sexes. The garden not only represents the class status of Ms. Julie but the Eros fountains, lilacs in bloom and tall poplars are phallic images expressing the sexual conflict that will dominate the play. Jean and Kristin's costumes, the apron and uniform, double as statements of their menial roles within the house but also as aids for the audience to identify them as stereotypically male and female; two distinct opposites.
Emphasising these stereotypes so early in the play allows Strindberg to identify Jean and Julie as unusual characters, who do not represent man and woman as a whole. This allows him to show the effects if one attempts to act outside of convention. Ms. Julie is certainly not the average woman due to her peculiar upbringing. By setting the play during the festivities of Midsummer Day Strindberg is emphasising the unique and unnatural nature of Jean and Julie. Julie describes the holiday as a time for 'enjoying ourselves, not fussing about mistresses and servants' (Pg.6) but this break from the rules is exposed to be false by the dancing and derogatory singing of the peasants. When Jean exclaims that 'we can't fight them' (Pg.20) he is expressing the futility he feels after his plans for social aspiration have collapsed. The futility of any attempt to transfer between classes is represented by Jean's changing costume throughout the play. If Julie is his conquest, his tree to scale, in order to become a gentleman then her order for him to change coats is a symbol of his assumed success. When he changes back on the arrival of the count he finds that he can no longer order Julie and curses 'the damned menial' within himself. The jacket is a Strindberg's reminder to the audience that we all have our roles in society, which cannot be replaced.
The end of Ms. Julie has some strong parallels to A Doll's House. Like Nora Julie attributes her personality down to heredity: She describes how her father gave her everything she thinks and her mother gave her everything she feels; this sentiment is suitable for both plays as they carry the same notion of determinism in the world. Strindberg and Ibsen have opposite opinions over the strength of free will. The difference is shown in the outcome of the two plays, for although both characters are educated through interaction with other characters, Nora can escape for her problems are contained within the boundaries of the home. Nora is provided with hope for improvement whereas Julie's new experiences of the wider world destroy her ideals; any visions of hope are proven false which drives her to despair and (assumed) suicide. Both playwrights engage the themes of determinism but although both writers acknowledged the presence of determinism in life Ibsen endeavoured, through A Doll's House, to teach the world that it was possible to overcome. Strindberg's Ms. Julie conveys exactly the opposite message. He believed that the realism of Julie's character 'must be conditioned by a number of hereditary and environmental circumstances which, combined and accumulated, pull her towards the final destruction.' In a last final moment of each play the striking image of each character leaving the stage spells out the contrasting opinions of the writers. In both plays the lead woman leaves the stage with their future left very much up to the interpretation of the audience, but while Nora's exit is under the air of possibilities and hope Ms. Julie's exit, with razor blade in hand, leaves the audience in no doubt that there is no other outcome other than her death.