This essay will seek to understand how Grotowski's approach to theatre that resulted in his practice gaining the title of 'poor theatre'. I will attempt to explain the unique aspects of Grotowski's practices in the theatre and highlight the reasons behind Grotowski's theatrical beliefs, including his influences and aims for his own work for Grotowski, as its creator, was directly responsible for the definition of poor theatre. At the same time I will explain what is understood by the description of 'poor theatre' as a theoretical and a practical approach to performance in the theatre by looking at the different performances Grotowski was a part of.
Grotowski's theatre career really began with his establishment of the Theatre of Thirteen rows with Ludwik Flazzen in Opole, a town sixty miles from Auschwitz in Poland. It was here that he lay down the foundations for 'poor theatre' but his greatest achievements as a practitioner would not take place until he relocated to Wroclaw on the first of January 1965. It was there that made his intent clear by giving the Laboratory Theatre the status of the 'Institute of Actor's Research'. The two titles are indicative of Grotowski's desire to explore theatre and push its limits.
Grotowski's aim was to find the essence of theatre and classify it. This resulted in a systematic removal of anything that was not necessary in performance for it to remain theatre. He went on to say that 'By gradually eliminating whatever proved superfluous, we found that theatre can exist without make-up, without autonomic costume and scenography, without a separate performance area (stage), without lighting and sound effects etc. It cannot exist without the actor-spectator relationship of perceptual.' (Grotowski, Towards a Poor Theatre, Pg.19) Grotowski understood that the only thing necessary for theatre to function was a core of actor in a space performing to an audience. Everything else that could not be generated by the actors and their interaction with the audience was not necessary and therefore could and would be taken away from his work. As Grotowski wrote 'No matter how much theatre expands and exploits its mechanical resources, it will remain technologically inferior to film and television. Consequently, I propose poverty in theatre.' (Towards a Poor Theatre, Pg.19) Grotowski's work was given the label of 'poor theatre' as it was intentionally stripped down to its very essence and this is its most distinguishing feature.
With all other aspects designated as 'superfluous' to theatre Grotowski formed a great interest in the relationship between actor and audience. He believed that the text of a play did not make theatre itself; only when performed by an actor to an audience did it then gain the title of theatre. An essential part of this relationship was the audience's ability to lose themselves completely in the spectator aspect of the performance just as the actor must lose himself completely while giving himself to the audience. The actor's technique was therefore absolutely essential to Grotowski's vision of the theatre. He saw the body as an instrument which must be capable of more than the spectators and because of this he went to great lengths to train his actors to express themselves adequately.
The training that all Grotowski's actors went through was a distinguishing aspect of 'poor theatre' as it was responsible for the striking acting styles that could be seen in the Theatre Laboratory productions. The training did not focus on teaching the actor's new things (there was no formal voice coaching for example) because Grotowski did not want to merely teach his actors a bag of tricks. Grotowski was interested in doing just the opposite: Grotowski wished to strip the actors down so training took the process of via-negativa; an attempt to break down an actor's mental blocks and give them freedom. He desired an actor to be released from so called natural behavior which resisted impulses in an attempt to reduce the time between inner thoughts and outer actions. He believed that an actor must be able to accomplish 'self-penetration' in order to give themselves totally to the audience: The most intimate parts of the actor must be accessible during a performance to allow great ease of communication between actor and spectator. This desire for his actors to attain a passive readiness to act out their most natural desires made Grotowski unique amongst practitioners in the Western world. He said himself that 'It is not a comfortable concept for the western mind, which tends to prefer positive intellect-guided actions' (Grotowski's Theatre Laboratory, pg 194)
When establishing a form of training for his actors Grotowski drew on his various and eclectic influences. He was Influenced by Stanislavski's work on physical actions, Dullin's rhythm exercises, Delsarte's investigations of extroversive and introversive reactions as well as Meyerhold's bio-mechanical training and Vakhtonghov's synthesis. He also brought in knowledge of the training techniques in Oriental theatre, especially the Peking Opera, Indian Kathakali and Japanese Noh theatre. What separated Grotowski from other practitioners however was his adaptation of various training methods to suit his own purpose. He never rested with his ideas and as such his training never became a defined set of motions; in fact Grotowski actively sought not to have a commercial brand of method like Stanislavski or Brecht. Although he was brought up on Stanislavski he moved away from his ideas although he never lost Stanislavski's attention to detail.
Grotowski relied on the actor's body alone to express itself. Without any artificial enhancements such as lighting and external sound effects the actors had to make their own noises and props. The scene they were in had to be conveyed through the actor's gestures. Costumes could be created through the way an actor behaved and through association between the acted character and the audience's perception of them. The few props were used merely as extensions of a character as in The Constant; the prosecutors wore symbols of power such as cloaks, top-boots and in one case a crown while the accused prince wore a white shirt of purity, a loin cloth representing his vulnerability and a red cloak fitting of a martyr. This reliance on the actor alone can further be seen in the pictures taken from Akropolis. In this play the actors played the parts of the Auschwitz dead while the audience were representatives of the living, witnessing a life they could not partake in. The spectators sat on raised platforms while in the centre of the room a large box was placed; this was covered in piles of metal junk and this is all the actors had to work with to construct the play's action. The actors moved in a heavily stylized way which emphasized the fact that they came from another world to the audience. They used no props and swapped characters continuously so they only had their bodies available to express themselves. Their closeness to the audience intensified their manipulation of their bodies in contrast to the audience's still frames. The actors worked together to form highly emotive tableaus reminiscent of Caravaggio's paintings and concentration camp art.
The defining features of acting in the poor theatre can be summed up as follows: The actors only used their body and voice to depict character, costumes and props were used but only sparingly as extensions of the actor. The actor's deficiencies were used and not hidden. Actors would exchange parts for there was no attempt made to pretend that the actor actually was their character, instead the idea of actors playing to an audience was exploited for maximum impact.
If the actor's attitude toward performance was an important feature of 'poor theatre' then the staging, including the positioning of the audience was as equally noticeable. The aesthetics Grotowski created at the Laboratory Theatre were striking though their overwhelming simplicity. The performances were often starved of any technical aspects such as costumes, props, artificial sounds or lighting, the latter often being produced by a few bare bulbs positioned in the theatre. This allowed a greater focus on the actor's expression and the spectators' part in the performance.
The special element of a theatre, the situation a spectator is placed into during a performance, was very important to Grotowski. He came up with a variety of different ways of seating the audience in order to engage them in the most effective way. There was no fourth wall mentality in 'poor theatre'; the audience were always much more prominent than a regular theatre setup whether it be as a patient (Kordian), dinner guest (Dr. Faustus) or merely as a detached onlooker (The Constant Prince). For this reason the audience size was always limited. The Theatre Laboratory seated less than one hundred so the audience was always guaranteed to be small. This allowed for a more intimate and personal experience. Grotowski wished to emphasis the audience's presence not to hide it: his aim was for the audience to confront their own role within the performances as spectators. He gave them different roles and asked them to judge themselves in that role, whether it be as an object, passive spectator or merely a part of the scenery. The roles designated to the spectator may have changed over the course of Grotowski's career but the function an audience performs remained at the very heart of 'poor theatre' and is one of its most striking and defining features. To fully understand the importance of the audience and staging in 'poor theatre' it is necessary to look at the progression of Grotowski's work throughout the sixties and the different ways in which he used them to further the play's themes.
Just two years after forming the Theatre of Thirteen Rows Grotowski stated his intentions for an active audience in his production of Forefather's Eve when he created a total spatial integration of actors and audience, giving the latter the title of participant and designating them roles to fulfill in the play. The next production in 1962 was the play Kordian. It takes up the story of a man (Kordian) who dedicated himself to travel in search of the ultimate truth. While at the top of Mont Blanc he has a revelation that everything can be achieved through self-sacrifice. He returns to Poland to kill the Tsar but his attempt fails and he is sent to an insane asylum. The play is set within the asylum and although the audience was not given such obvious roles as in Forefather's Eve they still took on an element of role-play: They were patients as with the protagonist and as Kordian was condemned and killed the audience went through his story with him. The intellectual distancing between the audience and the actor was undermined through the involving set. It took place on several levels and the scenery was only created through metal beds and chairs. The actors used the beds as performance spaces while the audience were seated on them. The audience was provoked to take part and sing a song. If a member of the audience did not take part then the doctors would identify them. This designation of the audience as patients and direct confrontation with Kordian's action meant that the actors merely became more active members of the scenario than the audience. This in turn meant that the audience had to find their role in the play and address its key theme, what is insanity?
The staging of Dr. Faustus, with the action taking place round one large dinner table, was another variation of the break down between previously separate actor and audience space but Grotowski was soon to abandon his ideas of an active audience. From Dr. Faustus onwards Grotowski placed the audience back in their more typical role of passive onlooker. This did not mean however that Grotowski was not interested in the audience' role within theatre but rather that poor theatre became an exploration of the actor's role as an uninvolved participant.
Grotowski's next two plays, Acropolis and A Constant Prince both shared the same attitude towards the audience; they were ignored by the actors but were not forgotten in Grotowski' aims for the piece. Acropolis saw the audience confronted at close quarters with the horrifically stylized movements of the actors. The stage was set so the actors and audience shared the same space and were constantly within touching distance of each other. An American reviewer wrote of the discomfort this staging provoked.
In no other style of theatre could such a feeling be created; the unique staging of poor theatre allowed a feeling in the audience that was totally fitting with its setting of Auschwitz, a place where 'where our century had had to measure its values' (Jennifer Kumiega, The Theatre of Grotowski, Pg 59).
The Constant Prince took another step towards an entirely passive audience by furthering them from the actors but Grotowski's main concern remained with the audience's assessment of their own position within the performance. The play was based around a loose scenario involving a group of persecutors and their prisoners. The first captive, Don Henri, was symbolically castrated and then joined the group. However the second prisoner, Don Fernando, refused all compromise and opposed his persecution with love and humility. As the persecutors were forced to greater cruelty which ultimately ended in Fernando's death 'The audience were made to watch the drama of persecution from elevated positions surrounding a wooden enclosure with the guilty curiosity of voyeurs' (Jennifer Kumiega, Grotowski's Theatre Laboratory, Pg. 196). Although the audience participated in no greater form than in any conventional theatre, their elevated position emphasized their presence: Their role in the play forced them to confront the scenes in front of them, a trait unique to 'poor theatre'.
Grotowski strongly desired to break down the audience-actor barrier but he never lost sight of their initial aim to define theatre. If The Constant Prince asked the question 'how far can the relationships of actor and audience change while still remaining theatre?' then the answer came in the defining moment of poor theatre Apocalypsis Cum Figuris. All the distinguishing elements of 'poor theatre' are present in this performance. Set, costumes and props were abandoned as the play took place in a large empty room. The only lighting present was two spotlights and a candle. The main emphasis of the piece was on equality between actor and audience; while one gave the other received. This was the pinnacle of 'poor theatre' for nothing was needed except an actor performing to a spectator; they alone created the scene and when both left the room returned to its state before their entrance. The audience was as important a force in the scenario as the actors. Apocalypsis Cum Figuris did not attempt to manipulate the audience into participating but instead used their passive role to heighten the play's emotion. As Kumiega wrote; the persecuted simpleton 'was not only excluded from the group consciousness- he was also trapped between their (the actors') active rejection and the passive refusal of the surrounding witnesses (the audience) to intervene. By their own awareness of the roles they had accepted for the duration of an hour, and their inability to cast of these roles, all present forced the cycle events nightly to its preordained conclusion'. (pg.199, Grotowski's Theatre Laboratory).
With the performance of Apocalypsis Cum Figuris 'poor theatre' had reached its conclusion in dramatic style. Grotowski had shown in practice his theory that nothing in theatre is essential other than the actor-audience interaction but had also managed to manipulate this relationship for dramatic effect. Although his style of theatre became to be known as 'poor' it was certainly not lacking in depth, drama or beauty: As Leonia Jablonkowna wrote 'It is true that Grotowski's acetic approach reaches its limits here...and yet in spite of the poverty the spectacle dazzles with a richness of visual effect (in the best sense). The circumstances, gestures and movement have a dynamic intensity and a fascinating attention to detail... Each gesture, however insignificant, each movement of the hand or sway of the body has expressive power... The actor is like an instrument capable of registering a variety of tones and octaves. He could take the place of a powerful symphony orchestra, and himself perform the symphony' (The Theatre of Grotowski, Pg.96)