The Treaty of Rome had the aim of creating a single integrated internal market back in 1957. However slow progress throughout the years until late 1970s, brought about a mission to complete the Single Market. The programme was initiated in 1985 with the publication of the White Paper and the Single Market went into force in January 1993. Here, the rationale of the Single Market will be explained as the objectives or reasons for its creation while the aims are the mechanisms which are used to achieve the particular objectives. The rationale will be outlined first and then an analysis of each of the mechanisms used will follow. First of all, a basic description of a single market is needed so that the discussion can proceed progressively. A single market is a customs union with common policies on product regulation, and freedom of movement of all the factors of production (goods, services, capital and labour).
One of the major reasons for the Single Market was to create an economic area that is larger than the U.S. and Japan. These two countries were seen as major competitors particularly in terms of technological innovation and global presence. A Single Market will provide a platform for Europe to increase competition with them and also the rest of the world. Furthermore it was hoped that economic growth could be stimulated and thus increase employment in the member states. Also, the completion of the Single Market will enable businesses to engage in fair competition thus achieving economies of scale through improved efficiency. There are also political reasons such as promoting security and peace and improving quality of life more quickly and effectively. In 1999 the strategic objectives for the internal market for 2000-2004 were set out, which include enhancing the efficiency of product and capital markets and improving the business environment.
The most important aim of the Single Market was to remove the remaining non-tariff barriers to the free movement of all the factors of production. The three areas identified were physical barriers, technical barriers, and fiscal barriers. Physical barriers included paperwork, red tape and cross-border checks and these caused delays and hold-ups in the movements of goods and labour (people). By removing these barriers the high costs incurred by businesses in transporting their goods across member states as well as in getting the workers with the skills that they require will be substantially reduced. Cost to consumers will also be positively affected. Furthermore citizens in the Community will then be able to travel across or reside in other member states more easily. Increased labour mobility should lead to less disparity in wages across member states and more opportunities for people within the EU to locate jobs which are suitable for them. This underlies the rational of a more efficient EU.
This proposed abolishment however created concerns about the control of drug trafficking, terrorism, and major crime in the member states. Most of Europe's police forces felt particularly concerned as at that time terrorist groups such as the Italian Red Brigades and West Germany's Red Army Faction (RAF) were still quite active. Nevertheless the elimination of physical barriers has led to an improvement in the movement of goods and labour. Customs formalities were simplified initially and then abolished along with border controls by 1 January 1993. In response to the concern about major crime in the EU a system of frontier-free police and criminal justice cooperation was created. Europol, the European police force, is part of that response. So is the Schengen Information System whereby national police exchange information on wanted or suspected wrongdoers.
The elimination of technical frontiers basically means breaking down the barriers of technical regulations or standards on the factors of production, either by harmonisation or mutual recognition. Most of these regulations were based on different safety, health, and environment standards. Goods were prevented from moving freely due to the differences in the standards. The lack of mobility of labour and persons was due to the differences in, for example, immigration policies as well as pension schemes. With regards to movement in capital, this means removing exchange controls and any other restrictions. The European Parliament has pointed out that capital liberalisation should be backed up by full liberalisation of financial services in order to create a unified European financial market. This should encourage economic progress by enabling capital to be invested efficiently. An integrated capital market would also reduce the cost of equity, bond and bank finance and lead to a rise in Europe-wide GDP growth by 1.1 per cent. The idea was to create more competition in the financial sectors i.e. banks, insurance, and securities thus allowing a greater variety of investment products for consumers to choose from. As for other types of services, the differences in the recognition of professional qualifications among member states limit their free movement. In eliminating technical frontiers, there was the issue that member states were forced to lower their standards to those which prevailed in others. This was argued in the 1987 case about Germany's import of beers hence producing a potential conflict between consumers' interest and the drive to remove trade barriers.
The removal of technical barriers has made an immense achievement in the movement of goods but to a lesser degree for labour. The Commission however is currently focusing on the services sector as this sector is seen to be the least progressive. Their efforts include more deregulation in certain areas for example to ease price-fixing by professional associations. A free services market should enable service providers to realise economies of scale more efficiently.
The Commission proposed VAT approximation among the member states as one of the attempts to remove fiscal barriers. Member states had varying rates of VAT, between 12% and 22% in the 1980s. Since border controls were to be abolished, it was essential to have little differences in VAT levels so as to make fraud pointless. However in Britain the approximation would mean the end of their VAT zero-rating of basic goods such as food and fuel. Also, the harmonisation of excise duties was argued to lead to lower cost of 'demerit goods' e.g. cigarettes. However, VAT differentials causes distortion of competition and thus an approximation was essential.
The Competition Policy made a great deal of contribution in the development of the Single Market. It aims to promote competition among businesses, having achieving it, will then contribute to consumer welfare as well as to the competitiveness of the European industry. However the authorities have not succeeded in dealing with certain areas, for example, the abuse in the car industry, in which cars are distributed through exclusive dealership networks, ignoring all of the normal competition rules and resulting in huge price differentials. It is believed that a more pro-active enforcement will assist in contributing towards increased competition and economic growth. However the instruments used such as antitrust, the control of state aid, merger control and liberalisation measures may not have a direct effect on competitiveness. That depends on the firms' own ability to compete.
The Single Market has achieved substantial success since it was launched but there are rooms for improvement particularly in the services sector. It is also interesting to note that it is regarded as a stepping-stone in realising the conversion to the euro. Hence it plays an important role in assisting the EU to become the world's most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy as set out in the objective of the Lisbon strategy.