Recently, the importance of culture in International Business was discussed and it had definitely broadened my view on the concept of culture. Learning that culture has a significant influence on business strategy, brands, and marketing activities is to me, stimulating. For instance it is interesting to observe its applications to various marketing issues such as differences in consumption behaviour, differences in levels of consumer responses to advertising, management practices in various cultural settings and so forth. This piece shall look at the most apparent arguments relating to Hofstede's 5 Cultural Dimensions framework which was used as a model in grasping the essentials of the topic.
To begin analysing Hofstede's framework, one must be aware that his framework aimed at systematically understanding cultural similarities and differences around the world by measuring particular cultural values. This means the ratings were based on the whole population, thus the framework should not be used to measure individual cultural preferences.
One of the main advantages of this framework is that it is comprehensive. The research, careful and quantitative, covered a great number of questionnaires from at least 50 countries, ensuring the reliability of the final scores. Users of the framework can be confident that it is representative of a particular country's culture. Gooderham and Nordhaug (2001) believe that for comparative purposes involving many countries Hofstede's survey-based approach is highly efficient. The fact that the research was conducted within a multinational firm shows that the findings can be applied to businesses in general.
This framework can be used to assist firms in understanding the culture of a particular emerging country when weighing the possibilities of investing in that country. For example a high Power Distance score could mean that there is preference towards an autocratic type of management. It also means that there is greater centralisation and tall organisational pyramids within the society's culture and the firm needs to take that into account.
However, the scores of the countries could be argued to be of less relevance today as they were derived some 30 years ago. For example, recent studies show that Japanese and Koreans are often more individualistic and less collectivistic than Americans, which contradicts the culture scores developed by Hofstede. Significant events that have happened in the last three decades such as the industrialisation of under-developed countries and globalisation of leading corporations are said to have played a major role in modifying national cultures. Another recent study by Gooderham and Nordhaug (2001) based on a sample of students at leading European business schools, shows that there could even be a decline in the importance of national culture as their findings suggested a number of significant differences between male and female students.
Hofstede's dimensions are believed to be insufficient to represent the dynamism and complexity of culture. For instance, the existence of subcultures in societies and cultural borrowings were not considered. Other important aspects of culture such as language, values and beliefs were also ignored. Many social scientists contend that there is no such thing as national culture because subcultures in a country can vary greatly in their values and beliefs. Hence Hofstede's framework may only be appropriate for business analysis.
Nevertheless it cannot be denied that Hofstede's framework has been immensely influential in the social sciences. His framework has been widely used and has played a massive role in providing a good starting point for further research in many fields. At the same time, I support the view that culture is something which needs to be understood from a personal point-of-view that is through active involvement. Nevertheless regarding international business, firms seeking to invest abroad must firstly be introduced to the notion of cultural differences before going any further and I feel that Hofstede's framework works well to achieve this.