"At its core, the goal of a company is to create value," said Jean-Paul Page in his article 'Corporate Governance and Value Creation'. Hence enter the role of Corporate Governance which is basically how a company is controlled and directed. Traditionally most firms adopt the shareholder approach which emphasises on maximising shareholder wealth. However for the past few years, there is a growing interest on the stakeholder model. Under this model, management is supposed to focus on long-term survival, which is achieved by satisfying the interests of stakeholders. Stakeholders' interests are evaluated according to the firm's overall purpose and mission and then translated into the firm's business strategy or principles. Thus, in my opinion, this theory encourages a more straight-forward approach towards addressing social responsibility compared to the shareholder approach.
The definition of corporate social responsibility (CSR) varies among companies but generally CSR is often seen as the business's efforts towards sustainable development and is represented through the way a company balances its economic, environmental and social objectives while addressing stakeholder expectations and enhancing shareholder value. Here, Nestle is taken as an example although I will focus only on its social objectives.
Nestle has a 12-person shareholder-appointed Board of Directors, all of which are non-executive members, except for the Chairman who is also the CEO. Nestle incorporates their business strategy in the Nestle Corporate Business Principles (NCBP). These principles, in general, state that Nestle is concerned with developing products that would ensure sustainable value for shareholders, employees, and consumers over the long term. These principles are supposed to guide the company, its employees and activities no matter where the business is located. Consequently, the Board's responsibility is to implement all the values laid out in the NCBP.
However, the CEO recently claimed that there should not be an obligation to 'give back' to communities because they have not taken anything away from the society. This, in my opinion, contrasts with what is said in the NCBP because there, Nestle clearly acknowledges the fact that it would not exist without its consumers.
Nestle, in the NCBP; say that they do not favour short-term profits at the expense of long-term business development. But why, then, were they internationally boycotted for their unethical marketing of breast milk substitutes in developing nations in the late 70s? (This boycott continues until now in a number of countries). This shows that they actually were favouring short-term profits. I would assume that 'consumers' welfare' can be agreed as a business development as they would provide as a good performance indicator for a particular company. By flouting the WHA International Code Marketing of Breast Milk Substitutes, Nestle used strategies of deceptions to market its baby milk products to maintain their estimated $4 billion market share in the baby-milk industry.
From demanding compensation worth millions from a poor country such as Ethiopia to their cocoa and coffee-buying practices (which are argued to be exploiting farmers by OXFAM), from the issue of trade union busting in Colombia to the use of genetically-modified ingredients, I think Nestle has done quite a damage to its corporate image, not to mention its employee morale. However they are actually a good corporate citizen in many respects. An example is their support for nationwide HIV/AIDS prevention programmes for teenagers in Nigeria and Kenya which is reported in their 2004 CSR Report.
All in all, I feel that while Nestle addresses well the drive towards sustainability, it sometimes overlook or disregard ethical corporate philanthropy which many believe can also enhance shareholder value. Nestle does to an extent consider the interests of its stakeholders although adopting shareholder-focused governance. I believe that CSR is better grasp by the stakeholder model as it considers that a firm can make long-term developments and maximise value while taking into account the interest of stakeholders. However as the business is actually owned by the shareholders I think that it is only fair that they be given some advantage over the other stakeholders. With respect to corporate governance as a business ethics issue, I believe that it is a vital subject as failure to incorporate good governance will indicate a threat to the future of any corporation.
This approach may provide positive publicity, stronger brand affiliation or liking from consumers, and ultimately may be a source of competitive advantage.
Nestle is the world's largest food company and despite some negative publicity recently, has always been very successful in its operations, making a profit billion of in 2004. He also believes that companies should only concentrate on the endeavours that will maximise shareholders' value.
Their business principles also mention that they shall follow and respect all applicable local laws

 but this is not what actually happens in some countries. A very good example is in India where an Act was enacted regarding infant milk substitutes which especially prohibits advertising to the public, giving free samples to mothers, promotion in hospitals and gifts to health workers. There were occurrences in which Nestle violated the Act and this has been reported by IBFAN.
However I believe that if they were to work more on their stakeholders' interests they could improve their image and perform better. Thus, being known for its poor reputation for ethics, Nestle has to continue its effort to build up public confidence by contributing to the society in a number of ways and at the same time, producing reports of its activities such as the 'Nestle in the Community' and 'Nestle Commitment to Africa' Report.