Analysis of the information you supplied and recommendations are as follows:
Considering the present situation and ignoring any future costs and changes, the minimum cost of producing at least 500 metres yarn for the customer is 8,580. At this minimum cost, the yarn to be produced should be 320 metres and the remaining 180 metres are to be bought in.
20% reduction in cost of bought in yarn will decrease the price from 21 to 16.80. The implication of this is that the total cost will be minimised. At a reduction of 30% off the current price, the price is reduced to 14.70 but the supplier is less reliable. This reduced price will result in a much lower total cost than the first case.
The amount of yarn to be produced if extra 700 hours use of vats comes into being remains the same at its current value.
It is suggested that 80 hours of the spare carding and combing machine should be bought in order to utilise the twisting machine fully. The cost for this machine shall not exceed 120.
When the cost of fibre increases by 1 per metre of standard width cloth equivalent, it is recommended that a negotiation with the supplier should be done in order to get the 20% reduction in the cost of bought in yarn since this will be able to drive down the total cost.
The amount to be supplied after six months can rise up to 640 metres only and the cost will also rise. Spare carding and combing machine shall be obtained if the need to produce more at a lower cost arises.
When calculating costs, all factors are assumed to remain constant when a change is being considered. The total cost is being calculated by multiplying each of the costs (produced and buy-in) with their respective quantities.
A few alternatives were analysed and this report comments specifically on the options that are available for the division not only to meet the target of the contract but also to minimise the cost incurred in the project, while adhering to the company's requirements.
The amount of yarn that should be made given the current situation is 320 metres and the amount to be bought-in should be 180 metres. Referring to Table 1 in the Appendix, the total cost of producing and buying in the yarn is 8,580. This is calculated by multiplying the costs and the quantities for both the produced and bought-in yarn.
Vat A and Vat B were combined as their functions are identical. The resources (hours) used for dyeing is 640, which is lower than the resources available, implying that the machine is not fully utilised. The carding and combing machine is being used to the maximum capacity while the twisting machine is under utilised by 100 hours. All in all, the amount of yarn produced met the requirement of the company which specified that the amount produced should be at least half of the total amount of yarn.
The vats machine used up 640 hours and this leaves 760 hours extra (1400-640=760). Since 700 is more than 760, the plan of requiring the extra 700 hours of the vat machines could proceed as 760 hours is more than enough to be used.
To know the amount of spare carding and combing machine capacity needed, the maximum capacity of twisting machine is analysed. Referring to Table 1, there are 100 more of hours available. This means the machine could produce 20 metres (100/5 hours) more of yarn. 80 hours are needed for spare carding and combing machine as one metre of standard width cloth is produced in 4 hours. The price to be paid should not be more than 120 (the difference between the cost of producing the yarn and the cost of buying it in is multiplied with 20 metres). Table 2 depicts this scenario where the carding and combing machine increase by 80 hours from 1280 hours (Table 1) to 1360 hours.
Table 3 shows the reduction in cost for buy-in yarn when the suppliers grant 20% and 30% discounts respectively. Referring to Table 3, the current supplier would give a cheaper price of 16.80. This will decrease total cost to 7,824. Although the cost is reduced greatly as compared to the initial cost of 8,580, there may be a possibility of the supplier supplying a lower quality of yarn due to the intention of selling off his stocks quickly and such. The 30% discount will reduce the price of yarn to 14.70. Referring to Table 4, when the price is decreased, the total cost decreased substantially to 7,425. However, the amount of yarn to be produced and bought in is 250 each, which does not violate the company's policy. Thus, it is clear that this is a good deal. Anyhow, the only problem with this option is the reliability of the supplier. If it is convinced that the new supplier is reliable or the company is willing to take risk, then it is worthwhile going for this option. Conversely, if the cost of fibre rises by 1 per metre, total cost will rise to 8900. Therefore, negotiation with the supplier to obtain the discount is important. A 20% discount will result in the total cost being 8,184. The 30% discount would bring about an even lower total cost; 7,675 and the quantity produced and bought in are 250 each (refer Table 5). Anyhow, the reliability of the supplier must also be considered.
To increase the amount supplied per week after 6 months of operation, spare carding and combing machine has to be attained from another division in order to minimise cost. The present situation will only allow an increase in the amount of yarn supplied up to 640 metres per week only, at the expense of a rising cost, up to 11,520 (refer Table 5). This is because the carding and combing machines have used up all of their available hours.
The division is able to meet the requirement of the contract in the current situation. However, a few adjustments have to be made in the future in order to keep the cost low, as well as meeting the requirement of the contract which is to supply at least 500 metres per week in a standard width of a particular cloth. There are many factors that could affect the production of the division and it is wise to weigh the costs and benefits of all the alternatives available in order to decide which move will be most beneficial.