Tort of negligence is important as it covers so many areas of our daily lives. In order to prove that a defendant is negligent, the claimant must prove three crucial elements; that the defendant owed him a duty of care, that the defendant was in breach of that duty of care and that the claimant suffered damage as a result. Duty of care is said to exist when there is proximity between the parties, the harm suffered is reasonably foreseeable and the imposition of duty must be just and reasonable.
In the first case, it is crucial to see whether or not Barry owes duty of care towards Albert for the advice given. With regard to proximity, parties must have been brought sufficiently into a close relationship with each other. Albert was in close contact with Barry as the advice was given directly to him, face to face during the luncheon. Apart from that, it is reasonably foreseeable that the advice given by Barry is reliable. This is so because Barry is the Director of the company and is deemed to have vast knowledge about the company, making him the expert of Dunmore Limited. Based on the points above, it is likely that Barry owes duty of care towards Albert. However, it is unlikely that the duty is owed due to the circumstance in which the advice was given. The advice was communicated during lunch, which is a social occasion. In the Hedley Byrne v Heller, 1963, it was held that specialist advice cannot reasonably be relied on when given off the cuff, or on a purely social occasion. Even if given in a business context, it may not be reasonable to rely on it if it is given without proper checks on relevant data. Therefore, Albert bears the responsibility of doing his own research on any data of the company before deciding to invest and not relying purely on Barry's advice. Referring to Caparo v Dickman (1990), House of Lords held that the defendant must reasonably have anticipated that the advice would be acted upon without the claimant seeking further clarification or independent advice. Barry's advice may be impromptu and he could have not reasonably foreseen that Albert will be following his advice.
Due to the reasons above, Barry do not owe Albert duty of care. Hence, I advice Albert not to proceed with the claim. However, this case can be viewed from another angle in which Barry can be accused of negligent misrepresentation. Barry in a way had acted as a representative of the company and had enticed Albert in buying the shares. In this case, Albert could claim against the company but since the company has gone into liquidation, the claim would be dismissed.
In the case of Mrs. Smith and Jim, duty of care could be owed to Mrs. Smith as it is crystal clear that Mrs. Smith voluntarily went to seek for advice at the Centre and it is likely that any advice given from the Centre would be acted upon. The advice given by Jim was required for a purpose and Jim knew that his advice is communicated to Mrs. Smith and would be acted upon. Mrs. Smith then followed the advice to her detriment. Those four conditions were laid down by Lord Oliver from Hedley Byrne v Heller (1963)
 and as the conditions are satisfied, Jim owed duty of care towards Mrs. Smith. Moreover, based on the Esso Petroleum Co. Ltd v Mardon (CA, 1976)
, a duty of care is said to exist. Since Jim knew that his advice would be relied upon, he owes duty of care towards Mrs. Smith. Also, Jim is said to have voluntarily assume the responsibility of giving the advice. This is one of the criteria in determining that the defendant has been brought into close proximity with the claimant. Thus, in this case, Jim was asked by the student, whom is the third party to give advice at the centre and since Jim had assumed that responsibility, he was also responsible for giving the right advice.
In proving breach of duty, it is essential to look at what other average professional academicians such as Jim would have done in this situation. As a law lecturer, whose scope of job is limited to only dispersing knowledge to students in the university, it may be possible for Jim to not keep himself up - to-date with the law. However, since he has the capacity of actually conducting the conference and the fact that he had assume responsibility at the Centre, it would be crucial that he prepared himself well in order to carry out his additional duty effectively. Hence, whether or not Mrs. Smith could make civil suit against Jim would depend upon what other average professional academicians would do. If their action would be not to keep themselves informed of the changes in law, Jim is possible to not have breached the duty. However, it is more likely that Jim has breached the duty of care and I would advise Mrs. Smith to go on with the suit. Nevertheless, the type of loss that Mrs. Smith suffers from would be uncertain. She may be suffering from financial loss, which is recoverable in which she had lost her money by not being able to claim on her insurance policy. Anyhow, the Court could also decide that she suffers from pure economic loss; she was deprived from the opportunity of getting the money back, i.e. the money is merely for her own benefit.
In the last case, by applying the 'neighbour test', George is said to owe duty of care towards Percy. However, the difficult part of this case is in proving breach of duty. If Percy wants to make a claim against George, he has to prove that George was driving negligently at that time. Negligent driving then can be determined by what other average reasonable driver would do on the road. George may not be in breach of that duty if the accident occurred was due to other factors such as sudden puncture of the tanker's tyre. If the breach of duty is proven, Percy would be able to recover from the cost of his spoilt crops and also claim for the proceeds which would have been made from the damaged crops and not for the loss that should be incurred due to his inability to plant and sell further field of crops i.e. pure economic loss. However, the Court may also consider the argument that Percy suffered from pure economic loss as a result of property damage and it is possible for him to recover the losses. Unfortunately, other factors such as the weather factor could also be the cause to his inability to make future profit, but this would be too remote a damage. It is also important to note here that George is an employee and hence his employer could be vicariously liable for any of his negligent actions. Percy could sue George, George's employer or both if it is proven that George has acted negligently during the course of his employment, in this case, negligent in driving. Thus, it is important for Percy to firstly prove that George was negligent.
Before deciding to settle a case in the Court, it is essential that each party consider all the costs involved. The Woolf Reforms 1999 suggested that every party should opt for early settlement or settlement out of court. This saves time, money and energy.