A contract is an agreement between two or more parties which is intended to be legally binding. In order to create a contract, six conditions need to be fulfilled. The contract is said to exist if there is an offer, which is then accepted, provided that both parties give consideration, and have the intention to create legal relations. Both parties must also have the capacity to create a contract and the purpose of the contract is ought to be valid.
An offer is an expression of willingness to contract made with the intention that it shall become binding on the offeror as soon as it is accepted by the offeree. On the other hand, an invitation to treat is an invitation given to other parties to invite them to make offer to the party who gave the invitation. This offer can then be accepted or rejected. An invitation to tender is possible to amount to an offer if the terms of the invitation are made clear, for example, the highest bidder or the lowest bidder is said to be the successful bidder. In Harvela Investments Ltd v. Royal Trust Co. of Canada Ltd, House of Lords [1986] A.C. 207, the seller had bound itself in accepting the highest bidder for the shares that they had invited to bid for. The House of Lords held that the invitation has gone beyond an invitation to treat and thus has amounted to an offer. Usually, an invitation to tender is normally a way used in order to determine whether or not a suitable offer can be obtained. In Spencer v. Harding [1870] L.R.5 C.P.561, the defendant's circular did not state that the highest bidder will be awarded the tender. The circular was a mere attempt to ascertain whether an offer can be obtained within such a margin as the sellers are willing to adopt. Referring to the case given, Workwell Ltd has made an invitation to treat and not an offer for the drainage work. Drainklear's bid for the tender of the drainage work is the offer in this case and it is up to Workwell Ltd whether or not to accept it.
After an offer has been made, it is important that the offeree accepts the offer in order to make a contract. An acceptance is a final and unqualified acceptance of the terms of an offer in order to make a binding contract. It is vital that the acceptance must exactly match the offer and the offeree must accept all the terms of the offer. The communication of acceptance is considered to be crucial in order for a valid contract to exist. Literally, an actual communication is required with the exception of two situations. In the case of a unilateral offer, it is only necessary that the offeree accepts the offer by adhering to the terms of the offer. If the post is used, the Postal Rules highlighted that acceptance is said to establish as soon as the letter of acceptance is posted regardless of the letter being lost, destroyed or delayed. In Household Fire Insurance Co v Grant, Court of Appeal [1879] 4 Ex. D. 216, the letter from the claimant did not reach the defendant but the contract was held to exist the moment the letter was posted and hence the defendant was obliged to pay for the shares that he initially offered to buy from the claimant. However, the Postal Rules do not apply if the letter of acceptance is not pre-paid, wrongly addressed and not properly posted. In the case given, Workwell Ltd has accepted the offer made by Drainklear through post. Anyhow, the letter of acceptance was wrongly addressed and in this case, acceptance only takes effect if and when the letter of acceptance is received by the offeror, provided that it happens within the predetermined period of acceptance. Thus, an acceptance occurred only when the letter reached Drainklear, which was well within the deadline. The case of Getreide-Import-Gesellschaft v Contimar S.A. Compania Commercial Maritima [1953] I.W.L.R. 793 illustrates this matter.
After making an offer, offerors are able to withdraw their offers within the time stipulated for acceptance. Similar to offers, a revocation must also be communicated to the offeree. In Routledge v Grant C.P. [1828] 4 Bing. 653, the Court held that the defendant was entitled to withdraw his offer at any time before acceptance and once the offer had been withdrawn, the claimant could not then accept it even if it was within the time period for acceptance. Hence, Drainklear is allowed to revoke their offer within the 3 months period, provided that the offer has not been effectively accepted. Consequently, Drainklear's letter to Workwell Ltd revoked the 19,000 offer that they have made earlier. As opposed to the Postal Rules, a revocation of offer, if communicated through post, will only become effective when the letter of revocation is received by the offeree. The offeree is able to accept the offer anytime before the offer is effectively revoked. In Byrne & Co. v Van Tienhoven & Co., C.P. [1880] 5 C.P.D. 344, since the letter of acceptance was posted before the letter of revocation arrived, it was held that there was a binding contract between the claimant and the defendant. Since Drainklear's revocation is communicated to Workwell Ltd two days before Drainklear received Workwell Ltd's letter of acceptance, Drainklear's offer is said to be revoked before acceptance as acceptance in this case must be communicated i.e. the letter of acceptance must be received by Drainklear. Thus, Workwell Ltd cannot hold Drainklear to the original price of 19,000 since no contract existed between Workwell Ltd and Drainklear.
On the other hand, the invitation of Highroad plc for tender of a civil engineering contract is actually an invitation to treat. Workwell Ltd had made an offer by bidding for the Highroad tender and having being awarded the Highroad contract simply means that Highroad plc had accepted the offer made by Workwell Ltd. As a result, Workwell Ltd is bound by this contract with Highroad plc.
Since there is no contract between Workwell Ltd and Drainklear, Workwell Ltd is unable to take any legal actions towards Drainklear. There is no point for Workwell Ltd to waste unnecessary time trying to convict Drainklear of doing something which is not unlawful. It is believed that the best option for Workwell Ltd is to accept Drainklear's new offer of 29,000. This may well be 10,000 more than the original, misquoted offer but it is still the lowest value as compared to the two other bidders. It is important for Workwell Ltd to bear in mind that their contract with Highroad plc still exists and Workwell Ltd has to make sure that they could find a sub-contractor as soon as possible to fulfill the contract with Highroad plc. Otherwise, they may face the possibility of breaching the contract with Highroad plc. Since the tender is now in access of 10,000 from the original price, Workwell Ltd may wish to reduce its costs in other areas to compensate the high cost of sub-contracting. If, however, there is still time to search of other tenders before work is scheduled to start, Workwell Ltd could still look for a lower bid than Drainklear's.