Culture matters. This is what the whole discussion brings us to. The impact of culture is very significant that it needs to be addressed when evaluating matters in all areas. Why is culture so important? I think it is because humans' activities revolve around other human beings and the fact that individuals are different from one another sometimes makes things complicated. Culture, is one essential factor that makes humans different.
Many researches had been done to see the impacts of culture, dissecting as well as segmenting this wide and subjective area into categories that would assist humans in evaluating culture. Hofstede's 5 Cultural Dimensions attempted to group culture into 5 elements. His work has been used by many in analysing the impact of culture onto areas stretching from marketing to psychology. Hofstede's work is deemed comprehensive as the research covered a wide area of 50 countries. The establishment of each country's cultural scores is no doubt highly beneficial for researchers and international businesses.
This dimension is relatively easy to understand and could facilitate a first-timer in the process of learning about culture. In a way, it sets a boundary to a complex and wide issue which is beneficial for students especially. However, the learning process should be complemented with ideas at the other side of the coin.
One must note that the result of Hofstede's research does not represent individual's cultural preferences. It portrays a nation's cultural preferences as a whole. Thus, to truly understand individuals' behaviour, one must immerse oneself rather than observe and generalise. This leads to the criticism of culture not being able to be nationalised. It is argued by social scientists that subcultures in a country vary greatly in values and beliefs. This was what Hofstede overlooked and hence his generalisation is deemed unjustifiable. As an example, a study has shown that Italian and Swedish women have more in common with each other than their fellow males. Therefore, to a certain extent, it is believed that culture and nation cannot be equated.
Critics have been questioning the reliability of Hofstede's scores i.e. whether or not it is applicable in today's world. Hofstede's results of 30 years ago are thought historical, just as historical cost is viewed in the accounting field. For example, Japanese and Koreans nowadays are found to be more individualistic than Americans. This opposes Hofstede's national scores of Japan and Korea. Factors such as globalisation and upsurge of information technology may change a country's scores.
Hofstede's research is also regarded as biased by some critics. IBM workers in different countries were of different social classes. It is argued that the workers in developed countries may have belonged to an average social class whereas workers in underdeveloped countries belonged to the upper elite classes of their countries. This shows that the sample for the research was not of the same level and hence the biasness. Also, some had argued that IBM workers may not represent the whole country's population whom are not employees of IBM and they may not reflect the true nation's culture as their values are shaped by the US-based IBM culture.
In retrospect, personally, I feel that Hofstede's Dimension is a fairly good starting point to delve into this topic of culture. After all, it is used widely throughout the world. One cannot deny the usefulness of this dimension albeit the criticisms. Marketing researchers can use the model to compare actual behaviour at a countrywide level. Such observable measures are descriptive accounts of phenomena that reveal themselves in a similar manner across cultures. Perhaps new researches should be done in order to emulate Hofstede's, addressing the flaws present in the dimensions. But even then, dimensions and theories will always be criticised as no one can really know everything about culture and attend to its complexities. Culture changes overtime and is not static and despite differences, there are similarities and some convergences. Regardless of the difficulties, I believe new and better models can be developed. Till then, Hofstede still wins.