London was growing rapidly during the Tudor and Stuart period. As the population of the country as a whole doubled, the population of London quadrupled. In 1500 the population was just 50,000, but this had risen to 490,000 by 1700. There was a low fertility rate as only a small proportion of people were married and the poor living conditions in the capital resulted in a high mortality rate; yet the population continued to rise. The explanation for this comes from the high level of migration into the city. In order to counter the effects of low fertility and high mortality rates on the population, London needed around 7,000 migrants entering the city every year to grow at the rate it did. E.A Wrigley estimated that one in six people had lived in London at some stage in their life by the end of the seventeenth century. A. L. Beier and R. Finlay have raised the question of why it was London that attracted so many people. There were between 700 and 800 market towns in England, including a dozen major provincial cities, so 'the country was not devoid of possible competitors to London'. The motivations for migration into the capital are numerous. Some people's reasons to move to London were to get away from the countryside and smaller towns (push factors) and others were motivated by what the city had to offer (pull factors).
As Beier and Finlay have asserted, 'London evidently exerted a tremendous pull on migrants from an early date'. One explanation for this may have been the unique situation in London in which the capital city was also a great port. One of the main factors that encouraged migration was the centralisation of England's economic life in London. The shift from Mediterranean to Atlantic trade was beneficial to England, and hence to London which was one of the major ports. By 1700, London dominated English trade. It dealt with eighty per cent of imports and sixty-nine per cent of exports. By the mid-1540s London's cloth exports accounted for eighty-six per cent of the country's total woollen exports. Professor J. H. Hexter comments on the number of merchants who 'lived in the town but were not of it, and yet won there that beatitude of riches that enabled them to go back to where they came from'. Men would come to London to make their fortunes as merchants. The cloth trade 'unquestionably stimulated London's economy and migration to the capital'.
It could be argued that trade did not have much of a direct impact on migration as it only involved a small number of merchants. However, it did have considerable impact in other ways. Profits from trade were invested in other industries such as manufacture. For example, a trader called Thomas Myddleton set up a sugar refinery and a draper called Thomas Cullum financed a dying business. This sort of activity created job opportunities which were major pull factors for migrants.
There were many job opportunities in the city for professionals such as doctors and lawyers. There were also many jobs involving unskilled labour such as shipping and building. People could find jobs as street sellers or as water men taking people up and down the Thames in boats. Most migration was by younger people wising to find placements as apprentices or domestic servants. By 1600 the number of apprentices migrating to the city was between 4,000 and 5,000. During the period new craft guilds were established and membership to traditional ones increased. Production spread to the suburbs and provided thousands of jobs for migrants. It became an industrial area and specialised in the production of luxury goods in the mid-seventeenth century. 'These changes in turn attracted migrants' both for the job opportunities and the goods produced. Wages were a huge incentive as they were fifty per cent higher in London than in provincial areas. Moving to London for the economic benefits of more work and better wages was betterment migration. People found opportunities to rise to freemen, masters and girl wardens. For example, John Browne claimed in 1631 that he could not make a living dressing hemp in Leicester, but after going to London he was profitably self-employed and a freeman of the city and of the company of merchant tailors. People would follow their neighbours to London to see if they could have the same success. The story of Dick Whittington became part of English folk-lore at the end of the sixteenth century and Beier and Finlay note how there was 'a popular belief that the city's streets were paved with gold for the immigrant'.
As well as being the centre of economic life, London was also the centre of political action. This centralisation was a major pull factor for migration to the city. 'Generations of historians have connected the rise of the modern capital with its political role'. The number of Peers increased from around 30 in the 1560s to 90 in the 1630s. They would bring with them their family and servants which added to the growing population. The Royal household grew under the Reign of Charles I. While under Elizabeth there were around 1,000 in Court, this increased to around 2,600 under Charles I. The Court used to move around the realm in the High Middle Ages, but from the reign of Edward IV it remained in or around London. This 'attracted to the city the custom and residence of county landowners' who sought favour and office. The number of resident gentlemen in London increased and the number of MP's rose from 300 in the early sixteenth century to 500 during the mid-seventeenth. The Court also provided patronage for musicians and artists which drew them into the city.
However, Beier and Finlay believe that 'the direct influence of Government on London's growth has probably been overstated'. The size of the central government does not change much between 1580 and 1640 when London experienced its biggest population increase. The increase in officials came after 1650. By 1725 the number of officials had risen to around 2,700 from only 400 under Elizabeth. Nevertheless, even 2,700 officials and their family and servants would have only taken up around 'five and a half per cent' of the population of London; therefore, government membership cannot be considered one of the major driving factors for migration.
London was the legal centre of the country. The four Inns of Court, which were like England's third university, experienced a five-fold increase in admissions between 1550 and 1650. During term time there were around 1,000 students populating the capital. The Inns also employed many staff such as ushers, agents and scribes. The judicial centre of the country was Westminster, which observed a huge expansion in legal business in the sixteenth century. The land market expanded as church land was seized after the Reformation. This generated much legal business as the land was fought over. Women also engaged in legal business which brought them to London. They brought cases such as defamation, sexual offences and marriage disputes. This was a pull factor that drove migrants to the capital.
During the Tudor and Stuart period 'the landed upper classes increasingly resorted to London for business and pleasure'. The London Season was from October to June. Rural landowners would travel into the city for entertainment and shopping. Road transport was improving in the seventeenth century and the stagecoach was introduced which made it easier for frequent travel into the city. London was a commercial city where items that were not available elsewhere could be obtained, including such exotic goods as tea, coffee, wine, spirits and tobacco. The West End became an area of high quality shops in the late seventeenth century and attracted many rich landowners. The merchants helped to finance the extravagant spending of the aristocracy, encouraging them to come to the capital, by providing them with loans and pawnbroking arrangements. The elites were also enticed to live in London by the newly built mansions and squares. This 'influx of the landed classes boosted the city's population'.
It was not only the rich who came to London for the social aspects of city life. Many would come to see family and friends. There was much entertainment that was available to the poor as well as the rich. There was bull baiting and theatre productions in the Swan and the Globe. Brothels were also part of London life. Songs, jests and fables were produced in London and were discussed in the markets and alehouses. The alehouses were important places where migrants could procure food, drink, shelter, loans and contacts for finding work. London coffee houses also became popular towards the end of the seventeenth century, which were important in the development of the bourgeois public sphere as described by Jrgen Habermas. They were places where members of the general public would meet to discuss politics. People would move to London to be nearer this type of cultural movement.
Young women migrated to London as it was a place 'where the rigid controls of patriarchy... [were] more easily evaded'. Single women could socialise and court more freely than in the smaller, more kin-based communities of the rest of the country. These women migrants often married later then the women from where they originated. They often worked and earned independently for a few years before marriage. The anonymity of the city allowed some women to start anew if their reputation had been damaged at home. This type of migration involved both push and pull factors as the women were escaping the restrictions of the smaller towns and countryside and were attracted by the freer lifestyle in London.
Some people came to London for the specialist medical practitioners. By 1704 there were around 1,000 London apothecaries. People came to consult other specialists such as astrologers like William Lilly for which 'the Stuart city was also famous for'. Other people migrated to London for the educational opportunities available. The literacy levels in London were higher than the national average for men and women. Schools taught a humanist curriculum and there were public lectures that anybody could attend. Books were more readily available in London as it is where the printing presses were. Ballads and cheap pamphlets were produced on a large scale and provided writers with a regular, if low, income.
Beier and Finlay assert that 'people were pushed to London as well as pulled'. As well as going to the city to better themselves, many were pushed there by poverty. The latter became increasingly common between 1500 and 1700, whereas in medieval period migration primarily involved reputable workers wanting to improve their situation by becoming apprentices in the guilds. Clark and Slack have argued that it was the poor and destitute who were seeking labour and charity that 'probably formed the bulk of the 8,000 or so net immigrants whom late Stuart London absorbed every year'. This suggests that migration into early modern London was driven primarily by push factors.
As London increased in size, it needed more food. This placed an increasing demand on the agrarian economy which was forced to make improvements to increase production. These changes included the introduction of enclosure and engrossing, which led to depopulation in the countryside as less labour were needed. Beier notes how these changes 'pushed surplus labour out of advanced farming regions to London'. Most people in the countryside probably migrated to other areas of the countryside or to smaller towns before moving to London. However, this still effected the migration levels into the capital because increasing populations in small towns from migration and general national population growth meant worsening living standards and higher levels of poverty and unemployment. These were push factors that made people want to leave other areas of England and move to London where there were more job opportunities and higher wages. This was often a form of subsistence migration because people would have to move to London as they could not support themselves or their family where they were.
The success of London's trade and manufacture 'had wide ramifications'. Provincial out ports such as Southampton suffered as trade became centralised in London. Clark and Slack have observed that, 'as London continued to consolidate its lead in overseas and domestic trade, many provincial towns were forced to recognise the evident disadvantages of their position'. It may have also frustrated the depression of inland towns such as Coventry because of London's ready access to Low Countries' markets. 'Poverty not infrequently threatened to overwhelm English towns' and pushed people out and into the capital.
'London's massive growth... took place mainly because of two developments which encouraged migration: first, the centralisation in London of the nation's political and economic life... secondly, upheavals in the provincial economies', which have been discussed above. This explanation contains both push and pull factors that drove migrants to the capital. It was a combination of the two that encouraged so many to migrate to London in the early modern period.