Corporate Governance is concerned with holding the balance between economic and social goals and between individual and communal goals. Its framework is there to encourage the efficient use of resources and equally to require accountability for the stewardship of those resources. It looks at how a corporation is managed, in structure and process to achieve its aims and objectives.
Originally, before the notion social responsibility came to stage, organisations' objectives are primarily to maximise profits and shareholders' values. Yet, due to the increasing impact of stakeholders on organisations, companies are beginning to address the matter profusely. Thus, corporate social responsibility (CSR) has become one important area in organisations, specially addressing stakeholders.
At one glance, companies which are socially responsible are deemed good. However, arguments against CSR do exist. Corporations, which are mainly owned by shareholders are said to be depriving them from their property rights by being socially responsible. Personally, I think CSR is more of a complement to the shareholder approach because it will eventually increase a corporation's share value, provided its CSR is done appropriately. A corporation should attend to both its shareholders and stakeholders equally. No one approach is superior to the other, but this depends too on factors such as the current position of the corporation and its size.
In my opinion, Cadbury Schweppes (CSc) addresses its CSR very systematically, and at the same time aims to create value to shareholders. This forms the basis of its business principles. Managed by a board of directors, it has non-executive directors whom are independent of management. CSR is one of the areas dealt by the board's sub-committees. CSc communicates its CSR through CSR Report which was first published in 2002. Building around 5 CSR pillars, it aims to produce the best long-term results for all its stakeholders.
On the community front, CSc has invested in many programmes around the world to contribute to the society. For example, CSc team spent a day in a school in Costa Rica, helped in realising its projects, donated to the school and assisted the children in learning the supply chain process. This kind of activity made me think about the boundary of CSR. To what extent is CSR necessary to positively affect the company? Was the programme held out of sincerity and philanthropy or was it just a PR effort? Maybe the programme alone was not significant in increasing CSc's value, but a series of them would.
On the environment aspect, CSc reported a drop in water consumption in its production process, in a factory in France, due to its efficient water management system. However, I reckon a success in one factory does not represent the overall success of being able to reduce water consumption. Furthermore, it triggered me, how far does the relevant stakeholder, in this case, the environmentalists, can affect other stakeholders, namely consumers, in upholding their course? Consumers who are not civic conscious will keep demanding the products.
CSc works in ensuring that its suppliers are treated justly. Thus, besides merely buying cocoa in Ghana, it helped the farmers by providing wells for drinking water. However, CSc was criticised for not knowing where the supply of its palm oil came from, which is thought to be in Malaysia. It is found that 60% of the plantation villages where it obtained its palm oil from did not have schools. I think this goes to show that addressing CSR is not easy to the extent that every little thing matters and may not be worth considered. But I realised that this view is biased as I am not SCs' other stakeholders whom may take the matter seriously.
In retrospect, I think implementing CSR can do more good than harm to corporations as long as its benefits outweigh its costs. However, it is difficult to set a boundary to CSR, to determine the type of issues that need to be addressed as some I think can be trivial. But to say that CSR is not important is too extreme a view, as both shareholders and stakeholders are key players in a corporation. Perhaps considering both, in moderation is the key to success.