Strategy as a response to external Opportunities and Threats and to internal Strengths and Weaknesses as a means of achieving competitive advantage (de Wit&Meyer, 1998)
This view of strategy is what underlies SWOT analysis as a modern analytical approach used to support the search for a favorable competitive position.
It is the simplest form of presentation that is of practical value for describing a business and its environment. (Houlden, 1996)
I. Real opportunity - the strengths enable it to pursue opportunities successfully.
II. If the weaknesses significantly lower its performance, decision-maker must consider actions to overcome the weakness.
III. Real threat - it is not equipped to deal with the threat.
IV. Strength can help overcome such threat.
No weightings of factors
Difficult to determine which factors are the most important at the present time/ the most relevant for the firm?
Arbitrary classification on factors as weakness/threat or strength/opportunity
Iraq opening oil sector: threat - potential expansion of supplies, rising oil price
opportunity - profitable investment for giants such as Exxon
More important is to have a careful identification of these external and internal factors followed by an appraisal of their implications (Grant, 2005)
Strength versus distinctive competence
Strong capacity of a firm is not necessarily the unique competence in comparison to rivals.
Static and  not forward looking
Can only be done once, no point of review
Over-Simplification
Not good at dealing with a complex and often paradoxical world (Broklesby&Cummings) - Icarus Paradox - strengths potentially being weakness.
However, while SWOT is more appropriate for smaller businesses, its nature also leads to its wide application, from project to nation, where a relatively quick analysis is needed
.
Absence of ethical aspect and personal motive in strategic planning
- Certain industries such as mining must consider the degree of risk the society might entail. They may be examined against the standards of responsiveness to the expectations of society the strategist elects.
- What the executives want to do also forms an element of strategic decision.
Of all the components of strategic choice, the combination of resources and competence is most crucial to success. (de Wit&Meyer, 1998)
Provides little guidance to managers
Planners are left without indication as to where to search for such variables, or what to do after finding them in terms of how best to incorporate them in strategy formulation.
SWOT remains rooted in vagueness, relies on an over-simplified process. (Panagiotou, 2003)
It is an atheoretical framework, of limited prescriptive power for practice and minor significance for research (Dess, 1999)
Duncan, Ginter&Swayne (1998) suggested a four step model for assessing internal strengths and weaknesses. After initial survey of both strengths and weaknesses, the focus turned to resources and capabilities that can be used to build a potential competitive advantage.
SWOT's focus on the strengths rather than the weaknesses when evaluating a firm's internal capabilities is also used by Barney (1995) in his VRIO model.
SWOT serves as a stepping stone towards the implementation of the Balance Score Card and Strategy Formulation (Lee&Ko).
Combination of SWOT and Maxwell's six dimensions of quality (Storr&Hurst)
I have briefly learnt the framework before but was initially not confident if there would be enough to say about this simple model due to its limited content in both lecture handout and seminar presentation. However, by discussing with people with more subject knowledge and learning independently, especially via e-resources, I have realized there are much more insights to explore.
During the research of this assignment, one of the questions that I have found intriguing is that whether strategic analyses such as SWOT a creative interpretation of a problem situation (de Wit&Meyer, 1998), whose evaluation depends on the  idiosyncratic views held by strategists or a  logical analysis with which business managers could assess their competitive positions, hence choose the action from a variety of options that brings the best chances of success.
This assignment has left me with a genuine interest in the area of international strategies and strategic thinking, which I would like to explore further.
I have found this form of assignment both enjoyable and intellectually stimulating and would definitely put in more time into reading relevant literatures for my next reflective piece on Governance.