Society has always had a preconceived notion of black masculinity. Earlier theories of black masculinity pathologised black male sexuality. (Marriot, 1996) This racist attitude inevitably was at its peak during the years of slavery. Nineteenth century plantation societies saw the emasculation of black male slaves as they were stripped of all the symbols of masculinity - as defined by that society. However, with the twentieth century and the Black Power Movements there rose a different image of the black male as being hypermasculine, and this image became another racial stereotype with prominent figures in popular culture endorsing it. Ironically, much of the tension regarding the hypermasculine stereotype of black men is a logical cultural development for a group systematically denied full access to the socially constructed ideals of masculinity. As Bell Hooks or Kobena Mercer argue, historically the black man was denied the attributes of patriarchy. Whereas prevailing notions of masculinity imply power, authority and control, these were historically denied to black men since slavery.
The new black masculinity, which Hooks, Hortense Spillers, Michelle Wallace and other feminists state as patriarchal phallocentrism, is however supported by many black male scholars. The new black male, although still oppressed himself, exerts his power and dominance by the blatant projection of 'sexist phalocentrism' (Marriot, 1996) and violence. However, this development by no means imply that racism is no longer a problem in today's society. As Staples lament, it is very difficult for most black men to have access to the patriarchal hegemonic ideal. Legally sanctioned institutions of slavery may no longer exist, but persistent racist fears and ideologies continue to economically, politically, and socially oppress black men. According to recent statistics the inequal discrepancies between black and white America are as clear as ever. [The Associated Press, 2005] Black masculinity, therefore definitely belongs to the lower strata of hegemonic masculinity. But the machismo that the young black male flaunts often results in the stereotyping of black masculinity as being too physical, too hard. This black masculinity is a 'sexually defined masculine ideal rooted in physical domination and sexual possession of women... ' [Hooks, 1992] If this is the case, black masculinity is surely a paradoxical subject. Black men are therefore the oppressor as well as the oppressed, a view that changes depending on the context. Also the issues of class and sexuality complicates the study of black masculinity. Gay black males live a different reality. A study of the socially constructed black masculinities therefore is definitely a study of contradictory experiences.
When looking at the historical evolution of the gender identity of the black male, one is confronted with a masculinity that is defined significantly by the legacy of capture, importation and enslavement. As Mercer & Isaacs point out, the period of history which saw the rise of the imperial powers of the West coincided with the historical construction of sexuality. [Mercer & Isaacs, 1988] The white man's image of black people was stereotypical of that time. They were savages, heathens, others - who had to be 'civilised' - lead to culture and godliness.'.... One of the first proofs of this otherness was the nakedness of the savage, the visibility of its sex.' [Mercer & Isaacs, 1988, p. 107] To the white colonisers this led to the assumption that black people were oversexed and promiscuous, unlike the Europeans, who were bound by the rigidity of the Victorian code of sexuality. The traditional notions of sexuality being linked to race led to the idea of the black male being dangerous. The white masters took it upon themselves to emasculate the black man. The slaves were shown the ideal of masculinity - the white master, who was the patriarch, the caretaker of his family, the provider. Slaves were however debarred from having patriarchal privileges. A black slave father did not even own his own children - they belonged to the white master.
With the abolition of slavery, black men started about trying to fulfill their patriarchal destinies. However they soon found that equality was never achieved, no matter what they did. Critics (mainly white) stated that this was because black men were psychologically handicapped due to an inferiority complex from being emasculated. [Hooks, 1992] Bell Hooks has described the black man's cultivation and embrace of a hypermasculine image as a logical response to these antebellum and postbellum views held by white supremacists, which characterized black men as feminine, a rhetoric that 'insisted on depicting the black male as symbolically castrated, a female eunuch'. [Hooks, 1994, p. 131] By the time of the Civil Rights era, the political and rebellious Black Power movement articulated what Hunter and Davis refer to as 'a radicalized Black manhood, throwing off the imagery of the emasculated and shuffling Black male dictated by racial caste. The collective frustration and anger over the denial of manhood, identity and peoplehood that led to urban riots in the 1960s was seen as a powerful expression of masculinity and as a vehicle for social protest.' [Hunter & Davis, 1994, p. 23]
However, this anger of the black man, which was once seen as political, is today seen as dangerous. The 'gangsta' image is what the popular culture promotes, but it is derogatory to women, gays and is blatantly sexual and violent. Majors state that this is the way young black men compensate for their marginal position on the hierarchical ladder of hegemonic masculinity. This adoption of the 'cool pose' is infact a survival strategy. Over the years, in diverse ways, black men have responded to their shared experience of cultural alienation by adopting 'certain patriarchal values such as physical strength, sexual prowess and being in control as a means of survival against the repressive and violent system of subordination to which they were subjected.' [Mercer, 1994, p. 137] This leads to the continuation of the fear of the black man by white society. Marriot comments on the state's categorization of black youth as criminal and deviant, saying that this raises questions regarding the relationship between 'white law and black men'. [Marriot, 1996, p.187] Statistics prove this point, when looking at the criminal justice of the United States.
Homicide (murder) rates among black males more than doubled between1960 and 1990, and in general, violence has become the way of life for many black males.
Black males are dramatically over represented in the US criminal justice system.
Black males, who make up 40% of those on Death Row, are more likely to be condemned to death than white males who have committed similar crimes.
There are more black men in jail in the US then there are enrolled in higher education.
Drop out rates of young black males from schools are at the crisis proportions in between 40 - 70 of major US cities. [ Parker, 2005]
However, along with the existence of these inequalities, the image of the black male in popular culture, only helps in them being reinforced. The media focuses on the body of the black male - in a way animalising him. Muscles, as a signifier of 'natural' power, have been strongly linked with the black male body. So strong is the association, Kobena Mercer argues, that classical racism 'involved a logic of dehumanization, in which African peoples were defined as having bodies but not minds.' [Mercer, 1994, p. 138] Mercer claims many black men do not want this myth demystified, because in some ways (e.g., physical strength, sexual prowess), it raises them above the status of white men. The two primary means to legitimate success for black males in popular culture are sports and music. Sports icons such as Michael Jordan, Mike Tyson, Shaquille O' Neil perform these images to perfection. This results in the consistent association of black men with extremes of physicality and masculine posturing. The media has commodified this black masculinity. Contemporary advertising has come to recognise the selling power of the black male image. The new wave of 'body culture' has put the physical strength and sexual power of black men under the spotlight.
However, as much as the body has been related with the 'virtues' of masculinity, it has also been associated via racial and class prejudices with the insensitive, the unintelligent, and the animalistic. Also, the more one's identity is linked to a hypermasculine persona based on the body, the more uncultured, uncivilized, and bestial, one is considered to be. Following the binary logic of the male/female, nature/culture, uncivilized/civilized, body/mind dynamic, blacks have historically and symbolically been represented as pure body and little mind.
Because of this racist ideological paradox, blacks in Western culture have been forced to shoulder the burdens of the body itself. In contemporary culture black men are often seen more as beasts, as rapists, as gangsters, as crack-heads, and as muggers - literally as bodies out of control - than they are as fathers, as scholars, as statesmen, and as leaders. [Mercer, 1994; Hooks, 1992] It is perhaps this split between the mind and the body that marks one of the greatest threats facing blacks today.
However, black men are happy embracing this image. Majors calls this the 'cool pose'. He says black men adopt this mask of masculinity as a survival strategy. They do this in order to gain the ever-elusive phalocentric dominance and to challenge white hegemony.
Majors, drawing from Staples work, argues that black males have accepted the traditional values of masculinity but are so restricted by social and political factors that many of them have been deeply frustrated by their inability to enact these traditional masculine roles. 'Cool pose originated as a coping mechanism for the "invisibility," frustration, discrimination, and educational and employment inequities faced by Black males. In response to these obstacles, many of these individuals have channeled their creative talents and energies into the construction of masculine symbols and into the use of conspicuous nonverbal behaviors (e.g., demeanors, gestures, clothing, hairstyles, walks, stances and handshakes).' [Majors, 1994, p. 246]. In his examples of the cool pose, Majors includes the use of humor, feigned emotional detachment, and specific stylistic expressions like the black athlete's inventive basketball dunking, football spiking, and endzone dancing, as well as black hip hop musicians aggressive posing and graceful yet strenuous dancing styles. A prime ingredient of the cool pose as a compensatory form of masculinity is an exaggerated style of toughness. 'Symbolic displays of toughness defend his identity and gain him respect; they can also promote camaraderie and solidarity among black males.' [Majors & Billson, 1992, p. 30] Unfortunately, as Majors point out, this ritualized hypermasculinity performed by many black men as a cool pose, also promotes dangerous lifestyles (e.g., gang bangers, tough guys, drug dealers, street hustlers, and pimps) and reinforces harmful stereotypes
Violence, fierce homophobia, and derogatory attitudes towards women are blatantly reflected by this 'bad ass' masculinity which is portrayed by these black men.
However, it is not just the black rapper, who holds this attitude. Black male scholars such as, Amiri Baraka, George Jackson, during the Black Power movements, attacked white masculinity and revealed a frighteningly misogynist attitude. Women, especially black women were seen as adversaries. As Hooks say, the attitude of Baraka and Jackson might be dated. But even now 'most black men remain in a state of denial, refusing to acknowledge the pain in their lives that is caused by sexist thinking and patriarchal, phallocentric violence that is not only expressed by male domination over women but also by internecine conflict among black men... In popular culture, representations of black masculinity equate it with brute phallocentrism, woman hating, a pugilistic "rapist" sexuality, and flagrant disregard for individual rights.'[Hooks, 1992, p. 103] More public figures such as Eddie Murphy, Spike Lee etc blindly exploit the 'commodification of blackness and the concomitant exotification of phallocentric black masculinity.' [Hooks, ibid.] Murphy's film Raw is one of the most graphic displays of this. Another example could be the following song by the rapper 50 Cent:
The idea of the woman being a possession who can be cast aside whenever the need arises is a glaring aspect of this song. The song is all about the 'gangsta' lifestyle mentioned earlier, reflecting the black mans voracious sexual appetite. 'The "pimp" is a sign that celebrates black male virility in a climate that seeks to emasculate black men. The successes of artists like 50 cent and Chingy are not merely representatives of black youth culture, and popular culture in general. They are signs that embody extreme polarities embedded in our society, poverty and wealth, racial and gender divisions, national and global borders, that converge to make our impoverishment a source of liberation and our liberation a source of impoverishment'. [Brown, 2003]
However, these ideas of raw sexuality and physical domination of women, have been present in the music of black musicians for a long time. The soul and blues musicians of the earlier 20 th century narrated 'the playboy role' in their music. [Hooks, 1992, p. 95] This was at that time an alternative male lifestyle. Timothy Brown argues that, music was and still is an escape route for black men. Not just for the musician, but the market towards which it is targeted - the working class, the social class to which most black people belong. [Brown, 2003] The dominant media image of the black male is such - a rebel playboy, overly sexual and hypermasculine. However, this is only a generalization. As Hooks say, not all black men are like this. Societal construction of black masculinity is one which is non conformist. But black men are outside societies masculine ideal because they were excluded from it. The assumption in predominantly white societies is that black masculinity is just a working class masculinity. This though mostly true is another generalization towards black masculinities.
In order to challenge such generalized opinions about black masculinity an important issue that has to be looked into is that of homosexuals in the black community. As Janice Cools state, one of the key issues that black gay writers have had to confront in order to attempt to redefine black male masculinity is the negative attitude with which members of their own community view homosexuality. Influential voices of the black community such as Baraka, Frances Cress etc, rather than attempting to understand black homosexuals, place them in a situation where they are isolated and rejected by members of their own community. Black homosexuals are then doubly 'othered', by race and by gender preferences. [Cools, ] However, Hooks states that homophobia in black societies is not all that it is made out to be. [Hooks, 1989] In fact, citing from her own childhood she says that poverty resulted in the growing importance of a sense of community, and ones identity was not determined by his/her sexuality. However she does say that, whereas gay men were respected as important members of the community, lesbian women were not supported. Some people seem to hold contradictory opinions, such as the man Hook talks about who laughs at homosexuality to fit in with a group, but at the same time cares for his own lesbian sister. [Hooks, ibid.] The idea that both Cools and Hooks state for homophobia is that homosexuality is spread by the white to segregate the black society. Also religious factors - the Christian church calling homosexuality a sin is another reason that might lead to this.
Looking at all these different factors we have to admit that the subject of black masculinity is surely paradoxical. The different experiences that black men experience are surely contradictory. On one hand, black men are among the most impoverished and economically disadvantaged groups in American society, and on the other hand they are the most feared. They stand for heterosexuality on one hand, but at the same time a noticeable number of black men also happen to be homosexuals. Black masculinity therefore truly embodies contradictory experiences, black male being the oppressor and the oppressed.