Foucault's first volume of The History of Sexuality begins with an examination of the ways in which our contemporary interpretation of sexuality has been shaped by historical trends. He opens, with a chapter entitled 'We 'Other Victorians,'' sarcastically narrating:
Foucault labels this set of cultural attitudes about and beliefs toward 'our restrained, mute, and hypocritical sexuality' the 'repressive hypothesis.' He swiftly undercuts the widely-held belief about Victorian repressiveness with both documentation and theorisation that in the nineteenth century there was the multiplication of discourse concerning sex in the field of exercise of power itself:
This Foucauldian notion of a constant 'incitement to speak about' sex is the result of what he names a 'discursive explosion'. (Foucault, 1998: 17) Although this 'explosion' was often produced as a means to contain and control sexuality, Foucault asserts that the idea that Victorian sexuality was repressed or silent is a modern invention. (Foucault, 1998: 36-49)
Thus in 'The History of Sexuality', Foucault attempts to disprove the thesis that Western society has seen a repression of sexuality since the 17th century and that sexuality has been unmentionable, something impossible to speak about. In the 70s, when this book was written, the sexual revolution was happening. The ideas of the psychoanalyst Wilhelm Reich, saying that to conserve your mental health you needed to liberate your sexual energy, were popular. The past was therefore seen as a 'dark age', where sexuality had been something forbidden. (Poster, 1984: 121 - 122) Foucault, on the other hand, states that Western culture has long been fixated on sexuality. Social convention, not to mention sexuality, having created a discourse around it, thereby making sexuality ubiquitous. The concept of 'sexuality' itself is hence a result of this discourse. And the interdictions also have constructive power: they have created sexual identities and a multiplicity of sexualities that would not have existed otherwise.
Keats points out that in Foucault's initial depiction of the Victorian sexuality implying increasing silence and secrecy, he is almost immediately able to present the difficulty facing the advocates of this repressive hypothesis
While analysing Foucaults ideas on Victorian sexuality, one of the issues that seem to stand out the most is the idea of confession.
Historically, there have been two ways of viewing sexuality, according to Foucault. In China, Japan, India and the Roman Empire have seen it as an "Ars erotica", "erotic art", where sex is seen as an art and a special experience and not something dirty and shameful. It is something to be kept secret, but only because of the view that it would lose its power and its pleasure if spoken about.
In Western society, on the other hand, something completely different has been created, what Foucault calls "scientia sexualis", the science of sexuality. It is originally (17th century) based on a phenomenon diametrically opposed to Ars erotica: the confession. It is not just a question of the Christian confession, but more generally the urge to talk about it. A fixation with finding out the "truth" about sexuality arises, a truth that is to be confessed. It is as if sexuality did not exist unless it is confessed. Foucault identifies an element of social control in this.
The nineteenth and early twentieth centuries are Foucault's main concern in his encounter with the repressive hypothesis. During this period, sexuality and power became intertwined in several distinct ways. Sexuality was developed as a secret, which then had to be endlessly tracked down as well as guarded against. Take the case of masturbation. Whole campaigns were mounted by doctors and educators to lay siege to this dangerous phenomenon and make clear its consequences. So much attention was given to it, however, that we may suspect that the objective was not its elimination; the point was to organise the individual's development, bodily and mentally.
With enlightenment, the view of sexuality as something sinful to be confessed mutated. It was adapted to modern demands of rationality by turning itself into a science. Foucault makes a strong distinction between what we would still today call science and a prejudicial doctrine on human procreation.
The doctrines on sexuality postulated several "unnatural" sexual behaviors. In the 16th century, the focus was on regulating the sexuality of the married couple, ignoring other forms of sexual relations, but now other groups were identified: the sexuality of children, criminals, mentally ill and gays.
But homosexuality was not the only object of study for the medical "science". Foucault identifies four reoccurring themes:
The body of women became sexualized because of its role as a child bearer. The concept "hysteria" was invented and seen as a result of sexual problem
The pedagogization of the sexuality of children. Children should at all costs be protected from the dangers inherent in masturbation and other sexuality
The socialization of reproduction. The importance of sexuality for reproduction is recognized and put into context in the study of population growth.
The sexuality of adults becomes an object of study and all forms of "perverse" aberrations are seen as dangers.
Foucault emphasizes that the aim of these new moral codes was not to abolish all forms of sexuality, but instead to preserve health and procreation. Many forms of sexuality were seen as harmful and they wanted to protect health and the purity of the race. A mixture of ideas on population growth, venereal diseases and heredity ("degeneration" was to be avoided) created the idea that many forms of sexual conduct where dangerous.
This view makes Foucault one of the first constructivists" in this area, claiming that sexuality and sexual conduct is not a natural category, having a foundation in reality. Instead it is a question of social constructions, categories only having an existence in a society, and that probably are not applicable to other societies than our own.
Looking at all the facts and arguments mentioned, I can thus have said to have looked at the Foucauldian ideas of sexuality in general and the sexual repression during the Victorian times in particular.