The doctors asked Phillip Roth whether they should put his dying father on a life support machine. Roth had previously persuaded his father to sign a living will, but he hesitated now and asked himself this question. "How could I take it on myself to decide that my father should be finished with life, life which is ours to know just once?"
This is a sad question that many of us would be grateful to never have to ask ourselves. But as technology takes giant steps into ever more advanced ways of making life better, it also discovers methods of clinging on to life - however unwillingly a person may want to. So science leads us to philosophical questions that are not something new. Is life truly better than death, even if that life is only filled with unspeakable pain, physically or mentally? Should be able to choose the way we die? Is a doctor who abides by the wishes of a patient and assists in helping them die a dignified death, a murderer? Should physicians then never involve themselves in conduct that may bring about death? In this essay I plan to explore euthanasia in the context of today's society. Should it be sanctioned or prohibited. I aim to explore both sides of the debate as I reach a conclusion, in my opinion, of whether medical euthanasia is truly defiant of the core principles and values of the medical profession.
Euthanasia has always been a highly charged topic, presenting a controversy morally, emotionally and politically, and the presentation of former human rights lawyer, Lord Joffe's Bill: Assisted Dying for the Terminally Ill has brought the issue into the public eye. Opinion on this subject is highly divided and strongly debated. In order to appreciate the complete argument we should begin with a definition of the term euthanasia. According to Collins' English Dictionary, euthanasia is defined the most straight forward of terms as "the act of killing some one painlessly, especially to relieve suffering from an incurable illness". There are many aspects, categories and sub categories of euthanasia. In this essay we will look at those forms which involve a medical third party, usually a doctor.
Medical intervention into euthanasia takes place in several different methods. One of these methods is the most usual injection of a lethal drug. This is known as active euthanasia, as it is a deliberate act done to shorten life and could be voluntary (at the request of the patient), non voluntary (done at the request of a proxy speaking on behalf of a patient who cannot speak for himself. This is purportedly done for the patient's own good) and involuntary (done without the authority of the patient of his proxy. Again purportedly for the patient's own good or to terminate the burden his existence places on society.) The most common form of medical intervention into euthanasia is what has been termed "Physician Assisted Suicide" or PAS. This involves providing the means for a patient to induce his/her own death. This could mean writing or filling a prescription for medications in a quantity large enough to cause death when taken by the patient.
Other controversial issues are the issuing of Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders, where a patient can instruct the hospital staff to refrain from resuscitating her if she suffers cardiac arrest. According to the British Medical Association and Royal College of Nursing guidelines, the decision to do this lies in the hands of the consultant with appropriate consultation of the family. Also at the centre of the debate are the decisions to switch off life support. It is now the doctor who makes the first step in suggesting that life support be turned off.
Should medical professionals be involved in conduct that is designed to bring about death? One of the basic principles of medicine is the precept "First do no harm". Deliberately taking the life of another, even if that life was ebbing away, constitutes murder, both in the eyes of the judiciary and possibly in the eyes of the public. The consequences of doctors being involved in Euthanasia can go in two different directions. To the few who are strong willed and capable of making a competent decision about how they would want to end their lives- but due to illnesses that cause their body to decay- are unable to, the knowledge that a doctor they trust could end their life in a peaceful manner would be a relief. But what then of the weak willed and the easily bullied?
Many of problems already being witnessed by the Netherlands which has legalized euthanasia and physician assistance in certain circumstances by its Termination of Life on Request and Assisted Suicide (Review Procedures) Act. One of the most important consequences is the erosion of the relationship between doctor and patient. A physician shall do all he can to cure, most times becoming a friend to the patient. The Remmelink report, a study conducted by the Dutch government into Euthanasia, prior to the 2002 Act revealed that "more than half of Dutch physicians considered it appropriate to introduce the subject of euthanasia to their patients. They seemed not to recognize that they were thereby telling the patient that his or her life was not worth living, a message that would have a powerful effect on the patient's outlook and decision." Dr. Herbert Hendin, M.D., Executive Director of the American Suicide Foundation and Professor of Psychiatry at New York Medical College said that when a suffering patient requests euthanasia, it is a strong cry for mental and physical relief. The assurance of a "caring, sensitive, and knowledgeable physician who can address their fear, relieve their suffering, and assure them that he or she will remain with them to the end, most patients no longer want to die and are grateful for the time remaining to them"
Another consequence that anti-euthanasia activists claim is inevitable is what they term the "slippery slope argument". In general form it claims that "an apparently innocuous small step can act as the thin edge of the wedge to bring about undesirable major changes further in that direction." Are guidelines strong enough to keep such a potentially dangerous and controversial practice in hand? According to research carried out by the afore mentioned Dr. Herbert Hendin, even the broadest guidelines established by the Dutch courts and the Royal Dutch Medical Association KNMG, are largely ignored by doctors engaging in the euthanasia practice. The situation in Netherlands, illustrates perfectly the dangers of the "slippery slope". Research shows that "the Netherlands has moved from assisted suicide to euthanasia, from euthanasia for people who are terminally ill to euthanasia for those who are chronically ill, from euthanasia for physical illnesses to euthanasia for psychological distress, and from voluntary euthanasia to involuntary euthanasia (called "termination of the patient without explicit request").
The situation in Netherlands is an example of how euthanasia can quickly slide out of control, unfortunately taking the weak and the elderly with it. There is evidence of termination of life without an explicit request from the patient in as many as one in five cases. The mentally troubled and depressed are helped to die with no thought of healing. And withdrawal of treatment with minimal safeguards is common. The murders of many, committed by Doctors who chose to abuse the trust placed in them by their patients, such as Dr. Harold Shipman and Dr. Jack Kevorkian are also striking examples of what can go wrong. It is easy to see that the patient's best interests were not what motivated them.
How would legalising euthanasia impact society? Dworkin asks many pertinent questions on this subject. How would people begin to see doctors? How would doctors see themselves and their vocation? Is it not reasonable that many would begin to fear going to the hospital for medical treatment or that their doctor would not be putting in his fullest effort in aiding them? "Would a profession that helps people die, even though with the best motives, grow more careless or less zealous about saving lives? Would legally sanctioned killing make the community as a whole more callous about death?"
If we were to grow too dependant on the fact that euthanasia is available if life gets too unbearable, it is doubtful then that the science of pain killing would take any steps into advancement. After all, necessity is the mother of invention. Palliative care and the technology of pain killing have improved within the last few years. Research carried out in 2000, showed that almost all pain suffered by terminally ill patients could be alleviated with simple drug treatments that have minimal side effects. The reality however is that doctors usually under prescribe these pain killers as they are afraid of the adverse effect an unnecessarily high dose would have on the patient. Proper training could easily remedy this problem.
Palliative care is the spiritual and emotional, as well as physical care of a dying person. It is supposed to offer them a peaceful and pain free transition from life to death as well as helping the family members cope with their loss. Proper palliative care is perhaps a healthier alternative to euthanasia as it offers families a chance to spend the last few moments of a loved one's life together. But proper care is difficult to provide as it is both physically and psychologically demanding. A quick, easy and cheap injection seems an easier option for most people. Especially in societies such as the U.K. where the health care system is constantly attempting to conserve resources, euthanasia may seem like the better option.
The fact remains that medicine has always been associated with principles such as sanctity of life and first do no harm. Healing has been the priority since the beginning of modern medicine. To give doctors the power to decide who is to die and who is to live is not only dangerous but it is the antithesis of proper medicine. Heal, not kill. Comfort, not abandon. The Anthony Bland case raised the question of whether a patient in a persistent vegetative state (PVS) can be disconnected from life support and allowed to die. The Law Lords ruled that in cases of PVS alone, this can be done. They saw the danger in their decision and issued many guidelines for instances such as this, but it still provokes many questions. Is technology and diagnostic skills advanced enough to detect when a patient is irreversibly in PVS or when there is a chance for recovery. Some experts who gave evidence were confident that they could diagnose it correctly, others were more dubious, claiming that in some instances intensive treatment could result in limited recovery. Is it right then, that doctors should act as executioners, especially when we cannot be completely certain that there is no hope left?
However consider this survey conducted by YouGov, and dependant third party polling service. The "YouGov survey showed strong support for euthanasia. Asked if they [members of the public] thought "that people who are terminally ill should have the right to decide when they want to die and to ask for medical assistance to help them die if they are unable to end their own lives" 87% said yes, with only 6% opposed. Asked if people should be able to assist the suicides of close relatives without fear of prosecution, 67% said yes." This is further confirmed by the fact that Lord Joffe informed the House of Lords, on presentation of his Bill, that over 80% of the public support the legalisation of Euthanasia. There are two sides to the story of euthanasia. One must keep in mind those who are dying horrible painful deaths and for those who would not want to be at the mercy of strangers in palliative care. Cases such as Lillian Boyes, dying of rheumatoid arthritis which was so painful that even the most powerful of painkillers left her in agony. Or the case of Dianne Pretty, who took her case to the European Court of Human Rights, to fight for a right to die at the hand of someone she trusted: her husband. The slippery slope argument claims that many who do not wish to die would be pressured into a convenient death. But one must keep in mind those who do not have anything else but the dignity of their death. What of their rights?
In the case of Lillian Boyes, her doctor for thirteen years had become a trusted friend. And it was in his hands that she placed her death. No doubt many who are in this same position would trust their doctors to give them a painless and easy death. But is killing, even for a worthy purpose, not the antithesis of medicine? Perhaps it depends on concept medicine hold for each of us. Is it merely to cure, as it has always been in the past? Or does it mean to improve the quality of life? Or to make a patient's life more comfortable? Is it archaic of us to expect a doctor to only prescribe medicines designed to cure? If that is the case, surely palliative care and pain killing medication, which do not cure, but only make a dying patient's last moments comfortable? What of the painkillers that ease the agony of the terminally ill, but are known to shorten life? These are necessary aspects of medicine, even if they do not fall exactly into the sphere of cure. Perhaps it is the patient and his best interests that should come first.
Whether it is the sanctity of life or the sanctity of the quality of life is a debate that will haunt the subject of euthanasia for a long while to come. The topic will always be opposed by pro life, religionist activists. Yet it will always be fought for by people who believe in autonomy and choice, right up until the end of life itself. The question facing us today is whether medical professionals should be involved in this practice. Is it the antithesis of proper medicine? Perhaps it is unavoidable that doctors and nurses will be embroiled in this issue. They play a key role in our lives and more often than not, become part of our lives. Euthanasia is an issue that if not legalised and regulated will still continue in the shadows. The Netherlands model may not be what we wish for the U.K., but the Oregon model has shown no signs of abuse. Doctors quietly assist suicide by prescribing the necessary drugs and do no more. Statistics show most of the time, the patients do not follow through with their plans.
If Euthanasia was legitimised, doctors would definitely play a key role, as they do not. Strict guidelines should ensure that a patient who asks for help in committing suicide is first counselled extensively and assessed by independent parties as to whether this request was made competently and under duress. Granting the request should be the final resort. This is key; euthanasia must never be the first resort. However strict guidelines require much manpower and resources. With a health care system that is already strapped for funds and resources it is doubtful how well euthanasia can be regulated.
In conclusion, all rests on what society's concept of proper medicine is. Is it, as afore mentioned, limited only to cure? Or does it encompass the patient's best interests and a goal to improve the quality of life? Perhaps the oath sworn by all doctors says it all:
"Most especially must I tread with care in matters of life and death. If it is given me to save a life, all thanks. But it may also be within my power to take a life; this awesome responsibility must be faced with great humbleness and awareness of my own frailty. Above all, I must not play at God." - Hippocratic Oath