In order to asses whether X, Y and Z might be successful in challenging the decisions made by the ABC College regarding their various drug offences, several factors have to be taken into account. First whether they would be eligible for judicial review has to be considered before the merits of each case are examined to find the probable outcome. It is only an indication, albeit a reasonably clear one, as the rules involving judicial review are evolving all the time.
Judicial Review is where administrative action is scrutinised by the Administrative Court, a subdivision of the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court, to monitor the legality of the decisions the body has made or the actions it has carried out. The Civil Procedure Rules describes it as
It is only applicable to 'public bodies' and will not be granted if the claimant has a private-law cause of action against the defendant, for example in contract, or has a right of appeal against a decision. Therefore in this instance the first point to determine is whether the school can be classified as a 'public body'. Previous to the landmark case of R  v Criminal Injuries Compensation Board Ex Parte Lain
 judicial review was only available against bodies with powers derived from statute. After this case the power was extended to bodies set up under prerogative powers. Then R v Panel on Take-overs and Mergers ex p. Datafin Ltd
 took it a stage further to include bodies which were 'governmental in nature' regardless of whether they had direct governmental support. The shift was towards the extent and nature of the power that the body exercised rather than the direct governmental link. Therefore as the functions of the school are important and of suitably public nature the possibility of judicial review would be granted. It would be a different matter if the school had been private rather than state run, as private schools are not available for judicial review.
Although in theory as it is a state school judicial review is possible, there are other procedural bars that that the cases must surmount regardless of the nature of the case. These are the rule of standing, exclusivity and keeping within the short time limit. To be granted judicial review, the claimant has to have 'sufficient interest', that is a close relationship between the claimant and all the circumstances of the case. Generally the courts take a broad definition of this and individuals who have been affected by the action or decision usually have enough to constitute sufficient interest. The courts also have the power to use their own discretion, for example in R v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs ex p Rees-Mogg
 where as the matter was of public interest, the right for judicial review was granted. As all three pupils are directly affected by the decisions and actions of the school panel. Therefore they each have standing. The exclusivity principle has been slightly relaxed since Lord Woolf's comments in Trustees of the Dennis Rye Pension Fund v Sheffield City Council
, therefore all three pupils would satisfy the procedural constraints. The other factor is the time limit imposed on bringing a case to court; it is three months from when the claim arose. As the information regarding the time span in the cases is not available, it is assumed that they were all brought before the court within the limit. It is also important to note that it is only the legality of the decision not the merits of it that will be assessed within the judicial review boundaries.
Therefore as the three cases fulfil these conditions, each case will have to be assessed to see whether they satisfy the grounds for judicial review set out by Lord Diplock in the GCHQ case. These grounds are 'illegality, irrationality and impropriety'. Illegality covers cases where a body acts beyond the powers conferred on it my legislation (that is, actions are ultra vires) and where a decision-maker incorrectly informs himself as to the law. `Irrationality' covers cases of exceptional unreasonableness, in the `Wednesbury'. Procedural impropriety covers failures to comply with procedures laid down in legislation and, in some circumstances, breaches of Natural Justice. Each of these will be discussed further, in context when they arise in each case. Each pupil must have a claim in any of these grounds in order for a successful application of Judicial Review.
In a claim for judicial review the court may grant one of the following remedies,
The other remedies include injunctions against the public body and a declaration by the court of the legal position in the matter before the court. Finally judicial review provides a possible means to claim damages but only in conjunction with any of the other remedies. In all three cases a quashing order would probably be most appropriate.
Pupil X has two bases for his argument. First is that the medical report that details the possibility that the second drug test was inaccurate. This may well be seen as not taking relevant considerations into account. The concept of 'relevant consideration' is subjective and can be variable but the fact that the medical report if included may have had a definitive effect on the hearing outcome, suggests that it would be sufficient grounds to dismiss the decision. Or it could be argued that there has been an error of fact, for example in R v Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, ex p.A
. The law in this area though is still developing and it may be wise for pupil X to claim through the concept of 'natural justice.' In the landmark case of Ridge v Baldwin
, it was held that the obligation to observe natural justice extends to administrative decision-making even to that of schoolteachers. X's claim would rest upon the fact that the refusal to consider the medical report was a breach of the duty to act fairly, and the right to a fair hearing, audi alteram partem. There exists 'the right to make representations, or to submit reasoned arguments rebutting any allegations'. It seems that pupil X has a very good case on the basis of natural justice but as Lord Denning said 'the rules of natural justice vary infinitely' so it is not a certainty.
The other grounds that pupil X might be granted a quashing order is that the whole policy of automatic expulsion is irrational and/ or disproportionate. This case is regarding a policy of the school, and it has been held that policy decisions of public bodies can be judicially reviewed, especially where an individual's fundamental rights are affected, which is clearly the case here as expulsion affects the student's right to an education. In order to succeed with a claim that this policy is irrational, it would have to fulfil the Wednesbury criteria of being 'so unreasonable that no rational decision maker could have reached it." There are several reasons why this claim would surely not succeed - the policy is clearly in place to protect students, drugs are illegal and many schools indeed have stricter policies than this. Therefore, the policy is not unreasonable, and so not open to judicial review through this means. Proportionality is not currently a separate ground for review in English law, although it has been suggested. It is a principle of European Community Law, however. To succeed, it would have to be shown that the action if restricting a fundamental right was not disproportionate to the public purpose sought to be achieved. Here, the public purpose of disallowing drugs into a school is clear, and the intensity of the review for proportionality may be even greater than using the Wednesbury Test, so it is unlikely to succeed on either ground. Therefore pupil X's best option would be on the grounds of natural justice where he has a solid case to get the decision reviewed.
Pupil Y is claiming that there was a degree of bias on the panel which meant that he did not receive a fair hearing and that one member fell asleep and therefore did not hear her defence. The rule against bias, nemo judex in sua causa is another rule of natural justice. The claims of bias are that a teacher who Y had previously made a complaint about and a well-known campaigner with a local anti-drugs group were both on the panel. These would both have to be satisfied by the 'real likelihood of bias' test set out Porter v Magill
, in which the House of Lords set these rules:
Even though the complaint was dismissed it is reasonable to assume that the teacher concerned would harbour ill feeling towards pupil Y which might influence their decision in this matter. The fact that one of the other panel members is a anti-drugs campaigner echoes the situation in Ex parte Pinochet
 where it was found that due to amnesty international links, one of the panel (Lord Hoffman) was believed to have had the potential to be bias. Therefore in this situation the teacher may well be harsher than another because of the feelings they obviously have against drugs. A quashing order would be appropriate with the decision being dismissed and a new hearing to be set up with non-bias teachers.
The fact that one of the panel slept through the explanation by pupil Y about why she should not be suspended so close to her GCSE's suggests that she did not receive a fair hearing. The maxim audi alteram partem requires that every person should be given a fair hearing. This idea is also part of the European Convention on Human Rights that is now incorporated in British law. Article 6 states that everyone is 'entitled to a fair and public hearing'. The hearing may well fail the proportionality test. Combined with the bias claims, it is clear that pupil Y did not receive a fair hearing, as she was not able to present her case to the whole panel and those she did present it to have a possibility of bias. She was punished much more severely than the minimum punishment especially for a less serious drug offence. Therefore these factors, combined with the decision in R v Chief Constable of North Wales ex. P Evans  where no chance was given to comment on the allegations, suggests that pupil Y has a good case for judicial review.
Pupil Z has two issues over which judicial review is possible. First that the panel took into account his poor grades when making their decision and thus acted in an ultra vires manner. Since  Anisminic LTD v Foreign Compensation Commission
 almost all errors of law are now subject to judicial review. The panel took into account 'irrelevant considerations' and thus may lead to the illegality of the decision. In this hearing the issue was about drug taking and not his grades. It, again, is a subjective decision though and would be very difficult to prove that the panel had taken his grades into account unless they admit as such. Therefore pupil Z will have to rely on the other issue, that they exercised their discretionary power for a purpose other than the one they were granted. The idea of improper purpose is linked to failing to disregard irrelevant facts and has the same connotations. However, following the cases of Westminster Corp ex p Soblen and Ex p Kahn, if it is held that the true or dominant purpose was justified, then the secondary objective that is attained is deemed not to be relevant. Due to the confusion of case law in this area, it is very difficult to assess whether this would be a reasonable ground for review and also difficult to prove. The argument that the panel was bias is also a possible avenue for pupil Z has the teachers have a monetary interest for him to be expelled. Due to the difficulty in proving either factor pupil Z does not have an exceptionally strong case.
Therefore, X seems to have a very positive case, Y a little less so but still has a chance and depending on the level of proof, pupil Z might struggle. If these parties appealed to the local authority board about the decisions instead of applying for judicial review, the outcomes could be different. This is because in appeals, the board will be able to look at the merits of the cases and decide whether the decision was right or wrong. The board could even decide to substitute the decision for its own decision. This is obviously different to judicial review, which merely refers the decision back to the original decision-maker if there has been a successful review. The appeal board would have much more discretion to look at whether the decisions were fair, and could quash the expulsions or suspensions if the board saw fit, whereby a successful application for judicial review could not change the decision of the board directly. The board will not be bound to follow the procedure of a trial, and would give the parties a fair opportunity to correct any relevant statement that was prejudicial to their view. Appeals can be on a question of fact or solely on the merits of the decision. Therefore the decisions can be more subjective and tailor made to the individual cases. Pupil X would still have the outcome of a high chance of success in quashing the panel's decision. The Local Authority board will probably quash the decision and order a new hearing where pupil X can make his case to ensure a fair trial. They would take into account the medical report before making their decision. On the second point, however, an appeal board would not be likely to find the automatic expulsion policy disproportionate or irrational for the same reasons as why it would not lead to a successful judicial review claim.
For pupil Y the Local Authority board need to rule as whether there is the possibility of bias, there does not have to actually have been any bias, the possibility is enough to rule the hearing void. The Local Authority board has the power to decide the case themselves and maybe reduce the severity of the punishment. The Local Authority board can actually make their decision considering the fact that her GCSE's are close and therefore may rule in her favour. The onus of proof would be on pupil Z to prove that the reasons that he was expelled were due to external factors and not concerned with the drug offence committed. It is a good idea in theory but is still a very difficult thing to show and prove so even the Local Authority board isn't able to help you. Therefore it is quite unlikely that the Local Authority Board will find in favour of pupil Z.
Judicial Review is still very subjective and therefore there are often no concrete answers. This compounded with the fact that the merits of the case do not (or should not) enter into the decision making process. All three pupils have the power to use judicial review but may well have varying degrees of success.