My first impressions of this module where those of confusion and trepidation. Whereas in all modules previous our learning had been steered on an exact and defined course, we were suddenly confronted with the concept of free interpretation. We had to 'take responsibility for [our] own learning...tolerate the ambiguity of a course without tight boundaries' which was rather a new method of learning. It is very much one that is becoming not only useful but also essential in terms of future career options. This was accentuated in a Daily Telegraph article where the education editor, John Clare, commented on how academic qualities are no longer enough. What is also required is " 'personal capital', which includes such 'soft' skills as the ability to communicate, persuade, adapt, solve problems, show good judgement, initiate change, work in teams, be creative", which I believe this module is providing. Interpretation is very subjective and the fact that there is no 'right answer' makes it both challenging but also more personal and therefore more enjoyable. Shakespeare is a great example of how varied interpretation of the same text and facts can be-since the 16 th century, right up to today with the BBC's 'Shakespeare Retold', people have been putting their own spin and views across about his plays. It was once I had assimilated the idea that this module was all about gaining 'soft skills' by applying our own interpretation on situations that I embraced the challenge and module as a whole.
I feel that so far the primary medium of communication of the module has been through the presentations given by the various syndicate groups; and so this is the area that I will focus this piece on. The opportunity to prepare, present and view presentations on a variety of relevant law and management issues has, and will, provide invaluable and transferable skills. The fact that we have to work in a team for a single goal whilst trying to incorporate the various personalities to create an amicable yet effective group dynamic is both interesting and a potential asset. It is very useful to be able to critique others approaches to the task, have feedback on your own and 'honestly evaluate your performance'. This enables me to improve my performance personally and for us to improve as a group. For example, it has been advised that talking behind the computer (or similar) disconnects the speaker with the audience as it creates some what of a barrier between them and therefore dilutes the attention to the speaker. The process of presentations also allows for more creative applications to topical problems, such as role-plays. I feel the motto, '"Tell me and I will forget, Show me and I will remember, Involve me and I will understand", sums up the concept perfectly and is one that I would like to base our future presentations around. Therefore through this module I would like to explore more engaging methods with the audience in order to improve the effectiveness of our presentations. Coupled with this is the fact that presentations need to be 'geared not to the speaker, but to the audience' and so any 'gimmicks' used must be appropriate.
By conveying the information from the module in the form of presentations, it allows each group to explore deeper into the subject matter, as well as deciding what direction that will take. Hart comments you 'cannot read everything on all approaches relevant to your topic' but this method of teaching allows groups to more then scratch the surface of issues and take responsibility of the aspects that they feel are pertinent and interesting to the rest of the group as a whole. This is especially true when different syndicates have different case studies. Although it is intriguing to see how the various groups construe the same scenario and issues (as was the case in Kilon Osuus), more knowledge is ingested when each group has differing key themes. Although I feel I have improved in these areas to a degree this term, I feel I still have further to go into training my mind to think 'outside the box' and to not be afraid to experiment with new mediums. Also not to necessarily accept the obvious and conventional interpretation of a situation but feel comfortable exploring less defined avenues. In the article mentioned previously by John Clare, he describes 'The Star' graduate, one that 'offers the complete package', not only academic qualifications but also 'excellent "soft skills"'. On the Mumford and Honey Learning Styles Questionnaire I came out as both a strong activist and reflector. These seemingly contradictory qualities can, I believe, be blended together to produce a successful team player and effective employee. I would like to continue to hone my skills so that these two aspects of my personality can compliment each other so that I can develop into a 'star'!