The 1957 Treaty of Rome set its immediate goal of a single market which by the 1960s meant a levy on duty on goods traded between the 6 member states. In July 1987 the Single European Act came into force, outlining policy for completion of the single market. In 1993 there were 12 member states which soon became 15 and then on June 1 st 2004 10 new members joined the EU. Further expansion seems inevitable but what is the rationale and main aims behind this reasoning for the creation of an EU single market?
Fundamentally the rationale for the EU single market is the creation of free and fair trade between its member states. This could occur through removal of duties or governments not giving unfair advantages to domestic produces. Further, there are 4 freedoms of movement that encompass the single market; goods, labour, capital and services. The Treaty on European Union (1991) outlined a 3 stage development of the single market; liberalisation of capital movements and alignment of currencies in Exchange Rate Mechanism, economic convergence of member countries and finally the introduction of single currency and Economic Monetary Union (based on member state assessment).
Aside from political factors, a more integrated EU would improve its competitive position within the world economy, leading to a healthier situation for the member states and more trade from outside the EU. Essentially, the single market is held together by competition policy. The 1985 White Paper propounded the removal of physical (frontier and customs controls), technical (national rules and regulations) and fiscal barriers (caused by differing tax systems) which would create full and free movement of labour, goods, services and capital. Lord Cockfield set out 282 steps to a Single Market; by 1992 92% had been achieved however 4 major hurdles remained that restricted Europe's competitiveness. Asymmetric technical standards and regulations between member states, complex administration procedures on customs transactions between EU states, restrictions on public procurement procedures and a lack of market integration in service industries were identified. Removal of these barriers to raise both competition within the EU and the EU single markets global competitiveness was clear rationale for single market creation.
Elimination of these barriers was seen as pivotal to cost reduction and making Europe more competitive but also as a driver for greater innovation. Differences in technical regulations in member states meant that costs for intra EU trade transactions, was unnecessarily high. Complex procedures regarding customs transactions also raised the cost of intra EU trade as did the reduced ability to transact freely in certain services e.g. the free movement of capital. Finally public procurement procedure was seen to limit competition for public purchases to member state suppliers, thus raising prices of purchases. There was scope for transaction cost reductions, which could potentially be achieved through key barrier removal.
If the rationale is the removal of barriers what are aims behind such rationale? Removal of key barriers was aimed at reducing transaction costs, increasing competition and inciting enterprise to exploit new opportunities. More specifically, 4 types of effect can be cited. A reduction in costs may occur due to better exploitation of economies of scale. Secondly cross border competition would force companies to operate more efficiently and thus push prices closer to the costs. The third effect would see new patterns of competition and innovation and the fourth effect would see a development of new business processes and practices stimulated by internal market dynamics. All these effects were in line with the removal of the 4 movement barriers. For example, removal of technical barriers would allow the existence of a single set of technical specifications. This in turn would reduce the cost or manufacturing, research and development, and marketing. Reducing the cost of intra-state trade was a clear aim of single market rationale.
The costs of non Europe e.g. not integrating a Single Market can be read as an alternative aim for the creation of a Single Market. The Cecchini Report (1988) was crucial in identifying the possible benefits of a Single Market. Cecchini estimated that the economics benefits of a single market were between 5.8%-6.4% of total EC GDP with a third of these benefits occurring through increased economies of scale. Cecchini also argued that there were significant benefits from improved government budgets as a result of "second round macroeconomic effects". It is important to appreciate the implications of not creating a single market, to realise reasons for its establishment.
Potential benefits are some of the aims of the rationale for the Single Market. There are impacts on the macroeconomic level; elimination of custom delays and costs, increased competition in public markets and liberalisation of financial markets. Estimations on completing the internal market were that GDP would grow 4.5% in the medium term. Consumers were also set to benefit from lower prices, greater choice of goods and services, and availability of work within EU. Specifically consumer prices were estimated to fall 6.1% in the medium term.
Non economic drivers of a Single Market are important, such as provision of public goods (defence, law and R&D), elimination of negative externalities (through environmental policy) and greater social and political integration. The Single Market was also seen as a tool for combating racism, bigotry and enhancing social understanding between member states. One aim was also to combat the ageing populations faced by the most developed countries, as workers from countries with younger demographics would be able to deploy their skills in other states. Leading from this was a mechanism to allow those with skills and experience to move freely. EU single market creation, also aimed to break down language, societal and cultural barriers that existed amongst European nations.
Results of Single Market creation should be considered when assessing how successful the aims and rationale have been. European Commission estimates 2.5 million jobs have been created and 800 billion euros of extra wealth created since the inception of the Single Market in 1993. However estimates by PwC claim that less than half of all companies think the Single Market has had a positive impact on them and 90% of businesses think that significant barriers remain. For example trans-frontier labour movement is negligible within the EU with only a few specific groups seeming willing or desperate enough to move.
In conclusion I think the rationale for the creation of the EU single market was the removal of physical, technical and fiscal barriers with the intention of generating free and fair trade between member states to facilitate transaction cost reductions. Creating free movement of labour, goods, services and capital was also a major driver. Aims of the rationale were improving the situation for consumers and businesses by lowering prices, increasing GDP levels, lowering unemployment, making businesses more competitive through economies of scales and raising the innovation levels. The overall aim was to make the EU more competitive in the global economy. The creation of EU Single Market was also a vehicle for closer political and social integration between nation states. Creation of the EU Single Market can be seen as one stage the process of complete EU integration, Economic Monetary Union and creation of a single European currency.