This study investigated whether first year university females had significantly more disordered eating than a control group of non-university females. It was hypothesised that low self esteem as a result of leaving home for the first time, and having to integrate a new peer group would be the cause of this. Questionnaires were used to measure participants eating behaviour, body shape satisfaction and self esteem. Attitudes towards the new peer group were measured using specific questions on the self esteem questionnaire. It was found that the first year students did have significantly more disordered eating than the control group, although having low self esteem and integrating a new peer group were not significant causes of this. It may be that low self esteem and having to integrate a new peer group play a part in increasing eating deviancy in first year students, although these may not have been shown to be significant because they combine with other factors associated with university life such as stress and depression. It was clearly found, however, that first year females have far more problems with their eating than females who are not at university.
Eating disorders are becoming an increasing problem. The concept of the thin body ideal is being internalised through the social setting and causing more people, particularly adolescent females, to resort to severe dieting techniques (Markham, Thompson, Bowling, 2005). Unhealthy eating attitudes are an immensely important area of research as it has been shown that up to 20% of young women participate in intense dieting practices at some point in their lives (Kurth, Krahn, Nain and Drewnowski, 1995). Eating disorders are an issue affecting millions of people worldwide, with 3.4% of the population having a diagnosis (Kjelsan, Bjornstrom and Gotestom, 2004). It is likely the incidence rate for eating disorders is higher than this, although many people suffering from them deny the problem and therefore do not seek diagnosis or treatment. Research in this area is particularly important as it appears that more and more people are developing the disorders and concealing them. Once the causes for eating disorders have been fully investigated it may be possible to accurately identify individuals who are predisposed to suffer with their eating behaviour.
There are many factors which may trigger an eating disorder. Lieberman, Gauvin, Bukowski and White (2001) found significant causes to be peer pressure to be thin, social reinforcement and body related teasing. They present the argument that as peer relations are very important in adolescence, if the social group values the thin body ideal highly then individuals aspire to achieve this, even through deviant eating patterns. In addition to this Blowers, Loxton, Grady-Flesser and Dawe (2003) found that the media plays an important role in the internalisation of the thin body ideal and increasing body dissatisfaction, and therefore, contributing to the development of eating disorders. These can be considered social influences over eating behaviour and are directly linked to how the individual perceives themselves in relation to others. This appears to be a highly influential factor for eating pathology because if a person's evaluation of their body does not meet the real or imagined body ideal set by peers, or by the media, then deviant eating behaviour seems to be the coping technique adopted to achieve what is believed to be desirable (Gordon, 1990).
Believing that your body is inadequate and not acceptable to social standards is captured overall by low self-esteem. It has been shown by McLaren, Gauvin and Steigler (2001) that low self esteem is a significant contributor to eating pathology. It appears that it is a combination of low self esteem, peer and media pressure to be thin, and an internalisation of the thin body ideal that predominantly triggers eating pathology.
The present study is concerned with investigating the combination of both internal and external factors within a particularly vulnerable group of individuals, first year university students. Moving away from home for the first time is one of the most stressful life changes a person will ever have to adjust to (Seligman, Walker, Rosenhan, 2001). This study intends to investigate whether eating behaviours become more deviant during the first year of living away from home at university compared to a control group of non-university participants. Moving into halls of residence at university entails integration into a new peer group, which may heighten feelings of insecurity and low self esteem. It has already been shown that low self esteem is a significant contributor to disordered eating behaviour, and this may combine with students seeking the thin body ideal in order to successfully integrate with their new group of friends. When adolescent girls are beginning new friendships they believe it is important to be thin, and compare themselves to other members of the group (Guendouzi, 2004). Attainment of the thin body ideal was also found to be a common topic of conversation (Guendouzi, 2004). This is particularly important when investigating the effect integration of a new peer group has on eating behaviour as it is likely that when girls first start university and are making new friendships, this is a safe topic of conversation as body concerns an issue many girls have as a common ground, which may increase pressure to be thin.
It is likely that the low self esteem associated with moving away from home for the first time will enhance the desire to be slim to make a more favourable impression on the new peers. This is because many believe the more attractive you are, the more likely you are to be popular. Langlois and Stephan (1977) (as cited in Lieberman et al, 2001) found that physical attractiveness is linked to more positive peer relations and social acceptance. Students may resort to disordered eating to increase their chances of achieving the thin body ideal, and therefore, increase their chances of being popular within the new group of friends they are living with, and also to counterbalance low self esteem.
It is also important to study first year students as the majority of previous research has centred upon participants aged between 14 and 16 years. It has been shown however that eating disorders are prevalent up until the age of 25 (Vanderlinden, Grave, Vandereycken, Noorduin, 2001). It is therefore important to study eating behaviour of older adolescents (hence first year university students), as this seems to be an area which needs enhancing.
Assessments will be made using the Eating Attitudes Test (EAT) (Garner and Garfinkel, 1979, as cited in Corcoran and Fisher, 2000) to measure eating deviancy, the Self Esteem Rating Scale (SERS) (Nugent and Thomas, 1993, as cited in Corcoran and Fisher, 2000) to measure self esteem levels and the Body Shape Questionnaire (BSQ) (Cooper, Taylor, Cooper and Fairburn, 1987, as cited in Corcoran and Fisher, 2000) to measure body shape dissatisfaction. Peer group influence over self esteem will be measured using a revised version of the Self Esteem Rating Scale (as detailed in the method section). It is hypothesised that having to integrate a new peer group and low self esteem will lead to more deviant eating behaviour in first year university girls compared to a control group of matched age participants. Females only were used as eating disorders predominantly affects this sex by a ratio of 9:1 females to males (Gordon, 1990).
The graph below compares the means and standard deviations for the experimental group, control group, and the normative means for the three dependant variables; EAT, BSQ and SERS (for a table of exact findings see appendix).
It can immediately be seen from this that there are higher levels of eating deviancy and body shape dissatisfaction for the experimental group although the control group have slightly lower levels of self esteem.
The one-way between-subjects MANOVA was performed to investigate the three dependant variables; eating attitudes, self esteem and body shape satisfaction. The independent variable was whether participants were first year university student living away from home (experimental group), or matched age non university student (control group). There was a significant difference between the experimental group and the control group on the combined dependant variables: F (3,128) = 4.08 , p= 0.008; Wilks' Lambda = 0.91.
When the results for the dependant variables were considered separately, the only difference to reach statistical significance using a Bonferroni adjusted level of 0.17, was eating attitudes: f (1,130) = 9.54 p< 0.002. The magnitude of difference between the means of the experimental group's scores for EAT and the control's was moderate (eta squared =0.068). After consulting the means for the experimental (M19.88, SD,10.66) and control group (M14.88, SD,7.71) for the scores for EAT it is clear that the experimental group is significantly higher than the control. Body shape satisfaction scores were not significant using a Bonferroni adjusted level of 0.17 or using a significance level of 0.05: f (1,130) = 3.13 p> 0.079. Self esteem levels were also not significant using a Bonferroni adjusted level of 0.17 or using a significance level of 0.05: f (1,130) = 0.042 p> 0.838.
An independent t test for SERS including only the questions relating to "new friends" or "others" found no significant difference between the means for the experimental group (M=4.53, SD=18.59) or the control group (M=2.65, SD=16.82) where t (132) = 0.609, p> 0.544. The magnitude of difference in the means was very small (eta squared = 0.002).
A one sample t test compared the means for the experimental group (M=19.88, SD=10.66) with normative means for EAT (M=15.6, SD=9.3). This showed that the experimental group had significantly more deviant eating behaviours than the normative group t (66) = 3.262, p = 0.002. A one samples t test showed a significant difference for BSQ between the experimental group (M=102.27 SD=34.08) and the normative group (M=81.5 SD=28.4) where t (66) = 4.952, p = 0.000. A one samples t-test also showed a significant difference for SERS between the experimental group (M =19.97 SD= 27.74) and the normative group (M=0 SD=0) where t (66) = 5.849, p = 0.000. This illustrates that all three dependant variables for the experimental group were significant when compared with the established normative values.
A Pearson product moment correlation coefficient was used to investigate the relationship between the three variables measured by EAT, BSQ and SERS. For the experimental group there was a medium positive correlation between the scores for EAT and BSQ (r = 0.476, n = 66 ,p < 0.0005) with 22.7% shared variance. There was also a medium positive correlation between the scores for EAT and BSQ for the control group (r = 0.341, n = 66, p< 0.005) with 11.6% shared variance. This shows that high eating deviancy correlates with high body dissatisfaction for both the control group and the experimental group.
The scores for EAT and SERS scores were also correlated. For the experimental group there was a medium negative correlation (r = -0.447, n = 66, p< 0.0005) with 19.98% shared variance. There was also a small negative correlation between scores for EAT and SERS for the control group (r = -0.285, n=66, p< 0.02) with 8.1% shared variance. This shows that high deviant eating behaviour correlates with low self esteem for both the control and experimental group.
The most general conclusion which can be drawn from the MANOVA is that there was an overall significance between the experimental and control group on the three dependant variables; scores for EAT, BSQ and SERS. There was however only a significant main effect for EAT, which means that there was only a significant difference between the groups in their eating behaviour and not in their self-esteem levels or body shape dissatisfaction. When an independent samples t-test was conducted between the control and experimental group for the revised measure of SERS, where only questionnaires relating to the new peer group were included, there was still no significant difference between the two. This suggests that experimental participants had no more self esteem issues regarding their "new friends" than control participants had with "others".
There was, however, only a non significant relationship for self-esteem between the experimental and control group used in this study. When a one sample t test was conducted between the experimental group in this study, and the established normative mean specified by Nugent and Thomas (1993), there was a highly significant difference. After consulting the means it was clear that the experimental group had lower self esteem than their non clinical control (although the experimental group did not have lower self esteem levels than the control group used in this study). It may be that low self esteem does contribute to disordered eating behaviour in first year university girls, although it was not shown to be significant with the MANOVA due to generally low levels of self esteem amongst the control group. In first year students however this may combine with several other factors linked with disordered eating not investigated in the study, for example, stress and depression (Vanderlinden et al, 2001). The control group of participants (not at university) may not resort to disordered eating to try and counteract feelings of low self esteem as they may not also have to cope with depression and stress and being away from home for the first time.
Data for the experimental group was also collected from The Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts. This is a performing arts theatre which may encourage outgoing, confident students. It may be that this had an effect on the overall self esteem levels for the experimental group and caused them to be higher than they would be if a non performing arts university had been selected. If a non performing arts institution had been selected then first year university students may have had significantly lower self esteem levels than the control group.
It is therefore clear from the results that although first year students do have significantly more deviant eating behaviours than a control group of matched aged participants, it is not attributable to low self esteem and having to integrate a new peer group, as the t test investigating the influence new friends had proved also not to be significant.
After correlating the results using a Pearson's product moment co-efficient it can be seen that there was a medium strength negative correlation between scores for EAT and SERS, showing that high eating deviancy did correlate with low self esteem levels. Although this did not prove to be significant in the MANOVA there was 19.98% shared variance with r = -0.44. When EAT and SERS were correlated for the control group there was only a small negative correlation between the two with only 8.1% shared variance with r = -0.28. Correlations do not indicate cause although it does show that low self esteem correlates more strongly with disordered eating for the experimental group.
The fact that there was no main effect for BSQ on the MANOVA suggests that the disordered eating patterns are not caused by body image. This might be because being at university does not increase body dissatisfaction and therefore cause more deviant eating behaviours. Although there was a stronger correlation between EAT and BSQ for the experimental than control group, body image alone cannot be considered a significant difference in disordered eating between the experimental and control group.
Although low self esteem and integrating a new peer group have not been shown to be significant factors in causing disordered eating behaviour for first year university students, it has been shown that they do have significantly more deviant eating behaviour than the control group. This may still be indirectly a result of being in a new peer group, as shown by the findings of Langlois and Stephan (1977) (as cited in Lieberman et al, 2001) who found that physical attractiveness is linked to more positive peer relations and social acceptance. Attitudes towards attractiveness and the benefits attractiveness can bring are established from an early age. This tends to be well known and seems to have internalised as a concept in young girls (Markham, Thompson and Bowling, 2005). This was also supported by Leiberman et al (2001) who found that more popular girls are more likely to have eating disorders. This suggests that girls who want to be popular, or want to maintain popularity tend to resort to severe eating behaviour and are under the assumption that slimness and attractiveness equals popularity.
If this is the case then integrating a new peer group may be a significant factor on eating behaviour in first year students. This study investigated the affect new peer group had over eating by measuring insecurity felt amongst new friends. It may not be that individuals feel insecure with their friends, but that they feel competitive amongst their new friends and engage in dieting tactics in order to establish themselves as the most attractive, thereby increasing their chances of being popular. This could not be established from this study which concentrated on the effect new friends had on self esteem levels. Lieberman et al (2001) found that peer group influence was the single biggest influence over disordered eating.
Another explanation as to why first year students may have significantly more deviant eating behaviour may reside in the element of perceived control. Individuals with the propensity to suffer from disordered eating tend to have a deficiency in their ability to influence their own environment (Gordon, 1990). They feel that they cannot control their surroundings or their lives and so resort to controlling the one thing that they feel they do have control over, their eating behaviour. Being independent and moving away to university may increase the sense of lost control and therefore present a crisis in self worth (Gordon, 1990). This may increase disordered eating as the individual may increase their control over their dieting behaviour as they feel a decrease in control of their circumstances. If this were the case, then it may be that the individuals already have the eating problems and it is just that moving away from university, and the challenge and stress accompanying this, enhances rather than causes the eating deviancy. It may be beneficial to compose a longitudinal study investigating how university affects eating patterns before and during university as opposed to comparison with a control group.
It may be that in this study self-esteem levels and integrating the new peer group were not significant due to a number of confounding variables. The SERS questionnaire was established in 1993. As it is now nearly ten years later it may be that there has been an increase in the levels of self esteem of the population in general. This could be why when the experimental group was compared with the control group there was no significant difference, but when the experimental group was compared with the normative values Nugent and Thomas (1993) identified, there is a highly significant difference. It may be that the questionnaire needs to be modified to account for this possibility. It is also possible that social desirability bias may have played a role in self esteem and peer group influence not being significant, as nobody wishes to portray themselves as having low self esteem and participants may not have liked to admit that they did feel inferior to their friends, despite the fact that the questionnaires are anonymous. People who are low might not want to recognise or express this due to reaction formation.
The format of the questionnaires may also have proved a problem. To increase reliability and validity three established questionnaires were used to create one. The main problem here is that all three used a slightly different scale. This may have caused confusion for participants, who might have used the wrong scales whilst answering questions. Experimental care was however taken by explaining in prose form at the beginning of each questionnaire that a different scale was being used for each section. The scales were also repeated every time questions continued onto a new page so participants would not have to rely on memory to use the scales. Human error may however have meant some participants may have used the wrong scale for the questionnaires. Other issues may have influenced results such as whether participants had a boyfriend at university. This may have increased self esteem levels and reduced the effect a new peer group may have had over individuals who had boyfriends. Also the distance from home participants were may have had an effect. Participants living closer to the university may not have had such low self esteem as they are still relatively near to their parents. In further research it may be beneficial to account for these individual factors.
Due to the fact that integrating a new peer group and low self esteem have not been shown to be significant causes of the difference in eating deviancy between the control group and the experimental group, there appears to be plenty of scope for further research. It may be beneficial to stay with a new peer group and self esteem levels but use different methodology to ascertain what influence these have over disordered eating practices. It is clear that although these were not shown to be significant they do have an effect and it may also be beneficial to look at the effect of a new peer group in a different context. Instead of viewing it from the stand point of a feeling of inferiority to peers as this study does, it may be possible to study it from a competition of popularity standpoint, led by the research of Langlois at al (1977) and Leiberman et al (2001). Depression and family factors may also play a role in increasing disordered eating behaviour in students and more research may be needed in this area. It may be that a new questionnaire needs to be established particularly looking at these issues to ensure validity and to ensure it is up to date and relevant to this generation. Further research may also look at the prevalence and causes of disordered eating for male students. It is however important to stay within the region of students as clearly there is an effect of going to university on students eating behaviour. This can also be supported by Kjelsan et al (2004) who found 6% of undergraduate women think they have an eating disorder, which is far higher than the national predicted prevalence rate of 3.4%.