I approached 'Critical Issues in Management' with an open mind, uncertain as what to expect. I personally felt the title was very broad in nature, and so saw issues such as personnel management and leadership featuring heavily from initial perceptions. Skills that I thought would be required and developed would be team work, presentation and leadership. All of which are important and transferable to the role of a good manager. My expectation of the module was that one of the underlying themes was to develop critical thinking.
The module started with an ice breaker session which served as a good opportunity to assign syndicate groups and get contact details of fellow group members. The first lecture was delivered by Frances Hall and covered presentation skills. From my time as an intern at Accenture I had participated in a presentation skills workshop, and a seminar on effective structured communication which meant my presentation skills were at a good level. So although I didn't learn anything new from the lecture, it served a good purpose to refresh and solidify in my mind the fundamentals of a good presentation such as positive body language, a clear structure to the presentation and use of appropriate visual aids.
The lecture in week 3 titled "What is Management and Where Does It Come From?" provided me with some interesting points to consider as I learned about Management from a new perspective. I was interested to learn that management as a formal concept developed in the US between 1820 and 1860. From this I also learned the distinction between management as a structure (for getting things done) and as a process for planning and improvement.
The first full seminar involved two group presentations, my group being one. A case on sexual harassment was refreshing in that its content was vastly different to those of my other, more numerically based modules. Having only had a week to prepare for this presentation, my group was forced to gel quickly which I felt we did with a reasonable degree of success. Clear communication and a commitment to deadlines were crucial in pulling the presentation together. Although the presentation proceeded smoothly we received constructive feedback which reinforced the importance of engaging the audience and using positive body language. I hope to incorporate this in future presentations during seminars. The lecture in week 4 provided a useful insight into critical theory and modern consumer culture, particularly how material goods are often a replacement for non-material needs.
A particular lecture which I feel changed my own views on a topic was that of week 5. I learned the different views on the role of management. It was interesting to hear why managers adopt new ideas for different reasons. We covered six perspectives such as the rational view and the need for power and to further an individual's career. By considering different perspectives I think it makes it easier to understand an individual's behaviour and why managers may act in a particular way.
Unfortunately I was unable to attend seminars in week 6 and 8 (when I was due to present my book review) as I was attending job interviews. For this reason I feel it is pertinent that I provide brief points of learning from the book I have been assigned. I have learned that firms must think globally but execute locally if they are to remain competitive. Further, truly "world class" firms are based on having sufficient concepts, competence and connections. Despite missing the seminar in week 6, having spoke to members of my syndicate group the key learning points concerned presentation technique particularly engaging the audience through asking audience questions and trying to achieve a consistent flow to delivery.
Overall, I feel that this course has greatly added value to my own learning process. The course is building on the skill set that I have been developing over the past two years; more specifically presentation and teamwork. The seminar sessions have been much more useful to me than the lectures as I have been able to bounce ideas of other individuals and we have more time to develop ideas further. I have not gained as much as I would have liked from the lectures, which for some reason have not added much to my own learning relative to the interactive platform offered by the seminars.