This report will analyse and evaluate the operation with emphasis placed on Service Quality. Recommendations for improvements and a critique of techniques used will be included as appropriate.
'The Oriental Star' is an 'all you can eat' buffet restaurant that offers more than 40 Cantonese and Indian dishes. It is independently owned and managed by Mark Harwood, who describes the service: "We offer an excellent service of authentic Chinese food in a buffet style.". The restaurant offers a lunchtime and evening buffet (Monday - Saturday) and an all day buffet on Sunday.
The Service Concept is a core task in managing service operations, and is the understanding of what the service provides and how it is perceived. Edvardsson (1998) suggests the service concept is a combination of customer outcome, customer process and prerequisites for the service. This is information regarding five aspects of the organisation. The organising idea is the fundamentals of the service experienced by the customer, while the service experience relates more to the customer's experience of the process and how they are dealt with. The service outcome is the end product of the service and the service operation is how the service will be delivered. Finally the value of the service is the benefits to the customer evaluated against the cost incurred. The Oriental Star service concept is figure 1 below.
Three methods were used to collect primary data. Further details are in the appendices. Company information was also obtained from restaurant visits and personal experiences.
In most businesses but especially service industries the customer is king. Customers are "the final judge as to how well the quality of the service matches up to requirements, and, by their continued support, determine its long-term success". The business should first aim to meet customer expectations, and eventually to exceed expectations. Along this progress, careful management of expectations is required to ensure that the gap between expectations and delivery is minimised. Delivering an excellent service comes through doing what you promise and dealing well with the unexpected. The integration of front and back office operations is also important as "Effective service delivery requires the co-ordination of front- and back- office operations."
Underpinning service quality is a consideration of the operation as a whole, and thus the entire outcome and experience of the customer is service quality. The relationship between expectations and perceptions goes a long way to explain the level of service quality. Perception is crucial to understanding as the reality of the service delivered by an organisation is of that perceived by the customer. Each customer may perceive a situation differently due to their personal and emotional circumstances. For example a customer already in a bad mood will be less inclined to tolerate a wait in a restaurant, than one who is in a pleasant mood.
To ascertain the service quality for Oriental Star both the internal view and the external view should be examined. From conversations with the manager it is clear that an "excellent service" combined with "authentic" food are the foundations of the service. Appendix 1 shows that the manager rated the service offered, the quality of service from staff and the quality of food offered as very good, the highest possible rating. Using the 18 quality factors model (Johnston 1995b and Silvestro and Johnston 1990) and feedback from the Oriental Star staff it is possible to capture the aspects of the service quality of Oriental Star. Attentiveness / helpfulness of the staff were stressed as important, particularly clearing empty plates and asking customers for drinks when appropriate. The manager also rated the layout of the restaurant as very good and said it was important that restaurant has a pleasant appearance and was kept tidy. Communication is also part of the service quality. As customers do not pay until they leave the restaurant it is important that the restaurant communicates the price of the buffet and its nature e.g. all you can eat.
By asking the manager how they coped at busy times and it is clear that flexibility is part of the service quality: "All the staff are fully qualified and good at their jobs, the only provisions we need is to rearrange the tables". He was keen to mention that they happily cater for large parties. Reliability, the consistency of performance applies particularly to the constant replenishment of dishes. The manager named Aromatic Crispy Duck as the best selling dish and thus particular attention was paid to ensure that this was constantly stocked. Finally responsiveness is part of the service quality offered by Oriental Star as it was stressed that customers should be able to receive their buffet food swiftly. This belief also underpins the restaurants desire to have a quick turnover of customers to maximise the turnover of the space available as it was indicated by the manager that he wished to have a larger restaurant.
The service quality explained by the restaurant employees should be compared with the findings from customer responses as this may highlight any gaps in the perceived service of both parties. Figure 2 shows a graphical comparison of how the customers rated the various factors against how important they thought there were to Oriental Stars' service.
Figure 2 shows that the category rated with the highest mean value was price of the food compared to other restaurants. Appendix 2 shows that 84% of customers surveyed thought the price was good or very good. This also compares favourably with the importance rating given by customers to price (4.16 against an importance rating of 4.28). The factor which scored the lowest with customers was queuing time, which received a value of 2.8. However it appears that this factor is rated highly to the service quality delivered by Oriental Star with a rating of 3.8. Customers seem to think that queuing times contributes significantly to the service quality. Some customers also said that value for money depended on how much they had consumed. Some customers indicated that if they had only consumed 1 plate of Chinese that they would not consider this value for money. The general opinion was that 2-3 plates represented value for money.
All the factors were rated higher for importance to the service quality delivered, than the actual standard. From the sample of 25 this may indicate that there is a gap between the actual rating of factors contributing to the service quality and how important they are perceived by the customers. For example overall service provided by Oriental Star was given a mean rating of 3.5 out of 5, but the perceived importance to service quality was 4.1. There is a further gap between these customer ratings and that given by the manager who rated the service offered as 5/5.
This gap analysis highlights the areas where there is a difference between the actual standard delivered and the standard desired by customers. This analysis is important for many reasons. Firstly it can help concentrate efforts to close the gap on factors where the importance to service quality is higher than the actual rating. Also in areas where the gap is minimal or zero the management might be able to focus less on this factor. Finally in areas where performance may be higher (although not applicable to these results) than the importance to the service quality it shows management that they would be better off focusing efforts elsewhere. Analysing the gap between the standard that the manager thinks the restaurant is offering and the standard rated by the customers provides interesting findings. For all the same factors the manager has rated them higher than the mean rating of the 25 customers. This indicates that the manager believes that they are delivering a service quality of a higher level than customers believe. This is a significant area for improvement, as not fully understanding customers may have a detrimental effect on sales.
Grouping the factors of the service quality into four groups provides further insight. These groups are defined in terms of a factor's ability to dissatisfy and delight. This is a useful technique because it facilitates the identification of factor's that may merit improvement, and contribute to a higher level of service quality. Figure 3 shows the four types of factor for Oriental Star.
The hygiene factors for Oriental Star are reliability, which means making sure dishes are available at all time, and communication. Not communicating prices has a high potential to dissatisfy. These factors should be in place but not over-specified. Enhancing factors such as flexibility of coping with busy periods and providing and attentive service have the potential to delight but these aren't the factors that attracted the customers to the restaurant. Neutral factors such as the aesthetics of the restaurant have low potential to dissatisfy or delight, and little effect on customer satisfaction. Customers coming to a low priced buffet restaurant will not be expecting plush surroundings but this is always a bonus. It is important for Oriental Star to understand the critical factors contributing to service quality, those which have the potential to dissatisfy and delight. Responsiveness, more aptly the time taken to get a table, the length of time for customers to receive their food and queue for the buffet dishes will delight customers if it is quick but annoy customers if the wait is lengthy. The restaurant must also be competent in providing the service set out by the 'service concept'. This matrix is useful as it clearly shows factors of the service quality that warrant consideration for improvement, responsiveness and competence. This also supports the customer survey that indicated the importance of queuing time to the service quality delivered.
To fully understand the service offered by the Oriental Star restaurant the service process must be fully broken down in which we consider 7 transactions. This is shown by the Service Transaction Analysis (STA), which is appendix 4. Breaking down the service process helps ascertain which aspects of the process are satisfactory or unsatisfactory and can then be used to consider the "zone of tolerance". The analysis showed that customers felt that queuing for tables / food was the main negative point of the process. Messages from STA forms included
The importance of dissatisfaction with one element of the service shouldn't be underestimated. According to Sasser et al. (1978), some customers adopt what has become known as the 'incident based approach'; whereby a single dissatisfying incident such as the above, could, despite all others remaining acceptable activities, lead to a feeling of overall dissatisfaction with the operation. Johnston (1995a) also shows that dissatisfaction with one transaction may shift the zone of tolerance up for the remaining transactions. "This shifting of the zone increases the likelihood of the outcome being a feeling of dissatisfaction". For example a customer experiencing an unsatisfactory wait for a table may need to be delighted by later transactions (e.g. the quality of the food) for them to be satisfied with the outcome of the service. The implications customers experiencing an unsatisfactory service are weighty. "Poor service experience of customers will reduce the potential customer base of an organisation and in turn has an adverse impact on the organisations' performance". The STA forms did however highlight that customers were positive about the eating of the food and the arrival at the restaurant.
The main issue from the analysis of the service quality offered by Oriental Star is the gap between how the manager rates the service offered and how customers rate it. More specifically this includes the queuing time for buffet dishes, the value for money of the buffet and the quality of staff. This report makes five recommendations achievable in the short term, a time frame of one - six months.
Capturing the views of an organisation is a crucial first step to understanding the motives for the level of service delivered. It is useful to compare how an organisation thinks it is performing against how customers actually feel the service is performing. From this perspective the Oriental Star Questionnaire was a useful exercise. It helped define the service concept of the organisation and provide insight into what the manager thought was Oriental Stars strengths and weaknesses. However it is limited in that there is likely to be bias in the answers given by the manager to reflect positively on the company. This is highlighted by the fact that the manager gave the quality of the food a value of 5, whereas the mean value rated by customers was 3.56.
Careful consideration must be applied when deciding upon the appropriate number of questions to ask customers. It may be preferred to have many questions, to gain a detailed understanding of customer views but long questionnaires usually result in poor returns. Although it is relatively easy to ask customers their opinion on particular aspects of the service it is harder to understand more subtle nuances such as will customers return again, or use word of mouth to inform potential customers. There are also issues with the nature of the data collective, most pertinently qualitative versus quantitative data. Although the scores received on a scale of 1-5 were useful for assessing satisfaction, it gives no indication of why those scores were given, or what changes could be made to improve. Academic studies also suggest that "a lot of customer satisfaction assessment is a waste of time and effort". On a larger more comprehensive scale, customer satisfaction assessment can consume a lot of company resources in the collecting and analysing data and producing extensive company reports. Further, it should be asked whether satisfied customers guarantee success. There are two aspects here. Firstly the reliability of the data, whether people take due care when giving their answers or just want to get the questionnaire over and one with. Secondly if customers indicate that they are satisfied, does this mean that the company will achieve success? In highly competitive markets customers that become slightly dissatisfied may easily switch or not use the service again. Thus a satisfied customer now, may not always use the service / products in the future.
As a tool, Service Transaction Analysis is a very effective way of illustrating the primary data obtained from the customer's experience of the Oriental Star. It seeks to identify reasons for the outcome of each service transaction so that improvements and recommendations can be made. This may help the manager understand more comprehensively what he must do in order to achieve the goal of increasing profit, particularly by getting customers back. "STA is a simple yet very effective analytical tool that can easily be employed by managers to increase the level of customer orientation of staff and lead to speedy and easy improvements in the service process". One problem with the technique is that there was no real sense of priority with problems until further research had been done. With customers simply giving a (+) or (-) for satisfaction or dissatisfaction, there was no level of how satisfied or dissatisfied the customer is. Use of a wider scale e.g. 1 to 5 may help to show this and illustrate urgent problems where more focus is required.
The 18 Service Quality factors model is useful as it covers fundamental competencies for any business but it is not specific for the individual business needs of Oriental Star to increase the service quality it delivers and therefore improve customer satisfaction. The Hygiene/Enhancing factors grouping tool is useful to categorise specific service quality factors, but there is some academic dispute as how to categorise them. With no clear formulae, this process is open to individual interpretation and hence a wider variety of applications to scenarios. The Zone of Tolerance Model is limited, due to the fact that the model doesn't provide well defined scales as to what level of service is actually tolerable. Analysis has shown that the manager and customers have differing views as to what is deemed acceptable, so it should be asked who defines the scales for being delighted or dissatisfied. Another important factor to consider is what delights one customer may dissatisfy another and the model doesn't account for these discrepancies.