In order to effectively answer this question, the question of what is logical positivism and therefore what is a logical positivist needs to be examined. The relationship between philosophy and psychology must be ascertained, both in general terms and in relation to logical positivism. This ensures we will be able to ascertain the level of influence that the movement of logical positivism had on the field of psychology and be able to assess whether modern psychologists are still logical positivists.
Logical positivism was the name given to the movement born of the Vienna circle, which was formally established in 1926. The Vienna Circle was comprised of mathematicians, physicists and social scientists who shared a common interest in the philosophy of science. The primary focus of interest to this discussion group was to introduce the methods and exactitude of mathematics to the study of philosophy. Whilst the research the members of the circle carried out influenced the direction of the circle, their primary influence came from outside the group in the form of the early works of Wittgenstein (1921). The circle believed that in order to significantly advance the work within philosophy, philosophers should be more scientific in their methods. Learning from the work of Wittgenstein and others, the members of the Vienna circle believed the way to do this was to utilise the techniques used by those who studied the natural sciences. They believed that the method of comparing theory to fact through the use of unbiased testing was the surest, and logical route to the truth.
The Vienna Circle began as an informal discussion group in 1907 between Otto Neurath (sociologist), Hans Hahn (mathematician) and Philip Frank (physicist). It gained strength and organisation when the German physicist-philosopher Moritz Schlick became the leader of the group in 1922. In 1929 the circle published their manifesto, 'The Vienna Circle; Its Scientific Outlook' and organised an international congress in Prague that year as a method of distributing its' views. It was these predominant moves of the circle that led to it becoming a movement that was acknowledged in the wider philosophical and scientific world. 1930 saw the circle take over the editorship of the Journal that became known as 'Perception', and saw the movement gather increased support.
The larger circle that met under the leadership of Schlick was comprised of such predominant figures as Rudolf Carnap, Freidrich Waismann, Otto neurath and Kurt Godel amongst many others. The group also had associate members from Berlin which included Carl Hempel and Hans Reichenbach. It was the expertise that the members of the circle had in the fields of mathematics and logic as well as empirical philosophy that gave them the ability to undertake the task that they set themselves. The Vienna circle officially dissolved in 1938 after the rise of Nazism forced many of its members to flee Vienna for their safety. However this led to the recognition of logical positivism worldwide as the circles members moved to teach philosophy in America and Britain. Indeed the movement of logical positivism had been popularised in the English speaking world through the work of Ayer (1936).
The work of the Vienna circle built on the doctrine of the nineteenth century 'positive philosophy' of Augustus Comte. Comte believed that our views of the natural world were dominated by, and infused with religious thought and explanations were abstract with no real scientific basis (See Lyons 2001). Positivism argued that all science should be built on a foundation of fact, collected and summarised through a process of induction. This framework that only science could provide positive, true explanations was developed by the circle alongside the extreme positivist views of Ernst Mach. Mach (in Urmson and Ree, 1989) aimed to account for the nature of science free from metaphysical and non-empirical elements. The Vienna circle combined these positivist views with the logical concepts of Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell and especially Ludwig Wittgenstein. It was this influence of logic that led to the advancement of positivism to Logical Positivism.
Wittgenstein's influence came from the only work he published in his lifetime 'Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus', (1921) it was the circles primary influence which guided and developed their work substantially. The influence of logic led to what became known as a logico-linguistic turn within philosophy. The logico-linguistic turn led to philosophers making particular use of the language of Physics. The logical positivists believed that in order for explanations to be true, unbiased and have a validated meaning, a thorough empiricist method must be used. It was seen that physics had the most developed and thorough empirical methods and as such the language and methodological idealisms of physics were adopted as tools in the work of philosophy. It was seen as advantageous to the development of philosophy to unify science and to make philosophy more scientific in its methods. Wittgenstein argued that the surface grammar of statements can disguise their logic, he believed that a statement could be broken down into its' elementary particles which could then be examined for factual logic. As such Wittgenstiens' work led to the development of one of the strongest elements that came out of logical positivism, that of the Verification Principle.
The Verification principle (as defined by Alfred Ayer, 1936) was the principle under which a statement could be classed as being true. It comprised of two circumstances; a statement is true if verification can be deducted such as found in mathematics and logic (an analytic statement), or if the statement can be verified by experience (a synthetic statement). If the statement did not describe an event that could be verified by experience, or mathematical logic, then it could carry no significance, and was therefore of no interest to logical positivists. This led to the logical positivists being forced to take the position that philosophical work surrounding ethics, religion and aesthetics was meaningless as these areas did not contain propositions that could be verified by experience. The logical positivists feared that without this clear distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions the rationality and objectivity of science would be compromised.
It was this requirement of statements to be verifiable, combined with the influence of their observations of the developmental advances in physics (i.e. Einstein's Theory of Relativity) that led the logical positivists to their commitment in empiricism. Logical positivists argued that science should seek to explain the world through the principal of cause and effect. They also acclaimed that a discipline that made claims about the world and then verified these claims through empirical methods could be called a scientific discipline. It is through this belief that links between logical positivism and its influence on psychology can begin to be seen.
Logical positivists did not pay much attention to the process of how theories were derived for testing; they were simply concerned with specifying what was scientific. They were not interested in the history of science and made a distinction between the 'context of discovery' and the 'context of justification'. The context of discovery refers to the history of the theory, and the process that an experimenter goes through to arrive at any given theory, whereas the context of justification refers to the searching of relevant evidence to support the theory. It was argued by the logical positivists that the context of justification was an objective and logical process whilst the context of discovery was subjective and as such they should not concern themselves with the study of the context. They believed that the context of discovery would be of interest to historians and psychologists but had nothing to lend to the philosophy of science.
The philosophy of science is concerned with how scientific research should be carried out, thus providing intrinsic links with the study of psychology. The concepts and movements that have developed within the philosophy of science have influenced and guided the psychologists and given direction to the development of the study of psychology. It has been argued that the epistemology of logical positivism heavily influenced psychology at the time, especially within the school of behaviourism. Behaviourists believed in the verification principle, that only concepts that can be observed and measured reliably should be studied, so theories can be objectively verified. This laid the foundations of psychology becoming an acknowledged scientific subject, as it had fulfilled the logical positivists' requirements that empirical methods be utilised to verify theoretical statements. Behaviourists believed in the principle of Stimulus and Response, where the presentation of a stimulus caused a specific response in the subject allowing the observation of cause and effect. This, like the logical positivists led behaviourists to reject research in the fields such as social psychology and psychoanalysis due to the apparent lack of clarity surrounding the definitions of the constructs used in these areas.
The influence of behaviourism on the direction of psychology as a science and a respected subject in its own right was significant; it has shaped the scientific methods used by psychologists today from experimental design to statistical analysis. Logical positivism also influenced psychology through it's convictions that scientific theories were about objects, processes and structures in the real world, through this psychology adopted the assumption of realism. This led to terms such as 'attitude' being referred to as real features in the world right up to the present day.
Not all however shared the classical view that logical positivism influenced the development of the school of behaviourism in psychology. Smith (1986) has strongly argued against this view, claiming that logical positivism could not have influenced behaviourism, claiming that the first behaviourists such as Burrhus Skinner and Clark Hull were influenced by a naturalistic epistemology that was rooted in the works of the non-positivists such as Clarence Lewis. Smith also argued that the logical positivists were against the idea of a naturalistic epistemology as it went against their ideals that psychology and philosophy were distinct entities (which leads to the conclusion that there cannot be such a concept as naturalistic epistemology).
Eventually however, advances in physics and further analysis by philosophers of science started challenging the core assumptions made by the logical positivists. The most fundamental problem with logical positivism was the way it used language, the tight and rigid guidelines that it laid down over what it considered scientifically right to study. Physicists saw that there was a need to progress the research in the field, to construct scientific knowledge rather than to just describe laws that are found in nature. To do this the method of study needed to adapt to be able to be subjective in its' perceptions rather than just expressing certainties. This problem was highlighted by Bohr's recommendations (In Crotty, 1998) that traditional concepts be complimented by other forms of description, despite the implications this had on the need to accept the ambiguity of these concepts. These developments lead to the demise of logical positivism but in turn to the rise of a movement known as post-positivism.
Alongside these doubts that had started to echo within the philosophical movement, similar issues and problems were being encountered and raised within behaviourism. The doubts in psychology were being raised primarily by Chomsky (1959), whose work on language acquisition demonstrated that the behaviourist models were not adequate to describe the facts that he was demonstrating existed. The work demonstrated that human behaviour and capabilities often surpass individual reinforcement histories, therefore behaviour cannot be solely learnt from our experiences but must also require innate structures within which learning occurs. Behaviourism also failed to recognise qualitative aspects of mentality (such as sensation, perceptual experience etc.) and the influence that they may have over aspects of internal processing such as attention or arousal. Psychologists came to believe that human behaviour cannot be described purely in behaviouristic terms, but the use of a psychological vocabulary was needed to account for why humans behave the way they do.
There is no doubt that the logical positivism movement had a heavy influence on philosophy, science and psychology during its' heyday, indeed whilst positivism developed, the influences of logical positivism can still be felt in many areas today. The logical positivist belief that psychology should learn from the methods utilised in physics to construct a scientific psychology underlies the methods used in experimental psychology today. It was the logical positivists that argued that psychologists should move from the observation of single cases to the formations of generalisations and that observations should be objective and verifiable. If it is to be believed that logical positivism did influence behaviourism then there is even more evidence that the theories of logical positivism are still used as a foundation of psychological research today. Not only as a foundation, but work carried out by behaviourists such as Skinner (1938) provide modern psychologists with principals such as reinforcement schedules that appear to be indisputable. However, the most fundamental difference between the research carried out in the present day when compared to research carried out during the time of the logical positivists and behaviourists is in the aim of research. Nowadays, thanks to the work of Carl Popper (1959), a scientist's aim is to falsify a statement in order to verify it, the complete opposite of the aims of the logical positivists.
It is due to this fundamental difference in attitude towards research that forces me to conclude that modern psychologists are not logical positivists. Despite logical positivisms' obvious influences and impact on scientific research both in and out of the traditional natural sciences, modern psychologists do not use the same method of verification of statements and theories. Modern psychologist also cannot subscribe to the linguistic constraints that logical positivists placed on themselves and it is now acknowledged that constructs that are not necessarily verifiable through experience (as defined by the logical positivists) do heavily influence the behaviour of individuals and therefore must be recognised in research.