The following report gives a detailed analysis of the bank employee data file. It gives a picture of the demographics of the personnel of the company with particular emphasis on the relationships between male and female employees and their pay.
The bank employees 474 staff members, of which 258 are male and 216 are female. 104 members of staff are classed as being from a minority. The company employ staff in a range of roles from clerical to technical positions. Table 1 illustrates the composition of the company, showing the breakdown of male and female employees and their race in each position of employment.
This table shows that whilst there is a nearly equal ratio of male to female employees (50.2:49.8) there are far more male employees in three sectors; Exempt Employee, MBA Trainee and Technical. There is a majority of females employed in the Clerical and Office Trainee sectors. There is also a difference in the sectors that the employees from minority backgrounds are employed in. The vast majority of employees from minority backgrounds work in the Clerical sector and Office trainee sector, with only 4 males from a minority background being employed above the level of security officer. This is shown more clearly in Graph 1.
The salary scales are linked to the sectors, with the Clerical sector being the lowest paid and the technical sector being the highest paid, as clearly seen in Graph 2. This graph shows both the mean beginning and current salaries for each of the employment categories.
The median age of employees is 32 years, with the oldest employee being 641/2 years old and the youngest being 23 years old. An analysis of the age factor gives a mean value of 37 years and a skew value of 0.864. As the mean is greater than the median and the skew value is positive, this indicates that the majority of cases fall in the lower range of values. This is confirmed when looking at Graph 3, a frequency histogram of age of employees.
It is also seen that the vast majority of employees have been educated up to at least level 12 in their schooling with only 53 employees having left school at the end of level 8. Just under 50% (225) of employees have been educated to level 15 or above. However, educational level does not necessarily correspond to pay scales as seen in Graph 4.
The mean beginning salary is 6806.43, however the median beginning salary is only 6000.00. This indicates that there are some extreme outliers in the higher salaries. The large range of values, minimum (3600) and maximum (31992) support the view that there are outliers in the upper quartile as well as the values of skewness and kurtosis which indicate that there is a skew to the left and there is a leptokurtic peak. This means that the majority of values are at the lower end of the range and the distribution is peaked, probably given the skew value, at the lower end of the range. These values are tabled in table 2 and are supported in graph 5 by a frequency diagram of beginning salary.
When looking at Beginning Salary in relation to the variable Gender, a large difference (2883.77) in the beginning mean salary paid between males and females is found. The mean beginning salary for males is 8120.56, and the mean beginning salary for females is 5236.79. A further difference is found between white and non-white employees, even within the same gender. It is seen that female employees from a minority background have the lowest mean beginning salary whereas white male employees have the highest mean beginning salary. This is shown in graph 6.
These differences in mean beginning salary could be due to the job positions that people are recruited into. As outlined previously, there are a higher number of white males employed into the higher paid sectors and a higher number of females employed into the lower paid sectors.
This would affect the value of the mean salary of males and females, therefore to accurately look at whether there is a pay gap between the male and female employees, an analysis of beginning salary by employment category needs to be performed. The results of this analysis can be found in Table 3.
This table shows that the female employees are being paid less for the same job type than the male employees. This difference in pay is in some cases nearly 100%, i.e. the male employee is being paid nearly double that of the female employee. It is necessary to see if the same issues arise when looking at the current salary figures.
The mean current salary is 13767.83 and has a median value of 11550.00, this suggests that there are not as many extreme outliers within the current salary as there were within the beginning salary. This is supported by the standard deviation value, which is almost double that of the beginning salary variable. A large S.D. value indicates that there are not many outliers, but the values cover a larger range, as seen when the ranges of both variables are compared. The value of skewness and kurtosis also support the idea that there is a greater range of values within this variable, compared to the beginning salary variable. The skewness value of the current salary is slightly less than that of the beginning salary this indicates that the current salary distribution does skew to the left, although not to the same extent of the beginning salary distribution. The kurtosis value indicates that the distribution of current salary is more platykurtic than the distribution of the beginning. This means that whilst the majority of values are still at the lower end of the distribution, this majority is not as peaked as that of the beginning salary variable. These values are tabled in Table 4 and are supported in Graph 7 by a frequency diagram of current salary.
When looking at current salary in relation to gender, the difference in pay between the male and female employees has increased to 6163.94. The mean current salary for males is 16576.71, and the mean current salary for females is 10412.77. Again the same differences are found within the analysis of the sex and race variable, where those categorised as females from a minority background have the lowest mean current salary whilst white males have the highest mean current salary. This is shown in Graph 8, it should be noted that the mean values have all increased by approximately the same about between beginning and current salary.
Whilst the increase in mean salary within each sex and race category being almost equivalent, when looking at the current salary in relation to employment category it can be seen (Graph 9) that in 3 of the 5 categories where both male and females are employed, the percentage difference between the male and female average salary has actually increased. Table 5 shows that female employees are still being paid less than their male counterparts, although not to the extent seen in the beginning salary variable (39% compared to 98%).
The information from the Bank Employee file shows that overall, female employees are being paid less than their male counterparts. Female employees start on lower pay grades (up to 100% less in some cases) and even with time and development the pay gap does not disappear. It does decrease, but only to a level with the difference lowering to no more than 40%. With the data and information given it cannot be concluded as to why this is.
It has also been seen that employees from minority backgrounds are being paid less than those who are not from a minority background even if they are of the same gender. Therefore, female employees from a minority background are the lowest paid employees within the company, however due to the limitations of the analysis of the information no firm conclusions can be drawn from this data to explain why this is.