Many students are having to accept living with large amounts of debt despite recent
research showing that this debt may be having a detrimental impact on their mental health.
With the forthcoming increase in tuition fees, student debt reaching an all time high and reports indicating that mental health problems are significantly more prevalent in the student community, psychologists are beginning to look at possible links between heavy financial burdens and students health.
The uptake of student loans is at its highest since their introduction and the use of student overdrafts and credit cards is constantly on the rise. As a result student debt has become one of the biggest concerns facing students in higher education. With increased student fees arriving in September, psychologists are eager to assess what impact debt may have on students' mental health.
Psychologists at Middlesex University and the University of Sussex have been researching whether a students' worries about their finances and debt has an impact on their mental health.
In their study, students were asked to put statements such as "I worry about my financial situation" on a scale indicating how much they agree to the statement. This allowed the researchers to assess attitudes towards finances. They were also asked questions that looked at various aspect of mental health such as happiness, depression and vitality.
The results of the study, published in the British Journal of Health Psychology, demonstrated that financial worries do have a significant negative impact on mental health. These results confirm that students who are concerned about their financial situation are more likely to suffer from mental health problems.
The researchers also compared these results with data from the same questions asked of students studying in Finland. This allowed them to examine whether there were differences in attitudes as a result of differing funding policies. British students pay tuition fees and don't receive a grant, whereas Finnish students do not pay fees and receive both a grant and housing supplements.
Results showed that there were significant differences between the British and the Finnish students. It was seen that the British students reported greater levels of financial concern and that they reported significantly more mental health problems.
Research by MORI saw that almost 40% of British University students feel that being in debt is the worst aspect of student life. This is no wonder as latest figures suggest that in 2004, the average student debt rose to a staggering 12,000. More worrying still is that 56% of students report that they are unable to handle their finances and one in 20 students report that they have serious financial problems.
Highlighted in the published paper is the fact that government policies appear to contradict themselves, on the one hand promising to reduce inequity in health and on the other creating policy that may seriously affect students mental health.
Recommendations made by the psychologists suggest that the government needs to take a greater responsibility to ensure students positive mental health and well being.
With student debts estimated to reach an average of 30,000 by the academic year 2009/10, it is almost certain given trends already seen through national research that worries of debt and an inability to manage finances will increase.
The past few months have also seen a decrease in the number of applications to University for this September. Many critics of new funding policies for higher education believe that this is primarily due to the increase in the cost of the tuition fees that students will be liable for.
With a link now proven between financial worries and mental health problems, it seems essential to follow up on the recommendations provided by the psychologists in order to ensure the mental well being of future generations of students.