As part of my role as Press Officer within the Aston Martin Public Affairs department, in October 2003 I was charged by my manager, the Director of Public Affairs to oversee the development and deployment of an Active Desktop system to all PC's within the company, a system for which I would have responsibility for maintaining once deployed.
As part of the company's bid to improve internal communication the active desktop system was conceived as a means of improvement for staff by presenting a live information service on all PC's which could be used as an effective means of sharing information. The tendering process for supplier selection was already complete upon commencement of my particular project and so the project detailed herewith commences from when the successful supplier had been identified culminating with the deployment of the system within Aston Martin.
The system is particularly advantageous as it allows important information to be shared with the majority of employees promptly. For users, the system offers a live information service, whilst requiring no extra effort to be accessed (i.e. having to visit a website), as it is present on all PC's and updated by one sole owner (my eventual responsibility). The system is also interactive and employees can contribute to the information displayed. The project is intended to deliver strategic change through employee participation and involvement (McElroy, 1996).
My task chiefly revolved around working with the chosen supplier (Symbiosis) to develop the system, which would ultimately act as a key communication tool for the business. Actual deployment of the system would involve members of the IT department physically installing the software on every PC within the organisation. Although the actual installation process was fairly simple, taking approximately five minutes, just over 400 PC's would require attention across three UK sites (Gaydon in Warwickshire and Newport Pagnell and Wolverton Mill - both in Bedford). The process could only be completed by the IT department (due to specialist knowledge required to add software to the network) and consequently, with only three members of the IT team available, this process was expected to take around three days. However, before this aspect of the project began I needed to finalise the details of the system (i.e. precise content), present the final proposals to the Board of Directors, finalise financial arrangements (this merely concerned structure of payment and from whose budget the funds would be taken - financial approval had already agreed prior to my project commencing) and consider the possibility of a training programme for any employees unable to use the system.
Essentially, the project stems from a 2004 objective for the Public Affairs department and my project consequently revolved around achievement of the following principal objectives:
The context of this project within the overall organisational strategy is captured most accurately by adapting Maylor's (2003) strategy deployment table (figure 2):
As this demonstrates this means of objectives alignment typifies the strategic approach outlined by Maylor (2003) where this project (activities level 3) is directly related to top-level organisational goals (objectives level 1), operating a top-down strategy perspective.
As outlined by Maylor (2003), quality, cost and time trade off's are relevant to two particular stages of the project: planning and execution. For my project the same trade-off will apply at both stages - the priorities will be for timely delivery of a flawless system. Although cost is of obvious importance, the overriding priority of the project is to deliver an effective internal communication tool within the timeframe outlined.
I identified the key stakeholders, all of whom had specific interests in the project for different reasons which all needed consideration (Geddes, 1990), to be as follows:
Although my project could arguably comprise other stakeholders, they would have only very minor involvement and those detailed above were the most critical to the project. These stakeholders were consequently mapped using a power/interest matrix (figure 3).
This matrix allowed me to identify those stakeholders I would need to manage carefully and I consequently took the following measures to ensure that I achieve this with each:
Chief Executive Officer/Aston Martin Board - As this particular stakeholder had the power to halt the project at any stage they were of obvious importance. Consequently I ensured detailed proposals were made available prior to commencing the project detailing the advantages the finished system would present.
IT Manager (Richard Sparkes) - The chief advisor on the system capabilities/ requirements during development and responsible for installation across the business. Consequently critical to the project; has the potential to dramatically influence delivery time and I felt it particularly important to involve Richard in all aspects of the development stages by giving an input on what we should include and in doing so hoping to create a sense of involvement and ultimately responsibility for the project.
IT Team - Three IT team members would be available for system installation when ready for deployment. These specialists would be the only people with the skills required to install the system and consequently, whilst their interest in the project was not as great as other stakeholders, they remain absolutely critical to deployment.
Public Affairs Colleagues - Whilst not as potentially powerful as other stakeholders, my Public Affairs colleagues could prove useful allies on developing content, system management and 'selling' the idea to staff. Consequently I felt it important to get all team members to 'buy in' to the project at an early stage, inputting ideas and subsequently act as advocates for the project. I also ensured the project remained at the forefronts of priorities by providing an update at our weekly team meeting.
Public Affairs Director (Tim Watson) - Quite simply, the most important stakeholder to the project. Tim is a Board member and the budget holder funding the system. Consequently Tim would be critical to the project and obviously has the ability be to influential at any stage deemed necessary. Thankfully we already have a strong working relationship and Tim trusted me sufficiently to allow me to get on with the project rather than having to report my every move. However, I still felt it important to keep Tim informed and provided a 15-minute update every fortnight.
Symbiosis - This project is slightly unique in the sense that only one supplier is involved in project development and consequently the project is almost entirely reliant on the performance of Symbiosis. Failure in any sense by Symbiosis could influence timing, budgetary commitments or quality of the finished product. Consequently I put a great deal of effort into harbouring a good working relationship with the Symbiosis team. Firstly I invited representatives from the company to join us at a supplier open day (where key suppliers are invited to Aston Martin) in November and also arranged a drive in an Aston Martin Vanquish for each member of the team.
Symbiosis Account Manager (Jed Brannan) - My main contact at Symbiosis throughout the project and for the same reasons as identified previously, absolutely critical to the project. Conscious that my relationship with the Account Manager could be pivotal to the project, I took extra measures to ensure a healthy relationship was maintained. During the development stages I invited Jed to spend a day at Aston Martin to gain an appreciation of the environment for which the system was being designed. We also held weekly update meetings and conscious of the distance between my workplace and Symbiosis (based in London); I ensured locations for meeting were rotated between. Additionally I invited Ged to the company Christmas party and a number of other corporate events.
Other stakeholders, involved in the project, without being as potentially influential, were managed as follows:
Finance Director - Whilst not possessing as high a degree of interest in the project as those stakeholders named above, the Finance Director was still important in agreeing from which budget the necessary funds would be taken. (NB project costs had already been agreed upon supplier selection and consequently budget details are not included in this project). Subsequently, whilst I did not feel it necessary to manage this stakeholder particularly closely (once payment details agreed, minimal involvement required), I ensured the Finance Director was kept informed of progress.
Aston Martin Employees - The eventual customers, Aston Martin staff are of obvious importance to the project but do not possess any specific power. Instead it was most critical to attain employee requirements (via an internal survey conducted prior to project commencement) and attempt to match these as closely as possible with the end product (Geddes, 1990 & Jiang et al, 2002).
HR Department/Training Manager - The need to develop a training programme for staff that made need assistance with the system meant I needed to involve both of these parties in development. I hoped that by doing this I could more easily persuade the training manager to assist in development of necessary training. The HR department were also potentially very important advocates of the system.
Other stakeholders included the Public Affairs within the Premier Automotive Group and the wider Ford Motor Company, both of whom had some interest in the project due to it being an organisational first, but neither had the means to influence the project and conscious of increasing complexity I wanted to avoid their involvement. Consequently I provided a written update to the Directors of both respective teams upon project commencement and completion. The Aston Martin manufacturing manager was another stakeholder as he has responsibility for members of staff without PC access, being subject to a separate project later in 2004.
Prior to project commencement I needed to establish implications of the project environment. Firstly, of the geo-social consequences to be considered, the most notable aspect concerned distance in locations between Symbiosis and Aston Martin. As the Symbiosis team set about system development I would inevitably be unable to directly oversee development. A further connotation concerning location was the need to deploy the system across three Aston Martin sites not all located within close proximity to each other. System Installation by a small group of specialists from the IT department would consequently be a time intensive task.
Business environment consequences include Aston Martin employees and whether they will be receptive of the system when deployed. Another business environment implication is the obvious dependency on Symbiosis as the projects' sole supplier. Subsequently any problems experienced with Symbiosis will be highly detrimental to the completion of the project.
The greatest number of concerns relate to the projects' internal environment. A primary concern is the strict need to deploy by January and the concurrent limited available resources within the company due to the DB9 launch. Additionally at the time of the project commencing, the IT department were also midway through deploying a new version of Windows to some parts of the company, limiting there availability to assist with deployment of this system. A final concern relating to the internal environment was that of the negativity felt towards internal communications within the company. The perceptions currently held by many employees could potentially prove a barrier to the success of this project.
My initial attempts to map the project tasks requiring completion are illustrated in figure 4. Whilst as project manager it was my responsibility to ensure completion of all tasks, many could not be entirely completed independently so I elected to construct a responsibility matrix (Maylor, 2003) for the key tasks (beyond the actual development of the system) and outline the key people I would require to aid completion (figure 5).
In order to prepare fully for the eventuality of anything going wrong with the project initially, I attempted to identify those things that could fail. Primarily, I analysed the key quality, cost and time objectives and derived a series of possible failures and analysed them using FMEA (Maylor, 2003):
In light of this analysis, I prepared a series of measures to minimise the risks posed by each respective threat.
As depicted in above, the most viable potential failures concerned schedule, provision of sufficient deployment time by the IT department and functionality, which would be particularly important to create a positive impression upon launch (Geddes, 1990). The project commenced on October 29 th with completion intended for January 5 th - allowing exactly 39 working days for project completion. These risks are minimised most effectively by detailed planning; the overall project plan (and subsequent delivery to those timings) plus additional planning work with the IT department should help minimise any threat.
The relative success of this project will be measure by a number of measures, most accurately illustrated using Maylor's (2003) 'NPD' metrics:
As the above measures demonstrate, whilst the project initially seeks achievement of key quality, cost and time objectives, it is anticipated that the main benefits will be evident longer-term. Additionally I would hope that project success is measured in terms of lasting benefits, rather than purely conceptual or planning aspects (Munns & Bjeirmi, 1996:85).
Whilst the network planning analysis proved useful for overall project timing, I felt a need for a more visual, short-term means of monitoring task completion. To achieve this I set myself weekly task lists (figure 8), similar to the Last Planner method outlined by Maylor (2003).
By incorporating a measure of those tasks completed each week I was able to incorporate the Planned Percentage Complete (PPC) method to keep track of progress towards achieving the project completion. In the example from week 3 above, a PPC of 60% reflected not entirely satisfactory progress, which was slowed by the failure to complete the training plan as scheduled. Fortunately, this task does not appear on the critical path and as shown in the network analysis, had available float time. Consequently a delay of three days and eventual completion during week 4 did not prove disruptive to overall project timing.
In concluding, the project successfully achieved basic success criteria (Wateridge, 1998) - the system functions correctly and it was delivered on time for the cost agreed, although as I have discussed previously the real tests of success will be evident in the long-term. However, the project was by no means simple, nor did it run without problems and challenges.
A number of activities over-ran, such as the training sessions, but fortunately in most cases these delays occurred away from the critical path and so did not disrupt overall timing. However, there was one particular incidence, when the installation process took longer than expected that did cause notable disruption. In hindsight provision of greater time than three days for completion of this task would have been useful but the inflexible launch date meant this would not be possible. The situation was recovered by working late into one evening, running the subsequent task (system test) overnight and consequently avoiding any delay in launch. This was only possible due to a willingness on the part of members of the IT department to work late, without this a delay would almost certainly have been incurred.
Dependency on sole parties was a factor evident throughout this project, which was certainly not ideal and I would look to avoid, where possible in the future. Depending on a sole supplier for delivery of the system proved a constant source of personal anxiety throughout the project, but was perhaps unavoidable for a venture of this nature. Potentially the task of system development could have been divided between a series of suppliers, but owing to the inevitably greater cost involved, I can appreciate the decision to concentrate all work with one party. However, other incidences of dependency during the project could have been avoided. The absence or unavailability of the IT and Training managers at various stages proved disruptive - only the provision of float time avoided an impact on delivery. In future projects I would look to avoid this risk altogether by avoiding reliance on one source for task completion, where at all possible.
A further worthy note concerns the completion of a project FMEA analysis prior to commencing work, which uncovered a number of necessary new tasks and avoided any mid-project crises. The decisions made to commence work on the training plan as early as possible and the development of a demonstration version of the system as a result of the analysis, proved particularly important.
Finally, an inevitable mention concerns the provision of time made to deliver the project. The strict timings for activities were necessary to deliver the project on time, but particularly for those on the critical path, this was risky. A particularly concerning activity from the critical path was final Board approval for the system. Any decision to make changes to the system at a late stage would have proved disastrous for overall timings. However, although changes were made by the Board the provision of a demonstration version avoided any delay.
In closing, I am pleased to have satisfied the projects' principle quality, cost and time objectives, but remain wary that the real test of the system will come in the future. In reviewing the project I can appreciate some of my estimate timings, applied in order to deliver the launch date prescribed, where challenging for the available resources and appreciate that only by means of a committed team avoidance of delay was possible. Additionally I appreciate that the use of tools such as network planning analysis and FMEA particularly, were crucial to the success of the project.