Within the past few years there has been a significant change in the doctor patient relationship moving from a paternalistic to a shared approach. There is an understanding between patients and doctors, and the patients have a lot more power over their treatment than ever before, especially due to the vast amount of medical information that can be obtained by the Internet. Although this may be the case, doctors are still viewed by society as a figure of authority and as an individual with a high degree of influence over the patients health. Increasingly patients now expect doctors to have the opportunity to change not only their health but they expect to be increasingly involved in their own care. With an increasing ethnic minority population, doctors are entrusted to look after their health. Different ethnic minority groups have different values, culture and way of life that they expect to be taken into consideration by the doctor during the consultation.
Stereotypes are generalizations about a group of people whereby we attribute a defined set of characteristics to a particular group. These classifications can be positive or negative. It is easier to create stereotypes when there is a clearly visible and consistent attribute that can easily be recognised. This is why people of colour i.e. different ethnic groups, police and women are so easily stereotyped. Everyone uses stereotypes. People use it in their humour, in their beliefs, in the way they view occupations and even ideas. Stereotyping is imprinted on us from an early stage in our life, boys are given action oriented toys while girls are given dolls and domestic toys to play with [Rheingold, 1975].
People from stereotyped groups can find this very disturbing as they experience an apprehension (stereotype threat) of being treated unfairly.
We change our stereotypes infrequently. Even in the face of disconfirming evidence, we often cling to our obviously-wrong beliefs. This is not rational as individuals are treated as members of a group who posses certain set traits and are not judged on their merits and values. This is specially noted in the in the lack of opportunities for senior consultant posts for ethnic minority doctors. In the year 2000 the proportion of doctors in all grades who qualified in the UK and reported non-white ethnicity was 17%, where as the proportion of consultants reported non-white was 9%. There is evidence to suggest that ethnic minority doctors have fewer opportunities and they face discrimination at many stages during their career from the point of entry to medical school to applying for senior house officers post or seeking merit awards [Coker, 2001; Scambler, 2003].
Doctors use stereotyping too. In the Human Diversity course an afternoon was spent in small group work session on stereotyping and how it could influence values powers and opportunities and in turn influence clinical decision-making. The exercise illustrated the impact commonly used stereotypes had on the medical service provided to the general public. I was not alone in using stereotypes, but I found it very challenging to bring myself to limit my use of them or to think that it may well have detrimental effect on my future patients one day.
I have decided to look at racial and ethnic inequalities as a result of stereotyping in the health care system. To me this is a topic that is very close to my heart. As an Indian living in the UK and being an ethnic minority I am very keen to look at the healthcare system and if stereotyping is responsible for racial and ethnic inequalities. I am also keen to look at how doctors values and views of a certain ethnic group can influence their power and thus the opportunities they provide their patients in terms of treatment. However, this could lead to imbalance of power in a doctor-patient relationship.
Racial and ethnic disparities in health have been well described, with data showing that people from ethnic minorities suffer disproportionately from cardiovascular disease, diabetes, asthma, cancer, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) /acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), among others [Einbinder, 2000; Ahmad, 1993]. The Institute of Medicine report identified various sources that contribute to racial/ethnic disparities in health care; among them was health care providers' susceptibility to stereotyping minority patients, leading to disparate clinical decision-making. To understand how even well intentioned physicians may be susceptible to stereotyping and unknowingly contribute to racial/ethnic disparities in health care it is important to understand the clinical decision-making and the environment in which decisions are made.
Over the course of medical education, doctors are taught the "prescriptive theory of clinical decision making." This theory states that clinical decisions should rely on the detailed exploration of two variables: the presentation of symptoms and the probability of disease (through the application of Bayes' theorem) [McKinlay, 1996]. Simultaneously, doctors are taught a set of heuristics or "clinical gestalts" with the premise that there are certain hallmark symptoms for conditions. These heuristics then become shortcuts for clinical decision making (e.g. cough and fever likely equals bronchitis or pneumonia). Although this runs counter to what we are taught about generating a detailed review of symptoms and a broad differential diagnosis, as doctors practice under greater stress and time pressure they become more susceptible to using these shortcuts in clinical decision making. Finally, doctors are taught that their own personal background, and the characteristics of the patient and the clinical setting, should be excluded from consideration in the formulation of clinical decisions [Katz, 1933].
However in the real world, decision-making is more complicated. First, many non-medical factors influence the clinical decision-making process. Second, we are all susceptible to stereotyping, which directly influences the way we make decisions. Many non-medical factors, ranging from the patient's physical appearance to the organizational setting in which medical care is delivered, may have as much influence on clinical decisions as the actual signs and symptoms of disease [Hooper, 1982; McKinlay, 1996]. Our decisions, in addition to being shaped by symptoms and probability of disease, are shaped by the characteristics of the patient, including patient age, gender, socio-economic status, race/ethnicity, and language proficiency; the characteristics of the doctor, including the specialty, level of training, clinical experience, age, gender, and race/ethnicity; and the features of the practice setting, including location, organisation of practice, form of compensation, performance expectations, and incentives [Rathore, 2000; Weisse, 2001].
McKinlay et al summarizes, "Medical decision making can be as much a function of who the patient is as much as what the patient has." Recent literature supports this and challenges the prescriptive theory of decision making [Hooper, 1982, p630-638].
Macrae et al 1994 says that stereotyping enables us to adopt a large amount of information on a daily basis while saving us precious mental resources as it takes too much energy to define every individual based on their unique characteristics. Therefore stereotyping can be seen as a positive energy saving method. Most importantly, we tend to activate stereotypes most when we are stressed, multitasking, and under time pressure - the hallmarks of a clinical encounter. Sheikh et al commented on stereotyping and osteomalacia. The condition has been seen to be more prevalent among the Asian community and so in the two case vignettes, the patient was prematurely diagnosed with osteomalacia when they actually had different complications. It was criticised that diagnosis should be driven by clinical findings and not the ethnic origin of the patient as this may delay proper and systematic investigation [Sheikh, 2001]. However, the response to the article made a point that no harm was done to the patients by labelling them and that it was merely an attempt to highlight a clinical possibility that may have been overlooked had the knowledge of the likelihood not been there. So stereotyping may be useful, as long as one is aware of their limitations. However, it is not always very clear-cut to draw the line between using pattern recognition strategy and stereotyping. Such an example is illustrated in the BMJ that surveyed the racial stereotyping by psychiatrists in the UK. It was to be seen if the stereotype that black males were potentially more violent patients was still widely held. It was found through questionnaires filled out by psychiatrists that if they perceived the patient to be black yet having the same mental history and mental state as a white male, they would question the patient differently. It was further questioned in a response to the article whether the service-care provided to the African or African/Caribbean origin patients was having an effect on the outcome of the treatment. According to Dr. Chakraborty and Dr. McKenzie [Minnis, 2001] these patients had negative experience of psychiatry. The care given was more coercive and thus outcome was poor. Such medical practice is not in the best interest of the patient and should not be allowed to go on. Black patients were also more likely than white patients to see a black member of the psychiatric team and to see a junior rather than a senior doctor which limits their opportunities for good treatment. They were also more likely to receive powerful phenothiazine drugs and receive electro-convulsive therapy [Davey, 1995].
Burr (2002) looked at a group of healthcare professionals, consisting of GPs, Approved Social Workers (ASW), Consultant Psychiatrists and Community Psychiatric Nurses (CPN) working with South Asian Women and found that they used cultural stereotypes of their patients to explain their behaviours and in deciding how to treat them. It highlighted the fact that many of the values and attitudes held by these health care professionals influenced the discourse of mental illness for these patients with adverse consequences. Burr concludes 'the power of stereotypes of South Asian cultures is that they become incorporated as pseudo scientific explanations that are then incorporated as fact and used to account for different patterns of health and illness. A research strategy based on focused mental imagery has been found to be useful in combating stereotyping. Those that engaged in counter stereotypic mental imagery produced significantly weaker stereotypes than those who engaged in neutral stereotyping or no mental imagery [Blair, 2001]. Burr (2002) warns, in some cases cultural stereotypes have been presented as scientific facts, hence the South Asian patient's experience of depression followed with suicidal thoughts and intent is attributed to the person's culture. Although it is suggested that the mental health nurse draws on the cultural profile of the patient for possible clues as to the aetiology of the mental disorder, it is important to guard against the dangers of stereotyping people according to racial types and disease; such action could result in the nurse missing important clinical signs, and the subsequent exacerbation of the patients suffering through misdiagnosis. Culture plays an important part in providing an understanding of the mental illness and behaviour of minority ethnic patients. One method of combating stereotyping patients is to improve training and medical education, as it had been reported that stereotypes are usually enforced by emphasizing ethnic differences in disease patterns rather than reflecting on personal attitudes to diversity and respond to people as individuals [Sheik, 2001].
However, it is important to differentiate stereotyping from prejudice and discrimination, both conscious processes. Prejudice is a conscious, knowledgeable prejudgment of individuals that may lead to disparate treatment; discrimination is conscious and intentional disparate treatment [Fiske, 1998]. Physicians all stereotype naturally and often subconsciously despite their best intentions to treat every patient equitably and as an individual. It is thus no mystery that doctors respond, "Not me!" when presented with data that puts them among the potential "contributors" to racial/ethnic disparities in health care. The challenge is that if left unchecked, stereotyping has a detrimental clinical effect on certain groups that fall into specific categories deemed less worthy of diagnostic or therapeutic procedures or resources [Macrae, 1994]. Einbinder and Schulman [Einbinder, 2000] describe how this process, along with other factors, may lead to differential referral to invasive cardiac procedures based on the race of the patient.
Stereotyping is a term one likes to believe does not get used, however, it does. In medical practice it may not be desirable to stereotype, although pattern recognition is acceptable. The important task is to make a clear distinction and not to be swayed by personal views or values and to recognise doctors have the power to change their attitudes towards stereotyping. In my opinion, the problem is not whether or not stereotyping is used to give the patient better quality services but whether the patient is treated unequally or not given opportunities, services or assurances. Stereotypes are not inherently evil; it is their uses that we must evaluate.