Health inequalities are the differences found in various aspects of health between different groups in society. They arise because of systematic differences in illness and health by socio-economic status, gender, ethnicity, age and geographical location 1. Although health inequalities have long existed, there is evidence to shows that it is widening 2 and lifestyle choices and health-related behaviour is one suggestion that has been put forward to explain current patterns in health inequalities. The Black (1980) report was one of the significant government reports, which detailed the explanations for inequalities in health, followed by the Acheson report (1998)3.
Diet, exercise, smoking and alcohol are lifestyle choices observed in different socioeconomic groups, which are health damaging or promoting 4. It has been stated that people in disadvantaged circumstances experience poor health because they are likely to participate in health-damaging behaviour 5. There is considerable variation among social groups regarding the extent of choices they have over their behaviour. Men and women in social-class V smoke more than those in social-class I 5,6 and women in lower social classes may use smoking as a coping strategy, to look after their families in difficult circumstances, despite its adverse health consequences 6,7. Thus in lower socioeconomic groups behavioural response to environmental stresses in the form of health-damaging activities play an important role. Cultural factors and prohibitions are also likely to affect behaviour in minorities, such as smoking and chewing tobacco which exists in the Bangladeshi community 5 and alcohol prohibition due to religious beliefs in other minorities 8.
The poor health in low-income groups is frequently explained in terms of their unhealthy behaviour, example diet. Low income limits the type of food they can purchase, therefore the amount of nutrients consumed 9. A packet of biscuits and fish & chips is more economical than a three-course meal and fresh fruits. Dietary patterns cannot be thought of as simply reflecting lifestyle choices, as a less healthy diet does not necessarily indicate ignorance and fecklessness of health. Instead, they are restricted by the social and economic circumstances 2. Studies of attitudes of low-income families indicated that they would prefer to eat a healthy diet but are prevented by financial constraints 9. However, there are also cultural preferences that influence diet like in Asian communities.
Manual workers who perform more physical activity at work are at a higher risk of CHD than people in social class I who participate in leisure time exercise 1,10. Research on health benefits of exercise have suggested that leisure time activity is protective against CHD, whilst occupational activity is not. The masculine persona has also been implicated in differential health behaviour, as men readily shrug-off symptoms of illness in early stages and consult later when damage is greater 5.
Life style choices and health related behaviour only accounts for 10-30% of the health inequalities 7. Health-related behaviours are usually assumed to be a result of individual choices, but its important to recognise the social and economic context in which such behaviours occur 4,11. Monotony and stress may predispose people towards smoking in repetitive and highly supervised occupations 11. Therefore should health-related behaviour simply be seen as a cause of health inequalities or should they also be seen as an outcome of differences in the behavioural, material and psychosocial circumstances between socioeconomic groups.
One of the most important explanations in accounting for inequalities is material circumstances 12. Material circumstances can have a direct and an indirect influence on health-related behaviours and on individual's health status, like housing, transport, accessing health services, income in kind and general poverty. Acheson's report acknowledged that income was a fundamental determinant of health as well as material environment and lifestyle 2,5. Manual classes/unemployed, living in overcrowded damp homes, without access to a car have a higher SMR (standard mortality ratio)6 and respiratory diseases in children 11. Living in poor circumstances results in higher levels of psychological stress which damages health, directly through increased vulnerability to mental and physical illness, or indirectly through resorting to unhealthy coping mechanisms such as alcohol abuse.
Income distribution and the differential accumulation of exposures and experiences are also responsible for health inequalities 13. Lynch et at described that the social circumstances of deprived groups can be changed through equitable distribution of resources and investments in neomaterial conditions which can have an impact on reducing health inequalities 13.
However, psychosocial aspects such as status anxiety, economic insecurity, poor working conditions, job insecurity and poverty could contribute to health inequalities. Living in poverty can cause stress, anxiety, low self esteem which can damage health and limit people's choices, militating against desirable changes in behaviour 6. Fear of crime in unsafe streets and lack of recreation facilities can severely damage mental and social health and limit opportunities for physical activities 6. Perceptions of relative positions and negative emotions can result in antisocial behaviour, less social capital, and cohesion within the community 13.
The evidence on the causes of health inequalities demonstrates that they are not due to any simple or singular explanations, but are due to many complex psychosocial and material circumstances with health-related behaviour and lifestyle choices also playing a role.
To tackle health inequalities effectively, policies targeting their causes need to be in place at national and local levels to promote, protect and improve health 14. At national level, initiatives such a NSF (national service frameworks), HAZ (health action zones) and Sure Start to improve health in deprived communities that are locality driven 2,15. At local level, PCT's (primary care trusts) are one example, where GPs and other health-care professionals work closely together with the local authority to tailor the services best suited to that area 16.
Health services and professionals have a vital role in reducing health inequalities. Health care professionals have the capacity to challenge the policies that promote health exclusion, to openly incorporate poverty perspective into health practice, to build up knowledge about structural poverty and poor health and disseminate this information to develop proactive responses 17.
Doctors can have patient centred consultations facilitating patient's active involvement, enabling communication of patient's beliefs and psychosocial context of their illness 5. Awareness of health inequalities and their causes by doctors can help to target those in need of such services, improve access and ensure equity in delivery of health services. The experience of poverty and deprivation during childhood can have life long consequences on health. Doctors could be involved in making sure that pregnant women ate an adequate diet, and offer advice about benefits they are entitled to 18,19.
Health promotion includes all actions designed to improve the health status of individuals and communities 20. Doctors can be involved in lifestyle campaigns like anti-smoking, screening and immunization. They are in a position to encourage healthy behaviour among their patients and provide guidelines for changes in such behaviour. Doctors can be involved in health education programmes, which focus on teaching about sensible drinking, as this might target the aspect of drinking behaviour which is closely linked to deprivation 8. Doctors have three main key roles in reducing health inequalities. These include working for social change, profiling and monitoring, and preventing and alleviating 17.
Working for social change is the most important role of the doctor. It involves working for health enhancing policies developing out of strong profiling and monitoring activities. This can be achieved by being an informed, knowledgeable and powerful practitioner who can advocate for reduction in health inequalities by working with professional organisations and supporting or working with anti poverty groups 17. Other dimensions to this role include creating supportive environments, building healthy public policies, strengthening community action, developing personal skills, patient empowerment and minimizing equity and inequality to health care services 21.
Profiling and monitoring involves collecting and analysing information to identify health needs and aid targeting and development of services. This allows doctors to identify the extent and nature of health and social problems, identify and target unmet health needs and use the obtained information to develop services that are effective and responsive to health care needs 17.
The preventing and alleviating role involves provision of services that prevent ill health and help patients to cope with the health effects of social disadvantage. It requires recognition that poor health is the outcome of exposure to health hazards across the lifecourse and adoption of a non-victim blaming approach 16. This role has four key components; maximizing access to health care, income, material and social resources for health and minimizing the costs of health promotion 22.
It is important that doctors accept that health inequalities do exist, as this is often forgotten as doctors, who are the highest social class. Doctors may experience problems such as time constraints, language barriers, patient's willingness to answer questions and differences in patient's preferences 5.
Health-related behaviour can be difficult to change unless the patient is willing, as behaviour is guided by attitudes, beliefs, values 20 and constrained by the material and psychosocial conditions 19. Having a limited role to play in terms of formulating government policies and reducing poverty and income inequalities, doctors alone cannot tackle health inequalities but can make significant contributions to help reduce them by working in a multidisciplinary team and helping to implement national and local policies and encouraging healthy behaviour.