While it is certain that the reformation which set off in the twenties of the fifteenth century was preceded by more than a century of humanism challenging, among other things, man's attitude toward theological issues, the extent and influence of the humanist movement are still a matter of debate. While it has been asserted that humanist thought centred around the capabilities of the human as gifts of God, as opposed to the middle age view of man as 'a humble, fallen creature under the permanent curse of original sin', the unity of the humanist agenda has to a large extent been exaggerated, and the various strands of humanism across Europe 'do not appear to have adopted a coherent position on matters of substance'. What does emerge upon careful assessment, though, is a general set of new attitudes and principles, often contrasting those of the medieval scholastic movement which is shared by both the humanist and reformer. Moreover, a careful assessment of the general theological position inherent in most of humanist thought must be contrasted to that of the reformers' movement to come to a fuller appreciation of how humanism came to influence reforming thought and vice versa.
The coming of humanism to Germany virtually coincided with the founding of the first German university in Prague. Indeed, the establishment of universities brought a fresh outlook to the studies of theology and morals, entrenching the humanist tradition (studia humanitatis) ever firmer into German scholarly attitudes. By the beginning of the sixteenth century, sixteen university had been founded across the German lands, which in various degrees pursued the methods of a new kind of studies. Professors of the studia humanitatis stressed text-based studies, thereby aiming to gain powerful and valuable insights of Christian religion brought back to a purer interpretation of the biblical text. Their slogan ad fontes signified, most importantly, an attempt to get closer to the true intention of the scriptures. Moreover, the via moderna, as this new interpretation of religion came to be called, also challenged the minutely derived rationalist viewpoints of medieval theologians (known as the via antiqua) by stressing the value of human experience and interpretation. For example, the German philologist and humanist Rudolf Agricola sought to explore this in his writing. Thus, he came to assert: 'Prodigious, immense, and unbelievable is the power of the human mind'. A renewed strong interest with secular Latin and Greek authors derived directly from the humanists' concern with the reform of language into clear uncomplicated formulations so as to arrive at more logical conclusions. Such linguistic reform the humanists found through 'the observation and imitation of the best authors and writers', classics such as 'Virgil, Lucan, Horace [...], Plautus, Terence, Cicero, Sallust, Seneca, and the Roman historian Valerius Maximus'.
It goes without saying that, by permitting themselves such a new, revisionist outlook, the northern European humanists soon came to criticise what they considered unjustified behaviour within the church and among all Christians in general, be it while viewing themselves inside the religious order and thus without calling into doubt the authority of the church. Still, in many respects, humanism undermined the absolute authority of the church organisation, stressing the humble, speculative element of religious life. Erasmus suitably quoted St. Paul in his work Praise of Folly (1509): 'I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly'.
By the time Luther came in conflict with the church, humanism had become well engendered in Germany. But besides the Italian humanist influences of text-based study, German humanists furthermore came to incorporate the creation of a distinct German identity in their writing. Around the turn of the century, several texts were published praising Germany's pious and learned traditions, with at its foundation the rediscovering of Tacitus' Germania in 1455. It was within this tradition that the greatest reformers received their education. The studies of Zwingli in Vienna, the Swiss reformer, coincided with the arrival to that city of Conrad Celtis, Germany's poet laureate, while Luther regarded humanist techniques of philology and the close study of the scriptures as the key to his theological discoveries. Similarly, Calvin, a decade later, would be grounded in the study of bonae litterae. Yet, the position of the reformers went beyond that of the humanists in theological zeal and single-mindedness. While most humanists agreed that '[t]he irreducible particularity of human reality was [...] more suited to historical description, rather than logical analysis', they proposed as a solution simply the reform of education through training in rhetoric and the study of 'ancient philosophers, poets and orators', as Celtis argued already in 1492. The differences in point of view of reformers like Luther and Zwingli initially appeared rather blurred to many humanists, which in effect strengthened their case. It was this 'productive misunderstanding' which made a great controversy out of Luther's theological uneasy with some of the church's practices. The theoretical misunderstanding is to some extent no surprise. Humanists and reformers alike shared many principles which clothed the doctrinal move away from the church in humanist language. Thus, when Luther wrote of his breakthrough in the theory of justification, that '[h]itherto, this epistle has been smothered with comments and all sorts of irrelevances, yet, in essence, it is a brillant light, almost enough to illuminate the whole bible', this certainly bore the semblance of the humanists' study of the scriptures ad fontes.
Historians have argued that '[t]o a certain extent, the reformers were simply confirming the advances made by the Humanist agenda, with its stress on ancient languages, its tools of exegesis and its approval to the sources'. This assertion rings a certain truth, in that humanists were quite ready to speak out against any kind of practice which they considered a perversion of the true faith. Consequently, we find that Erasmus freely criticised the incorporation of pagan elements into the Christian faith, and the complicity of the clergy in these practices: 'so it be of ghosts, spirits, goblins, devils, or the like; [...] the further they are from truth, the more readily they are believed and the more do they tickle their itching ears. And these serve not only to pass away time but bring profit, especially to mass priests and pardoners'. Furthermore, he criticised the fact that selling indulgences evaded the simple fact that 'to live well is the way to die well'. While humanist and reformer alike stressed the simple and direct relationship in which the individual stood to God, the period directly preceding the reformation saw the sweeping popularity of so-called sacramentals, small objects that were to have sacred protective powers, turning the religious experience into 'a kind of popular Catholic version of the priesthood of all believers'. Catholic theologians were quick to assert that the working of sacramentals worked, not through physical efficacy; rather, it was spiritual efficacy, based on the prayers of the church', yet, Luther attacked the very authority of the church as an intermediary between the individual and God. 'How much more properly did the apostles call themselves servants of the present Christ', he wrote in an open letter to pope Leo X, 'and not [like the clergy] vicars of an absent Christ?'. Such boldness did certainly lie outside the tradition of pre-reformation humanists, who, despite their criticism, were nearly all 'men who saw themselves as operating within the context of the church'.
On a note, however, it must be added that much of the question of the relation between humanism and the reformation depends on definition. Kristeller has rightly pointed out that humanism, taken in a broad definition, 'was not [...] Catholic or Protestant, [...] although it is easy to find [for both of them] a certain number of humanists who favoured them'. More correctly was it a new scholarly attitude, which often had little directly to do with theological questions. Naturally, humanist achievements did much to aid reformist criticism of the church, thereby unintentionally damaging the pope's authority as ultimate arbiter of religious matters. By 1520, Luther felt sufficiently confident to claim that '[t]heir claim that only the pope may interpret scripture is an outrageous facied fable'. Moreover, while many humanists were entangled in a 'productive misunderstanding' of reformation doctrine, similarly 'the response of reformers and traditionalists to humanism was improvised and lacked any clear, programmatic agenda'.
The intellectual life of northern European humanists had brought extensive soil for social development. Influenced by Italian humanists, many German humanists had studied at Italian universities, while extensive correspondence and printed works guaranteed a considerable reading audience to some of the more famous scholars such as Erasmus. This intellectual network now came to serve the reformation twofold. While it came to counter the vices of "popular religion", which reformers and humanists alike attacked, it also created a well-publicised stage for a reformed alternative. While religious life in reformed thought experienced a kind of rationalisation, relying only on the scriptures (sola scriptura), all acts in daily life were now to the honour of God. Simultaneously, too, the reformers managed through humanist channels to justify this transformation. Luther's new doctrine of justification now freed Christians from 'an agreed bargain involving a near-legal sense of obligation', thus evading the need for an authoritarian church. Aided by forthright humanists such as the patriotic nobleman Ulrich von Hutten, the church was portrayed as 'an unjust, unkind, and bloodthirsty shepherd'. Thus, the reformation succeeded in countering 'religion in favour of an emotional sensibility too preoccupied with outward appearances', managing to some extent to draw parallels between the opposites religion/magic and Germany/Rome.
The spread of these new ideas came hand in hand. While many humanists, trained and educated in Italy, brought up 'questions that [...] were discussed openly and debated in public', their sojourns in Italy generally brought out 'what was peculiarly Germanic'. Luther's address to the German nobility, then, must also be seen in this light. 'All classes in Christendom, particularly in Germany [my italics], are now oppressed by distress and affliction', Luther wrote, and it is not unlikely that some of the German nobility supported his reformed Christianity for national-political reasons. After all, since Luther refuted the idea that any active works or confession were of any importance in an individual's relationship to God, this discredited the authority of the church as a body of absolute mediation.
To conclude, the role of humanism in preparing the ground enabling a reformation to take place in Germany and the rest of northern Europe was very great. Despite the fact that many a humanist was, and remained, supportive of the church in Rome, the humanist challenges to education, thereby firmly establishing the studia humanitatis around Europe, was of tremendous importance for the theological and social atmosphere to bring about further-going criticism of the church institutions. Moreover, many of the humanist values were shared by the reformation movement. The emphasis on text-based studies was of key importance to Luther (sola scriptura), while the study of classical Greek and Latin texts enabled Zwingli to successfully challenge the church's position on several matters. Both humanists and reformers criticised the incorporation of pagan elements such as sacramentals, which they considered charms, and the church's trade of indulgences. Indeed, Luther's ideas and style of criticism of the church bore such semblance to humanist traditions, that the first period of clash saw the support of many humanists, which has been described as a 'productive misunderstanding', which, additionally, brought much attention to the Wittenberg disputation through the humanists' extensive correspondence network.
The exact relation between humanists and reformers has been a matter of dispute among scholars of our time. It depends, firstly, on a definition of humanism. While humanism knew certain general traits, it was not necessarily confined by a certain theological outlook, and the humanist movement was never united on theological matters. In fact, the period after the reformation saw the emergence of a number of prominent Protestant humanists. Thus, we can say humanism and reformation were mutually influencing, the reformer often using humanist tools in his pursuits, while many humanists, often demonstratively Teutonic, admired the reformation movement.