For Simmel, modern life was an eternal clash between the soul and society, and in order to study this he created a unique style of sociology; one dedicated to the unending dialectic of human existence (Etzkorn:1964:2). In this dialectic the individual life spirit is always in danger of being trapped and suffocated by rules and forms that it has created, forms that now confront and constrain this spirit. Whether Simmel ever intended to create a strict theory of modernity is unclear, even in the Philosophy of Money which is regarded by many, Simmel included, as his definitive work, the idea of modernity is implicit, but never truly the focus of his work. Simmel is wants to examine contemporary contents of science and emotion (Simmel:1907:57). Simmel talks of modern culture, the metropolis, and modern tendencies offering us glimpses of what the essence of modernity might be. Simmel is often described as an artist and a musician, rather than a mathematician or a scientist, and more than other sociologists we have to be immerse ourselves in the flux of life, and in the style of his sociology in order to emerge with answers. Simmel's essayism presents us with 'fragments of modernity', 'sociological snapshots' from which some binding force needs to be searched for. Simmel is
The essence of modernity is captured by Simmel for the very reason that he never attempts define it, he never tries to paint it accurately, but chooses to give us an impression, paradoxically these blurry brush-strokes seem to show us a heightened sense of reality. In attempting to construct features of Simmel's modernity we may be unfaithful to his own methodology, but we may also be able to depict new patterns and interconnections that allow us to return the flux with a greater understanding and appreciation of Simmel. There are persistent themes in Simmel which relate to the modern experience; proximity and distance, totality and fragmentation, inner freedom and outer obligation, the money economy and division of labour, all of which are different interpretations of the dominant theme of objective versus subjective culture, of form versus content.
It is perhaps easiest to begin with the 'big problem' of objective and subjective culture and of form and content, and from this original dialectic we can examine how this paradigm affects modernity.
Culture for Simmel is present wherever life and the contents of life (impulses, drives, hopes) have created forms to express and realize themselves, but these forms does not share the 'restless rhythm of life' and thus act back upon the individual; "this new rigidity inevitably places them at a distance from the spiritual dynamic which created them and which makes them independent" (Simmel:1921:11). Life needs, yet reacts against form, as a river needs yet erodes its banks, "life as such is formless, yet incessantly generates forms for itself" (Simmel:1921:12). No sooner has a form been created then the process of dismantling it and renewing it begins. This is the eternal struggle, that all societies pre-modern and modern must 'work out', of the subjective will against the objective world. But in modernity this struggle has essentially changed, in this new phase we are witnessing "the struggle of life against form as such" (Simmel:1921:12). The culture of modernity seeks to express itself in the restlessness and formlessness of life, modern individuals "are moved at once by a will to change - to transform both themselves and their world - and by a terror of disorientation and disintegration, of life falling apart. They all know the thrill and the dread of a world in which 'all that is solid melts into air'."(Berman:1983:15). This 'cultural epoch' that views all types of form as exhausted will, by necessity, have to create its own forms, and thus destroy its own ends, this for Simmel represents the 'tragedy of culture' (Simmel:1911:43). It is difficult to reconcile Simmel's notion of the deconstructive nature of modern culture with the increased objectification and permeation of the money economy into almost all relationships that Simmel too perceives in modernity. This antagonism within modernity ceases to be uniquely modern, and rather a feature of all societies, despite Simmel's claim, that, regardless of the limited possibilities of life, the momentum of the idea of modern culture against form does not diminish (Simmel:1921:26).
The solution to this problem may be found in his essay on The Metropolis and Mental Life. Modernity, unlike other epochs, is concerned at a fundamental level with the form and content dialectic, this dialectic becomes the everyday experience of humanity.
The pressures of society are exaggerated under modernity due to the intensification in stimuli to which the individual must deal with. Under these conditions people have developed certain characteristics that are distinctly modern. These characteristics cannot stand alone, but are only part; a fragment of the 'total personality', and the total modern experience. This interconnectedness is vital for understanding Simmel's vision of modernity, simply to write a shopping list of features of modernity can only fail to grasp its flux and interwoven dependence; "the most banal externalities are, in the last analysis, bound up with the final decisions concerning the meaning and the style of life." (Simmel:1903:328). The metropolis is an obvious symbol of the modern world, but it is the consequences of living in the city that create the essence of modernity. The individual in the city must adapt a blas attitude toward life, "life makes one blas because it stimulates the nerves to their utmost reactivity until they finally can no longer produce any reaction at all."(Simmel:1903:329). Modernity requires this indifference, distinction between events and objects leads to mental distraction. Were we to focus on the details of modern life we would become Musil's 'Man without qualities', simply unable to function under the burden of the energy required to comprehend life.
This leads to the emergence of a cold, unemotional, unattached world, one in which there seems to be no common humanity, no compassion any longer. It is interesting that Simmel should choose the word reserve, in this case it means much more than diffidence. What are we reserving, what are we saving for ourselves, what are we keeping from the metropolis? Simmel is constantly dealing with two worlds, the inner and the outer world, by maintaining an attitude of indifference to the outside world, we can foster inner freedom; depersonalisation allows for increased individuality. This inner freedom is experienced most obviously in the dense crowds of the metropolis, where "bodily closeness and lack of space make intellectual distance really perceivable for the first time." (Simmel:1903:334).
It is not only the sheer size of cities, the numerical impossibility of knowing everyone, that has developed this peculiar attitude. The nature of the money, and the money economy requires a calculating rationalising mind, one that can reduce qualitative values to quantitative terms.
Objective culture seems to dominate modernity more than any other epoch, yet Simmel has also asserted that modernity is more actively against this objectivity than any other period. Individual freedom seems superficial and hollow when compared to the power of markets and money flows. Far from creating a spiritually aware world, money creates a calculating one, the ability to handle qualitative differences of a subjective world seems to be lost; modernity can only measure in monetary units. The use of money also necessarily increases the means-to-ends rationality within the psychology of modern individuals (Simmel:1997:252), all possibilities are determined by means of the universal and objective value of money. The domination of money creates an atmosphere where personal interaction is not needed, money allows individuals to invest minimum energy and maintain their social distance from those who from time to time they must necessarily come into contact with. Money is
For Simmel, the positive consequences of this negative trait of 'lack of character' are the ease in which money allows us to deal with one another. We can, without knowledge of others involved in and interaction, expect and predict responses with regard to money transactions; allowing the personality to remain uncontaminated by the economic activity. This indifference created by money, and the unimportance of personal traits and individual qualities, is according to Simmel, a "democratic levelling social form that excludes specific individual relationships." (Simmel:1907:443), money not only unites societies via the means of transactions, but it also allows inner unity and sanctity as diverse personalities can all be guaranteed equal treatment. It is this depersonalisation of interaction, the referral to objective rules and standards, also found in Weber's concept of legal-rational domination, that bureaucracies require to function properly. The room for individual judgement and personality is significantly reduced, again having an equalising affect. The dominance of objectivity is vital to modern societies, not only because there are endless possibilities in a social milieu so large, but because ideas of individual freedom rely upon universal rules.
In Simmel's discussion of the division of labour, he states that this is one of the most important concepts that allow the divergence of subjective and objective culture (Simmmel:1907:453). Modernity is propelled by an increasingly complex division of labour that, although typified by man increasingly converging in ever more densely populated areas, thus vastly increasing the potential for interaction, is epitomized by society's composite individuals pursuing increasingly individuated existences, unaware of those around them. Spatial unity seems to come at the price of spiritual fragmentation. This alienation and lack of solidarity certainly echoes of Marx's essay on Alienated Labour, as well as sections of Capital. The idea of alienation from not only the product of labour, but also from fellow workers is well suited to Simmel's modernity. Similarly Marx's statement that "Money is the absolutely alienable commodity, because it is all other commodities divested of their shape, the product of universal alienation" (Marx:1994:252), is precisely why money allows intellectual distance in transactions. It is precisely because we do not have to 'cope' with the identity of the producer that money enables the functioning of modern society. The division of labour is paramount in modernity, within it we once more find the dualism of the subjective opposed to the objective. Prior to the division of labour workers invested themselves in the product, Simmel uses the example of a work of art to show how this method of subjective production affects the individual, this again is similar to Marx.
Whereas subjective work unites the spirit, objectified labour fragments. The division of labour is detrimental to the 'total personality', as it requires the focus of mental energy on fragments that lead to the neglect of the whole (Simmel:1907:454).
Not only is the worker alienated from his own labour, but similarly the consumer is also alienated from the product. The product is external to both producer and consumer for the very reason it is not made for, or by anyone. But without objective production there could not be a mass of goods, broadening consumption needs, and is dependent on, the increase of objective culture: impersonal and objective goods are of more use to more people. This anonymity is also a feature of modernity; "one never feels as lonely and as deserted as in this metropolitan crush of persons" (Simmel:1903:334). For all the mental freedom there is something inherently sad about being alone in the midst of people, not only because of the fact of loneliness, but also for the fact of valuelessness. But again money has a unifying feature; that despite all being more separate in this crowd we are reliant upon this anonymous mass. Money makes all us dependent on others, but at the same time we are more independent of any particular other.
The money economy supports both tendencies of modernity, tendencies that run in apparently opposite directions; towards both the independence and autonomy of individuals and conversely toward larger and larger depersonalised and remote spaces.
Modernity for Simmel is full of internal contradictions, and he expresses these in such a way that opposites were to be found not only in close proximity to one another, but also within one another. The modern experience is one of unity and totality but simultaneously fragmentation and diversity, individualism is paramount but the world is simultaneously one in which individuals themselves do not matter. Modernity seeks to free itself from the constrictions of form, only to reify these ideals; modernity is at once one with the eternal flux of life, and yet somehow contrives to stifle this through ever more rigid rules and standardisation. Baudelaire's modern painter captures this 'fleeting beauty', and it is with equal artistic skill that Simmel paints his picture of modernity, choosing "to illuminate with a firework rather than study with a lamp" (Schmoller:1981:vii). Simmel offers us momentary glances into the darkness surrounding us, but just as we come to recognise these shapes, they are no sooner gone, only to be illuminated once more from a different angle and in a different light. "Modernity here has found a dynamic expression: the totality of fragmentary, centrifugal directions of existence and the arbitrariness of individual elements are bought to light." (Koigen:1985:39). Rather than being the disorderly and unsystematic philosopher some view him as, his methodology is actually unified, showing the totality of modern society, "the inexhaustible multitude of interspersed analogies refer back time and time again to the unifying core conception of the whole work which may be briefly expressed as follows: from any point of the totality one can arrive at any other, each phenomena bears and supports the other, there is nothing absolute that exists unconnected to other phenomena and that possesses a validity in and for itself" (Kracauer:1981:7). It is for these reasons that Simmel is often regarded as the first sociologist of modernity.