In 1932 Aldous Huxley wrote 'Brave New World'. His dystopia existed six hundred years into the future. In his world culture and art no longer existed. Truth had been sacrificed for technological progress. Society existed only to perpetuate the status quo, controlled by sophisticated methods of science and censorship. Around the same time, the Frankfurt School were formulating their ideas that our world was not so dissimilar to Huxley's nightmarish creation. The founding authors of the Frankfurt School were Max Horkheimer, Theodor Adorno, and Herbert Marcuse. This essay will explore their thoughts and theories on the 'culture industry'; a concept worked out by Horkheimer and Adorno in the 1930s. The 'culture industry' is the culmination of a number of ontological ideas running throughout the Frankfurt Schools thought. A brief genealogy of the Frankfurt is a prudent place to begin, from this, the concepts essential to their ideas will be examined. Their arguments are those of 'totality', technological domination, and to a certain degree a functionalist critique of societal mechanisms that reproduce and create social control. The 'culture industry' is the capitalist method of securing stability for its world system, through the domination of the way in which people use their 'free time' the industry has removed people's true choices and obscured their 'real' needs. The commodification of culture has meant that it has not only become a marketable good but one that re-enforces the economic bas of society. The question is; can art be separate to this industry? The domination of the economic system leads the critical theorists to a bleak outlook of the world. This view, though intuitively reasonable, is not wholly accurate in the real world. Art can be produced outside of the 'culture industry', but can and often is engulfed by it. Nevertheless even in the total repression that apparently exists, artists still strive to be outside the framework of mass culture, and this must be a source of optimism and possible change that should not be ignored.
The Frankfurt school was set up in 1923. It founders tended to be upper-middle class, left wing, German-Jewish intellectuals (Stinati:1995:53). The Nazi's rise to power in the 1930s forced the school to relocate to New York, though it returned to Frankfurt after the end of World War II. This profoundly influenced the work of the Frankfurt school. They witnessed both the totalitarianism in Nazi Germany as well as the consumer culture in the USA. They saw the desecration and deformation of art under the authoritarian Nazi's, in juxtaposition to the mass individuality and consumption under liberal democracy. " It Seemed the possibility of radical social change and been smashed between the twin cudgels of concentration camps and television for the masses" (Craib:1992:209) Throughout the critical theorists work is an implicit attempt to reconcile the failure of Marxism to explain the prevailing social conditions in the western world. Since the collapse of communism, post 1989, this reconciliation seems even more potent. Although, as Craib notes, the golden past that the School is often looking back to is a period of early capitalism, "which is seen as a time of real individualism to be contrasted with the modern denial of the individual." (Craib:1992:215) Where they differ from Marx most obviously is their disinterest in economic and structural problems. But the language used is that of Marx and their central themes come from Marxian and Hegelian thought.
Horkheimer offers us a useful outline of the nature of critical theory that should be "distrustful of the rules of conduct with which a society presently constituted provides each of its members" (Horkheimer:1976:218). He goes on to write that 'social totality' is fundamental to modern life, and according to Adorno actively wanted (Adorno:1991:89), but at the same time loathed. "This is the two sided character of social totality...men identify themselves with this totality and conceive it as will and reason... [At the same time] because cultural forms are supported by war and oppression are not the creations of a unified self-conscious will. That the world is not their own but the world of capital." The theory of totality is key to broad Frankfurt thought but completely essential to the conception of the 'culture industry'. Lukacs states that the concept of totality is most important concept of Marxist theory. Capitalism a totalising system, it intrinsically is geared to expand and dominate. For this reason capitalism has allowed us to gain knowledge of society as a whole. Life and society cannot so easily be split up into convenient academic departments. Economy and culture are not separate entities in society, and it is the dialectic relationship between culture and industry that is so interesting for Adorno et al.
The relationship between industry and culture is not an equal one. The market forces that drive capitalism have created cultural commodity fetishism. Coupled with this the market seeks to reinforce its own existence through the provision of culture for, not from, the masses. "Commodity fetishism is a process by which men conceive of their social relations as if they were natural things... they [men] have no social relationships except in the act of exchange of objects. These objects come to stand for the social relationships." (Abercrombie:1988:43) People's beliefs about the products they purchase, and sell, come to mask the true social relations between them. This is the fetishism of the commodity. The implications for the 'culture industry' are that the nature of culture is being not only hidden, but corrupted by this fetishism. Because culture can simply be purchased, in the form of buying art and attending the opera, it ceases to exist as simply culture; it has become a commodity. Commodities are alienating, "Money is the absolutely alienable commodity, because it is all other commodities divested of their shape, the product of universal alienation." (Marx:1994:252) Adorno went as far to say that " the real secret of success... is the mere reflection of what ones pays in the market for the product. The consumer is really worshipping the money that he himself has paid for Toscanini concert" (Adorno:1991:24) Money corrupts the relationship between the artist and the viewer. In doing so the nature of culture, in the context that the critical theorists examine culture, is distorted from one that is inherently challenging to society; to one that is complicit with society. The value of art should be its use value, not its exchange value, in accepting the art to be synonymous with its price we lose the real value; the potential to inspire and provoke; the chance for culture to be freedom as Kant hoped.
This is not an accident; again the critical theorists are intuitively correct in their view of mass media, albeit a miserable one. Herbert Marcuse calls this both 'technological domination' and 'repressive desubliminiation'. Monopolies and large scale state intervention have reduced people's freedoms: extending their control in ever more secretly manifested ways as well as being exacted more efficiently and more successfully than ever before. A combination of authoritarianism and capitalism was present in the 'brave new world' post World War II. The blossoming of a more complete Fordism diminished the prospect of any working class revolt. This effected culture profoundly, high art and low art seemed to be amalgamating and not for the better. 'Culture' was being eroded by "repressive desubliminiation" that "manifests itself in all the manifold ways of fun, relaxation and togetherness which practise the destruction of privacy, the contempt of form, the inability to tolerate silence, the proud exhibition of crudeness and brutality" (Marcuse:1995:203) Society is becoming merely 'one dimension', allowing the economic base, and its institutions, to assert more control over social relationships. It is nave to presume that critical theorists are entertaining that some kind of illumnati control the globe, but rather that as a society we have succumbed to certain values that generate and regenerate 'desubliminiation' and reduce true freedom. Technological progress governs our lives; the celebration of humanism and romance are seen as backward in an age of science and 'reason' (Marcuse:1964:58). Technology and more astutely; its misapplication, is a derogatory force against a wealthy and rich culture.
Technological domination owes much to what post-structuralists, as well as the Frankfurt School, have called 'instrumental reason'. "Instrumental reason, then, is concerned solely with practical ends... instrumental reason separates fact and value: it is concerned with discovering how to do things, not what should be done" (Craib:1992:213) Marcuse sees that the needs of society have curtailed and replaced the needs of the individual. Adorno postulates a similar idea in his chapter on 'Free time' (Adorno:1991:chapter 8). The premise of both their arguments is that sexual energies, as well as other 'life-energy' or 'libidos', are harnessed by the system to endorse its values or transferred to more productive outputs. Adorno sees 'free time' and hobbies as essentially a means to supporting the structure of the work environment. The very idea of hobbies, to Adorno, is depressing: we create ourselves through our work; hobbies are something we attach to ourselves rather than allowing them to become part of our self identity (Adorno:1991:163). This functionalist conception of 'free time' can be transposed to the 'culture industry'. Culture's function is to offer some light relief from the toil of work, yet which also sanctions the current structures and institutions in existence.
Having broadly discussed the core concepts that run through critical theory; the 'culture industry' can be explored in depth. "[T]he expression 'industry' is not to be taken too literally. It refers to the standardization of the thing itself... It is industrial in the sociological sense, in the incorporation of industrial forms of organization even when nothing is manufactured" (Adorno:1991:87). In this sense technological progress has led to the rational, inescapable domination of the science over the arts. Society has been fundamentally altered by alienating commodities and relationships, creating an neutered and barren society: the masses need a new 'opium' to continue such a dreary life. "[T]he culture industry reflects the consolidation of commodity fetishism, the domination of exchange value and the ascendancy of state monopoly capitalism" (Strinati:1995:61) Conformity has replaced consciousness, and new forms of 'culture' reflect this fact. The 'western' for Adorno, and the contemporary 'horror' film genre epitomize the bastardized version of predictable, consumable and addictive anti-culture. Listeners, and viewers "are distracted from the demands of reality by entertainment which does not demand their attention either." (Adorno:1991:310). The fine line that the modern culture industry must walk is one between elevation from boredom, yet not so much as to confuse an essentially passive audience. Audiences accept this deception, and are apparently aware of it. Soap operas are undeniably dire, yet over ten million people watch episodes religiously. People are aware of bad they are, and how wasted the time spent staring at them is, but watch avidly nonetheless. To admit they truly worthless, would mean that "their lives would be completely intolerable as soon as they no longer clung to satisfactions which are none at all." (Adorno:1991:89)
The 'culture industry' does not only create a regressive audience, which by its nature is less challenging to the authorities and less aware of itself as a class. It is actively working as a form of propaganda for the existing framework of society. "The concoctions of the culture industry are neither guides for a blissful life, nor a new art of moral responsibility, but rather exhortations to toe the line, behind which stand the most powerful interests. The consensus which it propagates strengthens blind, opaque authority" (Adorno:1991:89) Once again, we can substantially back this up by venturing into the world of Hollywood. Disney films are the most sinister of these. These films instil the values that will be of use to society from the youngest ages, and say far more about the society in which they are created than any kind of fantasy world. "The vamp, the national hero, the beatnik, the neurotic housewife, the gangster, the star, the charismatic tycoon perform a function very different to that of their cultural predecessors. They are no longer images of another way of life but rather freaks or types of the same life, serving as affirmation rather than negation of the established order" (Marcuse:1964:60) These messages could be harmless, but modern society is a bombardment of media messages, telling us how to behave and what to buy. This leads to the second face of the culture industry, and perhaps its more obvious one: the creation of 'false needs'.
The society we live in is irrational according to Marcuse, increased productivity is destroying the free development of human needs (Marcuse:1964:9) We are incapable of making any real choices in our lives. We may be able to choose between buying different brands of washing up liquid, even choose between buying different styles of music. But these are essentially false choices, as the goods are only pseudo-individualistic, rather relying on a core that is the same throughout, with some peripheral differences. Adorno is extremely critical of popular music, owned by mass corporations and churned out for the masses. The current state of popular music has become synonymous with manufactured bands and powerful record labels. The image and package of popstars is most important rather than focus on their music as it is so similar it is not a selling point. This is the pseudo individualism that Adorno, and anyone interested in art and music must despise. Art is the case of pop music is created not for the sake of itself or its message but rather on its potential market success. Although Adorno is elitist, as he almost advocates that culture is only for those than can be critical. He is also over critical of the methods of producing music: using the same loops and hooks and musical tricks, tricks have been used since the invention of music, rather than some inferior state of music that has recently been created. But his overall point still stands: culture has become, under Fordist production and consumption principles, poorer and ceases to fulfil its original Kantian function. We can no longer make any real choices as even outlets and sources for our critical nature have been recruited to the totality of neo-leviathan state system.
The situation looks bleak. But there is hope, and art can still be created with a critical edge. The nature of sub-culture is to fight against the establishment. Sub-cultures have always created the cutting edge of our art and music. In the 1960s and 70s the generation of protest clearly showed that not everyone had bought into the system whole heartedly. Bob Dylan was the cultural pinnacle of a socio-political movement. His music did not represent anything that would be helpful to the prevailing social order. Arthur Miller's plays are blatantly against the system, and he, as an author suffered for his integrity. The punk movement during the 1980s, the sexual revolution of the 1960s, anti-Vietnam protests, and most recently, though barely comparable the protests against the war in Iraq all show a sub-cultures that were critical. These movements have unquestionably changed the outlook of society, but often only to build aesthetically different societies and no more. The more recent skate punk lifestyle, fuelled by rich middle class white teenagers is the epoch of the 'culture industry'. Rebellion is marketed on MTV every day, Miller is taught in secondary school, Johnny Rotten has become a TV presenter, the women of the sexual revolution all got married and had children. The power of the 'culture industry' is to adapt itself to market conditions, and exploit and commodity all art and culture. "Choose leisurewear and matching luggage. Choose a three piece suite on hire purchase in a range of fucking fabrics. Choose DIY and wondering who the fuck you are on a Sunday morning. Choose sitting on that couch watching mind-numbing spirit crushing game shows, stuffing fucking junk food into your mouth" (Welsh:1997) For all the 'false needs' we can fulfil, and can dream of fulfilling ,we will never be satisfied; we still won't understand who we are, and we never will until we become our 'species being'. This a reassuring thought, and offers hope for the emancipation that Marx wrote of.