Although the horrors of the concentration camps and the holocaust may lie beyond the limits of our imagination, this do not mean that we can not, and should not try to comprehend them. However, the assertion that the concentration camps have no parallels in normal life is a contested one. For Bauman "the Holocaust was born and executed in modern rational society, at the high stage of our civilization and at the peak of human achievement, and for this reason it is a problem of that society, civilization and culture." (Bauman:1989:x). Arendt disagrees with this fundamentally; as the Holocaust was infact irrational, unpunishable and unforgivable by all methods available to that society, civilization and culture. "Hannah Arendt described the Holocaust as a 'rupture with civilisation' that shattered all existing ideas of progress, all feelings of optimism, all previously engraved images of Europe as a civilised community, all notions of the innocence of modern political thought" (Fine:2000:19). The horrors of the 'final solution' are not beyond comprehension, they are however beyond the confines of 'modern' political thought. To distance ourselves from the atrocities directed towards the Jews in Nazi Germany, is to safely, but naively, dismiss the shock and the 'reality' of the Holocaust. But to be defeated by pessimism, the pessimism created by neighbour killing neighbour, and to diagnose 'modernity' as terminal is to allow those forces which are most abhorrent in human nature to claim victory. This antagonistic and dialectical approach to the Holocaust was presented by Arendt, and her discourse on this subject is neatly surmised by Bernstein in his book Hannah Arendt and the Jewish Question in which he discusses Arendt's own re-thinking on the nature of evil; From Radical Evil to the Banality of Evil. Are the instruments of totalitarianism extraordinary acts of evil, or are they a distortion, or a culmination of modern political institutions? Is Eichmann a devil or a man?
'Radical evil' was a phrase not created by Arendt but by Kant, who rationalised this "in the concept of a 'perverted ill will'" (Arendt:1973:459) .The motives of 'radical evil' are decipherable through the methods of enlightenment. 'Radical evil' fitted within an existing classification system; the devil is still an angel, just one who has fallen from grace. For Arendt 'radical evil' ceases comprehensible by these methods, "therefore, we actually have nothing to fall back on in order to understand a phenomenon that nevertheless confronts us with its overpowering reality and breaks down all standards we know." (Arendt:1973:459). Arendt does not offer us the meaning of this evil in the Origins of Totalitarianism, but in a letter to her former tutor Karl Jaspers she tries to offer an answer:
The Holocaust was not about hate, envy revenge: these are all to reasonable within the realms of our understanding. It was about creating an environment in which to experiment on human nature, and how to extinguish spontaneity, and even complicity in the elimination of your self. This ideas of superfluousness are examine by Arendt in her chapter The Decline of the Nation State and the Ends of the Rights of Man. The creation of the modern state was built implicitly and explicitly on the will of its citizens who intrinsically had rights. "Only with a completely organized humanity could the loss of home and political status become identical with the expulsion from humanity altogether." (Arendt:1973:297). People cease to have the right to have rights. Only in the death camps, in the laboratories and factories of death can the systematic deconstruction of the soul take place. And only here can people be made truly superfluous. "This new regime of totalitarianism opens for us the abyss of radical evil, the evil that seeks to make human beings superfluous and even to eradicate the concept of humanity. What is most frightening is that this monstrous deed, this deliberate attempt to destroy and transform the human condition, does not require monstrous or "evil motives". It can result from the thoughtlessness - the inability to think - of ordinary, normal people." (Bernstein:1996:153).
Eichmann was not a devil, he was a man.
This passage has provoked much criticism of Arendt and resulted in exclusion from some Jewish communities. By calling this 'banal' she is not trivialising the events of the Holocaust, she is, more importantly, refusing to raise Eichmann, and Hitler to 'satanic greatness'. But at the same time Arendt refuse to allow the perpetrators to be merely 'cogs in a machine', and though they may have conceived of themselves are such, this was not an adequate excuse. The problem for Arendt is one of morality and "the nature and function of human judgement." (Arendt:1977:294). How can we tell right from wrong without the moral gauge of society? The Holocaust serves to show that morality is no more than "a set of mores, customs and manners which could be exchanged for another set with hardly any more trouble than it would take to change the table manners of individual people". (Arendt:1978:5). And this is perhaps the most disturbing twist to the Holocaust, that it was in fact not extra-ordinary, not to those who those involved. "In this context the term 'banality of evil' was, I think, her way of saying the Holocaust was 'human, all too human'." (Fine:2000:35).
This 'banality' of the perpetrators of these 'crimes against humanity' this realness suggests that the transition to the 'final solution' was not something fundamentally new. The Holocaust contained recognizable elements of modernity, so much so, that thoughtlessness was all that was required to enable 'production of corpses'. The very institutions and modes of operation created and facilitated by modernity became the instruments of terror and death.
Nietzsche also recognises the pathology of modernity, that technological progression seems to at the expense of culture and beauty, and values and beliefs that had previously been the moral fabric of society had lost their validity. A 'spiritless radicalism' that sought to destroy all remnants of culture and civilization (Fine:2001:114).
The period in which Nietzsche was writing felt to many authors like an epoch or a turning point in history, the possibilities of science and technology seemed endless. The limits to human endeavour, in the name of progress had no boundaries. We have the impression that science and society are hurtling throughout history, out of control, without regard for the consequences. Progress and doom are truly two sides of the same medal (Arendt:1973:vii). Such a view does not seem so far fetched when we consider that the Holocaust utilised the very latest scientific methods, that qualified doctors considered it reasonable to strap metal plates to fourteen year old girls in an attempt to destroy their ovaries through radiation (Strzlelecka:2004:89). That such grotesque experiments could be justified by science and by scientists seems to justify Nietzsche's diagnosis of the pathology of modernity. It is only not the 'geist' of modernity that could allow the Holocaust to happen, but far more substantively the methods of modernity:
The only manifest difference between the Holocaust and 'normal life' was that the powers of the bureaucratic administration were given the objective of exterminating the Jews. The link between modernity and the Holocaust is certainly a strong one; the creation of Weber's depersonalised 'legal rational' society, combined with the principles pioneered by entrepreneurs like Ford, create the political and social space for men to be so thoughtless, unengaged and alienated with the product of their labour, that when held accountable for the deaths of over six million European Jews, their answers are those that any factory worker might illicit, "I just load the trains", "I just cut their hair", "I just do as I'm told". This alienation from the product of labour, that is a fundamental trait of modernity, allows the disengagement from reality: the end product is never realised in the minds of the perpetrators. It is a grotesque paradox that a quarter of a century after men were yoked to the production line, that humanity should find itself on the same line progressing slowly towards the furnace at the end.
Bauman not only examines the rationality of the methods deployed by the Third Reich, he also examines the rationality of the Jewish victims. In his essay Soliciting the Co-operation of the Victims Bauman explores how the Jews under Nazism were not only complicit in but actively aided the 'final solution'. "Jewish councillors and Jewish policemen were faced with a simple choice; to die or to let others die... Playing God was made easier by self interest" (Bauman:1989:144). The rationality of such actions seems unquestionable, self preservation is the driving force behind man's rationality for many of the Enlightenment thinkers and their forefathers. Bauman distinguishes between the rationality of the actor and the rationality of the action :
The decision to collaborate with one's own executors is irrational, but if such collaboration may offer redemption it is rational. It is in this ghetto situation where we see another evil of the Holocaust, where neighbour must, or a least can, condemn his neighbour in order to try and survive. In contrast to this view Arendt sees the impossibility of any rational behaviour under such circumstances; "when a man is faced with the alternative of betraying and murdering his friends or sending his wife and children... to their death; when even suicide would lead to the immediate murder of his own family - how is he to decide? The alternative is no longer between good and evil, but between murder and murder. Who could solve the moral dilemma of the Greek mother, who was allowed by the Nazis to choose which of her three children should be killed?" (Arendt:1973:452). For Arendt the whole idea of rationality is impossible under totalitarian regimes, it is wrong and dangerous to judge them by existing standards.
Even as the allied tanks closed in on Berlin the 'deportation' of Jews continued,
Indeed the resources required to maintain the death camps meant that the rest of the German army was stretched beyond its limit:
The concentration camps are in no way the rational conclusion to anti-Semitism, the means-to-ends calculation simply 'explodes' when we actually examine the functioning of them.
This is perhaps one of the reasons why the allies never chose to bomb the tracks that lead east.
The solution for Arendt is to not rely upon 'modern political thought' and assumptions of instrumental and economic rationality, but rather to accept the difficulty of understanding the 'mad unreality' of the Holocaust. The struggle to understand, which is not the same as condone or forgive, is what gives power to the political act of understanding. "Since totalitarianism suppresses the activity of understanding, the activity of understanding becomes itself a form of resistance" (Fine:2001:104). We must resist the temptation to normalise the Holocaust, but neither can we demonize the acts of men who were not " fanatics, adventurers, sex maniacs, crackpots...but first and foremost job holders and good family men" (Arendt:1973:338). If we decide that the death camps are the fulfilment of an unknown prophecy foretold in the beginnings of the enlightenment we not only lose our innocence we lose hope. But equally the Holocaust should not merely become an evil out of time like some natural catastrophe.
There are, and can be, no parallels to the concentration camps in life, though elements of modern life may be found in their mechanisms. Bauman is correct in his assessment of the means of the Holocaust, and I do not believe that Holocaust could happen in anything but a modern society, but the objective of the Holocaust was something completely irrational, and this makes it irreconcilable with modernity.
this implosion of ideology defies all 'modern' methods of explanation.
The self-cannibalism and anti-utilitarianism that for Arendt is inherent in totalitarian regimes: Hitler came to power through democratic institutions and once in power proceeded to destroy these principles and processes from the inside, the same paradigm apparent in totalitarianism and the state and the Holocaust and modernity.
Mourning must be an essential part of understanding the Holocaust, not only for the waste of human life and the terrible suffering caused to those who died under the Nazi policies of extermination, but also we must mourn the loss of our own 'innocence', for to truly understand the Holocaust is to fear radical evil, and to recognise the potential for its resurgence in our own societies.