There seem two approaches to this question: the first is that the holocaust was fundamentally different from our modern experience, and as such post 1945 we had to redefine our existence. The second is that the Holocaust is the twisted epoch of modernity. "The principal disagreement here is one between those who perceive the Holocaust in the realisation of modernity's ownmost bureaucratic possibilities, culminating in the classification and sub-classification of populations, meticulously organised timetables of transports, and ethical displacement; and those for whom it is the product of a pre-modern irrationalism secreted with the political culture of the early twentieth century Europe, a corrosive but eliminable residue." (Turner:2000:236) This antagonistic and dialectical approach to the Holocaust was presented by Arendt and her discourse on this subject is neatly surmised by Bernstein in his book Hannah Arendt and the Jewish Question in which he discusses Arendt's own change of heart on the nature of Holocaust, 'From Radical Evil to the Banality of Evil'. This transposes itself on to the debate that took place during the Nuremburg Trials, a debate which this question implicitly alludes to: are the instruments of totalitarianism extraordinary acts of evil, or are they a distortion, or a culmination of modern political institutions? Is Eichmann a devil or a man? To distance ourselves from the atrocities directed towards the Jews in Nazi Germany, is to safely, but naively, dismiss the shock and the 'reality' of the Holocaust. But to be defeated by pessimism, the pessimism created by neighbour killing neighbour, and to diagnose modernity as terminal is to allow those forces which are most abhorrent in human nature to claim victory. "Hannah Arendt described the Holocaust as a 'rupture with civilisation' that shattered all existing ideas of progress, all feelings of optimism, all previously engraved images of Europe as a civilised community, all notions of the innocence of modern political thought" (Fine:2000:19) But this is not an excuse for simple answers, the horrors of the 'final solution' are not beyond are comprehension, they do however lie beyond the confines of 'modern' political thought. The death camps raise a number of questions, and involve a wide and varied assortment of components. These components are often located and juxtaposed with their antithesis. These are perhaps the hardest to grasp, but also offer the greatest insight to the true horrors of the Holocaust. "The Holocaust was born and executed in out modern rational society, at the high stage of our civilization and at the peak of human achievement, and for this reason it is a problem of that society, civilization and culture." (Bauman:1989:x). Yet the Holocaust was infact irrational, unpunishable and unforgivable by all methods available to that society, civilisation and culture.
The first combination of apparent opposites I wish to discuss is the distinction made by Arendt between 'radical evil' and the 'banality of evil'. This is the most essential feature of the Holocaust, and should always be in our mind when looking at other features of it. So before going any further we must come to terms with these 'catchwords'. 'Radical evil' was a phrase not created by Arendt but by Kant, who rationalised this "in the concept of a 'perverted ill will'" (Arendt:1973:459) .The motives of 'radical evil' are decipherable through the methods of enlightenment. 'Radical evil' fitted within an existing classification system, the devil is still an angel, just one who has fallen from grace. For Arendt 'radical evil' is not comprehensible by these methods, "[T]herefore, we actually have nothing to fall back on in order to understand a phenomenon that nevertheless confronts us with its overpowering reality and breaks down all standards we know." (Arendt:1973:459). Arendt does not offer us the meaning of this evil in the Origins of Totalitarianism, but in a letter to her former tutor Karl Jaspers she tries to offer an answer.
The Holocaust was not about hate, envy revenge: these are all to reasonable within the realms of our understanding. It was about creating an environment in which to experiment on human nature, and how to extinguish spontaneity, and even complicity in the elimination of your self. This ideas of superfluousness are examine by Arendt in her chapter The Decline of the Nation State and the Ends of the Rights of Man. The creation of the modern state was built implicitly and explicitly on the will of its citizens who intrinsically had rights. "[O]nly with a completely organized humanity could the loss of home and political status biome identical with the expulsion from humanity altogether" (Arendt:1973:297) People cease to have the right to have rights. Only in the death camps, in the laboratories and factories of death can the systematic deconstruction of the soul take place. And only here can people be made truly superfluous (Bernstein:1996:Chapter 7).
The story does not end here for Arendt, for 'radical evil' is more than 'evil motives', but this is not to say that the Nazis were insane, mad men on a quest of destruction. Humanity can survive in the face of maniacs: Eichmann was not a devil, he was a man. "He was not stupid. It was sheer thoughtlessness-something by no means identical with stupidity- that predisposed him to become one of the greatest criminals of that period. And if this is 'banal' and even funny, if with the best will in the world one cannot extract any diabolical or demonic profundity from Eichmann, that is still calling it far from common place... That such remoteness from reality and such thoughtlessness can wreak more havoc than all the evil instincts taken together which, perhaps, are inherent in man, that was in fact, the lesson one could learn in Jerusalem" (Arendt:1977:287-8) This passage has provoked much criticism of Arendt and resulted in exclusion from some Jewish communities. By calling this 'banal' she is not trivialising the events of the Holocaust, she is, more importantly, refusing to raise Eichmann, and Hitler to 'satanic greatness'. And this is perhaps the most disturbing twist to the Holocaust, that it was in fact not extra-ordinary, not to those who those involved. "In this context the term 'banality of evil' was, I think, her way of saying the Holocaust was 'human, all to human'." (Fine:2000:35)
This 'banality' of the perpetrators of these 'crimes against humanity' this realness suggests that the transition to the 'final solution' was not something fundamentally new. The Holocaust contained recognizable elements of modernity, so much so that thoughtlessness was all that was required to enable 'production of corpses'. The rationality of modernity was twisted under totalitarianism and its goal of total domination into something more than simply irrational, but into something outside the bounds of rationalism all together. The very institutions and modes of operation created and facilitated by modernity became the instruments of terror and death. In his essay Soliciting the Co-operation of the Victims Bauman explores how the Jews under Nazism were not only complicit in but actively aided the 'final solution'. "Jewish councillors and Jewish policemen were faced with a simple choice; to die or to let others die... Playing God was made easier by self interest" (Bauman:1989:144) The rationality of such actions seems unquestionable, self preservation is the driving force behind man's rationality for many of the Enlightenment thinkers and their forefathers. Bauman distinguishes between the rationality of the actor and the rationality of the action :"Reason is a good guide for individual behaviour only on such occasions as the two rationalities resonate and overlap. Otherwise it turns into a suicidal weapon. It destroys its own purpose, knocking down on the way moral inhibitions- its only constraint and potential saviour." (Bauman:1989:149) The decision to collaborate with one's own executors is irrational, but if such collaboration may offer redemption it is rational. It is in this ghetto situation where we see another evil of the Holocaust, where neighbour must, or a least can condemn his neighbour in order to try and survive. The dehumanisation process begun by removing legal rights, then the right to freedom, then to cut away solidarity, the Holocaust was much more than simply the death camps, it was so much more than extermination of people, souls and minds were erased before the body was disposed of . In this way "Bauman argues that the Holocaust was not a novum in history but the outcome of the technological rationalism of modern society and the attendant normative socialisation of modern subjects" (Gorman:2000:49). The link between modernism is certainly a strong one; the creation of Weber's depersonalised 'legal rational' society, combined with the principles pioneered by entrepreneurs like Ford, create the political and social space for men to be so thoughtless, unengaged and alienated with the product of their labour, that when held accountable for the deaths of over six million European Jews, their answers are those that any factory worker might illicit, "I just load the trains", "I just cut their hair", "I just do as I'm told". This alienation from the product of labour, that is a fundamental trait of modernity, allows the disengagement from reality. The end product is never realised in the minds of the perpetrators. It is a grotesque paradox that a quarter of a century after men were yoked to the production line, that humanity should find itself on the same line progressing slowly towards the furnace at the end.
This however is not the whole story. Bauman is correct in his assessment of the means of the Holocaust, and I do not believe that Holocaust could happen in anything but a modern society. But the objective of the Holocaust was something completely irrational, and this makes it irreconcilable with modernity. Even as the allied tanks closed in on Berlin the 'deportation' of Jews continued, "The uselessness of the camps, their cynically admitted anti-utility, is only apparent" (Arendt:1973:456). Indeed the resources required to maintain the death camps meant that the rest of the German army was stretched beyond its limit: "Common sense trained in utilitarian thinking is helpless against this ideological supersense." (Arendt:1973:458), and is perhaps one of the reasons why the allies never chose to bomb the tracks that lead east. This self-cannibalism is something that for Arendt is implicit in totalitarian regimes, the totalitarian state is infact anti-state. Hitler came to power through the democratic process, and then proceeded to chisel away the institutions and principles of that democracy from the inside, the same paradigm is apparent in totalitarianism and the state, and the Holocaust and modernity. If we decide that the death camps are the fulfilment of an unknown prophecy foretold in the beginnings of the enlightenment we not only lose our innocence we lose hope. But equally the Holocaust should not merely become an evil out of time like some natural catastrophe. I do not think that there are any new principles, only new lessons to be learnt; "the one lesson that totalitarianism should have taught us is that it is an illusion to think that radical evil is impossible. 'Everything is possible.' All of Arendt's thinking is directed against the ever present, real danger of the eruption of radical evil." (Bernstein:1996:153).