It appears strange to talk about a state thought up in 1651 could be in any sense modern. Just several years after the Treaty of Westphalia, which is generally agreed to be the birth of the modern nation state, was Hobbes theorising and legitimising this state already? There are of course many different versions of the 'modern state' and no single one can claim to be true. This does not, however, stop us from appraising 'Leviathan' in terms of its modernity. There is a constant struggle in the latter half of 'Of Man' and the early chapters of 'The Commonwealth' between rights as an individual and sovereignty and power of the state. These questions are still relevant today, and political theory since Hobbes has challenged and sought to expound the problems between 'liberties' and 'obligations'. I shall begin this essay by offering a summary of Hobbes' account of the state and then examine the possibility of 'Leviathan' being a modern state, particularly by comparing it with the political writings of Max Weber. I shall then look at differing views of the modern state that refute Leviathan as modern. My conclusion will be that there are concepts within Leviathan that are uniquely modern, and how the social contract tradition was vital in the formation of modern states. Having said that there are modern ideas in Hobbes, this does not mean that his end result is a modern state.
Hobbes conducts a thought experiment in which he places all men in a 'state of nature'.
In this state all men are equal, in the sense that they are equal in their fear of one another and their insecurity. Even the weakest can use some 'secret machination' and kill the strongest in his sleep. Men are all equal in their hopes, desires and passions, that is not to say that all men share the same dreams, but they have and equal opportunity of obtaining them. In the 'state of nature' men may do what they see fit to procure the ends they desire for the "preservation of his own nature". But he may also seek power and glory either as a means to obtain more pleasure and security, or as an ends in themselves. Because of this constant competition and fear, men are in a constant state of war:
In this state of war there will be no culture, no art and life will be generally nasty and short. Despite this rather grim outlook men have a chance to gain the peace that they inherently desire. Men can renounce their natural rights to a sovereign in return for a protection. This is the basis of the social contract. Rights are given up and replaced with obligations and obedience to the sovereign.
This sovereign offers assurance to those entering into covenants, and allows men to live in peace and carry out the laws of nature as stated in Chapter XV 'in foro externo'. Hobbes' sovereign has absolute power, as he still retains all the liberties that he had in a state of nature. The sovereign is not answerable to the people, and can make laws and arbitrate in accordance with the laws of nature as he sees fit. The sovereign is to be the punisher of those who break covenants, of which codified law is a part, and protect individuals from harm and injury from others.
This although an all too brief account of arguably the most important sections of 'Leviathan' is nonetheless useful as it highlights key areas of examination. Firstly Hobbes' conception of human nature is way ahead of his time; his idea of man as in competition for scarce goods is not fully examined for another hundred years when Adam Smith talks of the 'invisible hand of the market'. Secondly his description of a state of war, aptly describe the international situation from Hobbes' time to the contemporary global system. Thirdly the social contract has been used since Hobbes to justify modern political institutions. Fourthly the sovereigns power as absolute and over-arching. This is an especially salient point as when Hobbes was writing Feudalism was declining. This links in with the fifth point of the scientific and legal rationality of this process. Power is legitimised through rational methods and upheld through codified laws rather than through customs and divinity. Although the first two points are extremely interesting and deserving of attention, it is latter three that are key to this question.
The notion of the social contract is a myth that has been propagated to justify the existence of the modern state. It acknowledges that humans have natural rights, and that these have been given up in greater or lesser degrees in return for the state providing governance. This at least on the surface implies some kind or interaction between the rulers and the ruled. It also suggests a hierarchy of rights, and these of course are integral to the values of a society.
This idea of representation is a distinctively modern concept. In pre-modernity, social order was preordained by God or by blood. Hobbes' 'state of nature' and the process of social contract gives everyone rights, something which we take for granted in a modern era. This pluralistic view of politics and power is more associated with liberal democracy rather than the monarchies of the 17 th century. However, to believe that Hobbes was advocating some kind of direct or representative democracy would be to take his words out of context:
Hobbes sovereign is "unpunishable by the subject".
This lack of citizenship excludes Leviathan from being a modern state. A modern state is a nation state. For people to belong to a nation that can call on them; they require that the state gives up some of its rights in order to procure their services. A modern government must have authority, not simply power, where authority is legitimate power. Without some kind of representation this legitimacy would not exist in a modern state.
Legitimacy has a central role in state building:
This is Max Weber's basis for the foundation of a modern state: that it is the only source of violence in a given area. This is modern for two reasons. Firstly that it is bound to a piece of land, pre-modernity there were no borders but frontiers, which competing groups laid claim to. Secondly there is only one source of violence that is legitimate in a modern society. In pre-modern societies feudal lords, local courts and local customs could punish individuals. 'Leviathan' sits quite happily alongside this definition of a modern state. Implicit within his writing is the fact that the sovereign is linked to a given area; namely over those that have renounced their right to the sovereign and over no more and no less. Secondly the Hobbesian state is the only source of violence in society:
This codification of laws also is modern. Weber calls this the 'legal rational' domination or "rule by virtue of legality" If we accept Hobbes judgements on people to be true, then it is merely a consequence of the definitions that, scientifically, we are lead to the creation of the all powerful sovereign. Using logic rather than custom and religion to define government is another fundamental building block of the modern state. Again we may not agree with where Hobbes actually ends up following his logic, but the methodology is that of modernity.
In conclusion it is difficult to juxtapose Hobbes complete work with modernity. We must remember that he is writing in a time of civil war and is motivated by finding a solution that would give peace. And maybe this context confined Hobbes from truly exploring the revolutionary ideas within his own work. However it is possible to find links to the modern state: the monopoly of power within the state, the methodology of rationality and logic, the codification of law. But most importantly Hobbes gives us the language of the social contract, without which it would be impossible to theorise about any kind of modern state. The idea that there is some give and take between the state and society; even the omnipotent sovereign is restrained by the laws of nature. The language of rights and responsibilities is as pertinent as ever in today's contemporary world. But crucially Hobbes fails to create the citizen, underestimates the power of the 'state of nature' and the freedom that modernity is constantly striving for and this is perhaps why we find it so difficult to accept his 'Mortal God' as anything remotely modern: