There are of course numerous factors that have contributed to the creation of the 'science of society'. Since ancient Greece, Plato and Aristotle have thrown around ideas of man and his role in society. Aristotle famously said that man was a "political animal" and in context this could also be translated as man is a social animal. After Aristotle there have actually been many attempts to study society, Ibn Khaldun in the 14 th century, and may attempts in medieval Europe, though under the guises of ethics and philosophy. But it was not until post-revolution Europe that a real independent sociology was created. Thinking laterally it would seem that sociology has existed since the beginning of civilised society, but the science of society which I think is subtlety different enough to be a separate subject did not emerge until the 19 th century.
It is an important distinction to make at this point, the emphasis must be on the word 'science' the idea that society can be 'scientifically' studied. Science is unfortunately a rather conceptual notion. Stoker and Marsh call science "ordered knowledge based on systematic inquiry" This would be a contrary view to that of Comte and his prodigy, if that would be appropriate, Emile Durkheim held. They believed that sociology could be the queen of the sciences, it could emulate Newtonian physics and later Darwinian biology. The same methods could be used and similar causal relations could be determined; just like Newton's second law. In some form or another, the concept that we can actually see patterns in society is fundamental. Despite earlier attempts it was not until Comte that this determinacy was recognised. Determinacy means that a pattern can be seen, before Comte and the 'enlightenment' more broadly society had been taken for granted. It could not be changed, unless by some divine intervention, and by divine this could be intervention through religion or the absolute monarch. It was the enlightenment movement sought to debunk this basis of power through knowledge.
The enlightenment was a collection of intellectual ideas and fashions. It would be wrong to assume that it was a focussed movement with a goal, it was more a network of members who could communicate and discuss varying issues. So was it just this wealth of knowledge caused the creation of sociology? That the intelligentsia had a need for such a topic? This natural idea of evolution, would have been Comte's explanation- himself believing in a three stage evolutionary system; from transcendental to metaphysical and then to the study of sciences. As with many sociologists, the only way I can think to explain this is using an analogy to political theory: Fukuyama would argue that liberal economics leads to the creation of a middle class and these eventually demand political power- resulting in democracy. If democracy is sociology, and the middle class are the philosophe then what are liberal economics? The development of the printing press, the schism in Christianity, scientific (in the natural science fashion) advances: gravity, astronomy, chemistry, ad so on. The list would in theory be endless as everyone is a product of their time, maybe to follow it a bit further, all actions are inevitable conclusions to a multitude of factors all stacked on top of each other in a nice chronological fashion. Though this is a rather fruitless, negative conclusion as the question still stands.
If we take it for granted that the enlightenment members were influenced by what had gone before and not until then had the means for them to exist been in place, how did the enlightenment develop the idea of science of society. Irvin Zeitlun sums up quite neatly what was a state of mind more that belongs to the enlightenment from Locke to Rousseau: " All aspects of a man's life and works were subject to critical examination... Through reason and science, men could achieve greater degrees of freedom" Cynically I would argue in a Marxian tradition, by men he meant the philosophes. They were the ones who would benefit from taking power from the church and monarch. They owned intellectual property and are the same kind of capitalist as one who owns a factory and demands economic freedom in order to increase her or his wealth. The enlightenment was another capitalist rouse to gain more power and control. One only has to look at the rather wealthy backgrounds to see the influences of these men- just as the French revolution was done by the upper class and made to look like a sans culottes revolution, these thinkers wished the world to see them as great humanitarians. So perhaps the whole idea of sociology is to make us believe that the elitist ruling classes actually are doing something for us, looking out for our welfare, when in reality they are just creating a false consciousness. It's [sociology] birth coinciding with the new need to discipline people in a workforce. This does create a certain paradox as Marx was a sociologist, and I do not seriously believe it to be a capitalist plot, but I think self interest certainly played a part in enlightenment thought.
Another major factor in the creation of science of society was the creation of a modern state, not until there was a large enough body of people deemed to have common goals was their really anything to study other than in a purely speculative way. Giddens points to the 'two great revolutions' The French Revolution 1789 (and the American revolution of 1776) as these were revolutions not guided by 'budgetary requirements' that is to say food shortage or to lower taxes, they were guided by secular ideals: fraternity, liberty, equality. The other great revolution was the industrial revolution starting in Britain in the late 18 th century and then spreading throughout western Europe in the 19 th. The urbanisation and industrialisation of the late 18 th and throughout the 19 th century created problems for people by people, these phenomenon could no be adequately explained by religion or science. People had to reflexively look at themselves in order to see solutions, no longer were answers to hand either from tradition or religion. New rules needed to be applied, more people leaving in close proximity without the personal relationships they had experienced in the countryside created the need for new solutions, either through charity or entrepreneurship people would be attracted to solve these problems.
So we have a combination of the enlightenment running throughout the late 17 th and 18 th century, culminating, or perhaps ending, in the French revolution of 1789 .Then came Comte followed by Marx, Durkheim and Weber. This would be a good timeline of the birth of science of society, but before them Locke and Newton were contemporaries, and suddenly the lineage blurs; who caused who? There were no revolutions to influence them, no citizen had yet been created. But this brings us back to the endless list of factors that could be added up, the breakdown of the roman empire, the introduction of Christianity as the religion of Europe, the black death. To all these the vague beginnings of sociology could be associated. But as with Aristotle the concept of science of society was not formulated, it was still a speculative exercise; not based on empirical data. It was not until Comte thought that natural science principles could be applied to the study of man that sociology became a 'science' instead of an armchair pursuit of political philosophers.
I believe the reason that it was first conceived as a science in the natural science way was because that is what people (by people I more accurately mean the wealthy and literate classes- about 33% of the French population was literate in 1789) knew. Physics and chemistry were winning great acclaim and it would only be natural to want to emulate them. Perhaps at the time the laity seemed more like objects than the 'educated' masses that we are used to in modern society. Even the French revolution appears reactive rather than inspired. For example, the storming of the Bastille was not done out of any political or symbolic motives, though it has acquired these now, it was simply that earlier in the day the mob had stolen guns and needed gunpowder- the Bastille was the store for gunpowder in Paris. Perhaps we are more like lumps of metal than we care to admit, reacting to basic needs and stimuli. Maybe that is why it was conceived as a science and the enlightened elite could watch over the people as objective scientists, as the society that created them was in no way related to the society that created most people. This would probably translate to current rational choice theory! But Comte clearly wanted to add prestige to his ideas, jumping on the intellectual bandwagon of the natural sciences was the best way to do that. Since Comte a more humanistic approach developed, but without something to be critical of, or in opposition to, this would not have possible. Even if Comte is wrong about being able to study people as objects, without an initial idea than can be no dialogue- only speculative assertions. Today I think it is wisest to walk a line between hard science and science as a ordered knowledge- with a tendency to the latter.