In the present political climate ethnicity and housing are key topics. In almost all countries across history, has existed the myth of the immigrant. This myth is still prevalent in modern society. Immigrants are feared and discriminated against, because they are markedly different from the indigenous population. Economic recession, crime, and almost any other societal problem can be blamed on those identifiably 'non-local'. This question will broadly examine if this discrimination leads to migrants in Britain being clustered into specific areas, and types of accommodation, and what effect this in turn has on the migrant population. It will focus on structural discrimination, this is not to say this is the only type of discrimination, but it is the most relevant type for this essay. This essay will attempt to objectively define the key concepts of class and ethnicity, and then to question if these are useful definitions and whether any alternative concepts should be uses instead?
The first concept that needs to be defined is that of class. Class is a method of social stratification. Those belonging to a class have empirically similar biographies and may share common interests (Abercrombie:1988:35). A housing class is a social structure created by the ownership and control of housing (Rex and Moore:1967:36). The empirical similarities come from the geographical location and type of home that households live in (Abercrombie:1988:114). These geographical commonalities come from Burgess' model of the modern urban city, that of concentric circles (Burgess:1925). The closer to the middle the less desirable the living conditions become, though the actual centre itself is a commercial and wealthy zone. Rex and Moore defined five housing classes in Birmingham:
This is neo-Weberian view of class. Weber gives equal consideration to the ownership of domestic property as to the ownership of the means of industrial production (Benix and Lipset:1953:63) In contrast to Marx's class based solely on the relations of production Weber's concept of class was:
Access to the housing market, and power within that market will help determine someone's class. Stucturationists refer to this as 'knowledgeability' and 'capability' (Sarre:1989:43). The history of all mankind is class struggle (Marx:1848/1994:158). The history of modern, urban, industrialised society is that of housing class struggle (Rex and Moore:1967:273). The struggle to own domestic property and the struggle to get better quality housing.
Housing classes develop inner class struggle and epitomize lack of unity.
However this leads to a major criticism of Rex and Moore. Housing class is a product of the wider proletariat versus bourgeoisie struggle. This type of categorization using domestic property allocation is highly useful for:
Marxists and stucturationists would not argue with the findings, but seek to place them in a larger framework. With reference to the Sparkbrook example, manual workers may find themselves in poorer quality houses, because they do not earn the regular wage required to gain access to a mortgage. But this is representative of structuralised bias against them as a piece-worker rather than as a housing class.
Another problem with the concept of housing class is that it assumes collective solidarity, or at least awareness between those in an objective empirical position. In 2000 a government survey found that almost 50% of people did not feel there was a community spirit within their neighbourhood. The recent golden jubilee lack-of-celebrations compared with those witnessed in 1977 shows that communities are not united. Housing class is as open to criticism as Marx's class system in that it shows no solidarity anymore. This is perhaps because many more people own their own houses since 1967, almost 70% in 2001, which may stop people having such a shared interest in the local district. Is housing class relevant in the 21 st century? Or could we say as is said of Marx; that it is located in a period of capitalist development. Such a question is beyond the scope of this essay.
Rex and Moore's concept of housing class was based in a larger hypothesis that ethnic minorities are disadvantaged and segregated from the white local residents. Despite many criticisms towards their work, it is still significant, especially in the formation and composition of 'ghettos' or 'zones of transition' in cities.
Before proceeding any further, clarification of 'ethnic' is needed. Ethnic in the question refers to ethnic group. An ethnic group is described as having a shared culture (Abercrombie:1988:90). Though this can be externally as well as internally created, and unfortunately ethnic groups are usually described by physical traits. There are of course many different ethnic groups, but in relation to this question ethnic groups form a conglomerate. Housing classes certainly could be used to differentiate between individual ethnic minorities, but are more constructive if used to differentiate essentially between those who 'belong' to the host country and those who do not. In the case of Britain this descends, in every sense of the word, to white versus non-white residents.
The common quality that 'unites' ethnic groups into a larger group is that they are in someway visibly different to the host population, and this is usually the colour of their skin. This is, however, an inadequate reason for ethnic minorities position in the housing market, personal discrimination is not enough. There are structural societal forces that 'push and pull' ethnic minorities into the same geographical location. Migrants initially came to Britain to work, and so naturally gravitated to the industrial cites London and Birmingham being the two largest. Once in the cities they required accommodation, but had a low socio-economic status and so found themselves in the cheap and dilapidated area of town. As more migrants came there was a tendency to live with people of the same shared heritage. (Sarre:1989:Chapter 1). Immigrants have similar 'market situations' and so end up in similar housing, and because their basic 'market situation' is extremely poor; language barriers, lack of knowledge of the area and the housing system, they will end up in the worst housing. Does this make them a class in their own right, or are they on the wrong end of capitalist market forces? Marxists argue that this creation of an underclass is a 'reserve industrial army' (Sarre:1989:14). They are just another strand of the working class. However as Engels noted classes struggle between themselves, the 'aristocracy of labour' may wish to increase its status by lowering others. Weber calls this social closure, where groups are excluded in order for others to maximise rewards. Good quality housing is kept for the host population by the threat of discrimination and social exclusion, thus 'forcing' immigrants to live together. This has a dual effect notes Parker; that the immigrant group closes itself off, in response to the primary closure by the majority of society (Sarre:1989:34-5). This closed community is then more attractive to immigrants who share culture, and possibly already know relatives or friends living there. As the closed zone becomes markedly more and more segregated from the host culture, the host culture puts less resources into and so closes it out more and so on.
This does not seem to create a specific housing class, though the houses and the areas may be similar. The reason 'zones of transition' come about is because of economic factors in a capitalist market. Those with little market power- i.e. money or the resources to money will have to live in worse areas. A class certainly then arises from this original market position; but whether it is called a housing class seems arbitrary (Giddens:1986:108). What is actually important is the isolated and disadvantaged nature of the community created. Structural forces then maintain this situation. The importance of market forces do not make ethnic discrimination redundant, if anything ethnicity makes such forces even more potent. It creates radicalized zones of discontent, but paradoxically these zones then become more remote from society, because of base physical discrimination. Instead of radicalizing society as Marxists might hope.
Housing classes are useful tool for examining urban situations. This class view enables sociologists to grasp other problems, even if in the end the link and border between housing classes becomes obsolete. The task is identify those groups who are prejudiced against structurally, and where and how people live is a valid way to do that. Moving from the theoretical world to the real one; underprivileged areas are a serious problem to modern society and because there have always been them it makes explaining them all the more complex and essential.