Before we can answer the question of what is distinctive about modern society, we must first decide what modern society is. Modernity is very conceptual, some authors would say that modern cities date back to 1450, others consider that the treaty of Westphalia is the 'beginning' of modernity and others would say that it is later than that starting at the end of the 18 th century. Modernity is equally debated at the contemporary end of the spectrum, some say we live in late or high modernity and others believe we live in a post modern era. When does modernity begin, and where does it end are key to deciding its features.
If we were to take the simplest concept of what is modern we would say today is modern. We would mainly be referring to the technologies we possess, and certain lifestyles. But if today is modern, what was yesterday, and if yesterday was modern, what about last year? Is modern just today then that is the only distinctive feature that need be named. But is today in the UK the same as today in Ethiopia, if we were there would we call it a modern society? If so what then do Ethiopia and Britain have in common, and if the answer is none, then can both be modern societies? All these considerations must be made when answering this question.
As we have seen to call modernity simply today problems arise as we see that last week was actually quite similar. But what made it similar? Stuart Hall gives us four criteria that make society modern, starting with the state:
This would put the modernization of Europe at around 1648 when the treaty of Westphalia created the 'modern nation state'. So modernity is infact over 300 years old, but as is also mentioned in the above quotation, no one cause can be singled out.
Hall emphasises the importance of political sovereignty and legitimacy that exist within the modern nation state. The economy must be a large scale production based on private ownership of property. He does however site the USSR as exempt from this, this for me immediately rules out the economy as a distinctive feature. If the USA and the USSR can both be modern in economic terms, then there seems little point in saying that a modern economy can encompass basically the whole spectrum of economies. There is nothing distinctive in this, indeed it is all encompassing. His third check is the decline of traditional forms of social order. He narrows this definition further to a new capitalist social order and the separation of male and female roles. This seems narrow minded seeing as he is a male and lives in capitalism, and can not conceive of anything other than 'today' as being modern, which would go against the whole point of modernity as a period. Or indeed if this is modernity then I would consider that we are not living a modern era anymore. Fourthly he suggests that a modern society must not be based on religion, people must be materialistic and rationalistic. This would delay the period of modernity, in Britain, and by Britain I more accurately mean England, and more accurately again urbanised southern England to around mid 19 th century. The point being that at no one time can a whole society to be totally one thing let alone claim to be all. To look at these criteria one might ask, did modernity ever exist?
England on the surface seems a modern society. It is a nation state, it is a capitalist and developed economy, social order is based on merit, and the majority of the population never go to any kind of religious institute - 72% of the population claim they are Christians only 9.6% ever attend church. How far is the nation state of England autonomous, more recently how legitimate is it? The EU accounts for a massive amount of regulation that all European countries must adhere to. There are also large scale business forces, either from MNCs or organisations like the CBI- how can the present UK government claim total sovereignty within its own borders when it has to answer to higher international powers, and even internal non-governmental forces. England may also be outwardly capitalist, but the government progressively tax to redistribute wealth- so the economy is based on more than "large scale production and consumption of goods". Social order is a very interesting point, Hall argues that traditional hierarchies are in decline and sexual division of labour is present. The royal family clearly show that the biggest traditional hierarchy still exists. I think that sexual division of labour is also contentious, he argues that to be modern there must be division, and patriarchal relations, formally England is not in such a state (excepting the frontline in the army), and although I will not contest that society is unequal in reality the trends are to move to less gender differences. Lastly religion, 5 million people still attend church and the head of our state, the traditional hierarchical one, is legitimated by the church of England. The only conclusion that can be drawn from Hall's criteria is that England is not a modern society.
Hall's is not however the only definition of what modernity, and although I may have been critical of each criteria they do serve as an initial way into looking at modernity, even if on further inspection problems arise. Modernity is more than the institutions that it is made up of. It is fundamental shift in attitude and lifestyle. Modernity requires us, on an unprecedented scale, to absorb more and more information and reflexively organise our lives around this knowledge.
We must also trust the experts who hand us this knowledge. For Giddens the abstraction of time and space are vital to this, in a modern society time and space do not matter. We can buy a house with the money we expect to earn in our lifetime, we do not need to know how the house has been built, or understand the principles that keep it standing. This analogy symbolises the trust in expert systems, in modernity we have to trust, this also includes a bracketing out of fears, we have to trust the systems of modernity. Giddens has a certain fascination with atomic destruction, and in several of his books refers to the constant risk that at any moment a H-Bomb could eradicate life. We have to have faith that this will not happen, such absent dangers did not exist in a pre modern would: danger, but also opportunity had to be experienced first hand in the social milieu. Modernity ushers in absent possibilities, often through what Giddens calls symbolic tokens- money being a good example of this. These shifts in thinking under-pin the conditions that Hall mentions; Hall is looking at the symptoms of modernity, not the actual problem. Though this does quite neatly I believe lead us back to the creation of the nation-state as key to modernity, as Hall mentioned it provided the framework, and I think it is also capitalists, not necessarily capitalism, that powers Giddens disembedding mechanisms and trust. Again this fits quite neatly into the creation of the nation-state, which was influenced largely by capitalist ventures- war included. I think the nation-state was important in bringing about modernity, but is not necessary for its continuation- as I mentioned earlier the nation-state is not as sovereign as it used to be (maybe it never was) but surely this is just part of the reflexive nature of modernity, looking at our current institutions and reforming them with the new incoming information. To live in world post-states is not necessarily to live in a post-modern world. Indeed as Giddens calls it, we are in a period of late modernity, though this does imply that modernity is ending- presumably to replaced by something else, but I don't think we are quite there yet. Globalisation still being a massive buzz word, and people still coming to terms with the shrinking of the world even further, perhaps lead toward the idea of the information or global society being the next era. But the nature of modernity is global- with its continual (recently accelerated) deconstruction of tradition and advance into all corners of the world. In saying this it is still important to recognise that although modernity has distinctive features, modern society still has tradition. It is not swallowed by modernity merely pushed a little further back, clearly in many modern societies tradition plays, to greater or lesser extents, valuable roles.
The distinctive features of a modern society are not so much visible institutions and technologies, all eras of history have new inventions that were previously inconceivable- such is the nature of history- things must be in context. But modernity represents a move from traditional ways of looking at the world. The separation of time and space, the development of disembedding mechanisms, the reflexive appropriation of knowledge all contributed to this- these in turn have lead to the breakdown of traditional hierarchies and religious dogma, and (one sixth of the world aside?) the rise of capitalism as a world economic system. I think modernity also shows its changing nature in the way that the nation-state has been outlived by modernity, despite it being an important factor in its creation. This I think is the most important feature of modernity, its free flowing, unanchored nature; to adapt, reflect and progress- not held down by ties to the past or tradition. I think the following quote sums this up - "modernity is intrinsically sociological"