From the late 19 th century and early 20 th century labour-capital relations began to undergo fundamental changes. In 1911 Frederick Taylor published "The Principles of Scientific Management" It was an attempt to document some of these changes, as well as spread these ideas more widely. It is from this book that the concept of Taylorism evolved. Key to the question is that Taylorism was different to what had come before, and that it came about for specific economic reasons. This essay will try to explain what Taylorism is, where it came from, and why it came into any kind of existence at all.
When Taylor published his book he believed that the working man had a natural tendency to 'soldiering' This meant that workers did less work than they were physically able to do (Taylor:1911:Chapter 1). Taylor noted two main reasons for this quasi industrial sabotage. Firstly it is that workers do not want to produce too much; as they risked of lowering the value of their, and their fellow worker's labour, in addition to decreasing the amount of labour needed for work. Secondly it is that the 'rule of thumb' methods are applied, men are not taught the fastest way to do a job. Taylor envisages 'scientific management' erasing these myths and inefficiency.
Taylor distinguishes this as different to what has been before, as his new relationship between employer and employee is based on 'scientific' observation, thus making any outcomes rational. Following on from this initial systematic analysis of work Littler sees Taylor as having three principles: the fragmentation of work, the separation of planning and doing and the divorce of 'direct' and 'indirect' labour (Littler:1978:371) This means that the management takes away the conceptual thought process involved in work (Braverman:1974:45/46), and prescribes to the worker the way a task will be done.
Because Taylor sees workers as inherently stupid (Littler:1978:371) jobs should be broken down to their simplest possible components. These methods were clearly taken up by Ford in his new factories where various ready-made jigsaws and later machines meant that work was deskilled and mentally unchallenging (Salaman:1992:342).
Was this a new phenomenon though? Braverman argues that capitalism has always had this rationality, a progression towards more and more control and the methods that Taylor is commenting are the continuation of a rational, technical progression:
The 'putting out system' and early factory work were all capitalist control methods. First controlling the product, then when the labour was done, and Taylorism was the final development of how work should be done (Braverman:1974:Chapter 2). Braverman sees the deskilling of the workforce as beneficial only for the capitalist employer, whereas Taylor says such management will allow mutual prosperity. The reality is that skilled labour costs employers more. To employ unskilled workers may be preferential, as not only are they cheaper but can also be replaced easily, which reduces their power. 'Scientific management' in Braverman's eyes increases capitalisms ability to exploit workers. Deskilling workers also removes any intrinsic value and satisfaction that was present in the work, alienating the worker from not only the product but from work also;
Braverman sees 'scientific management' as further subordination of the working class; in a classical Marxian bourgeoisie versus proletariat scenario. Littler criticises Braverman for this one-dimensional analysis. Taylorism was not about an omnipotent capitalism disenfranchising workers, it about formalising management structure. Before the professional management class existed factories were ran by 'gang bosses'. Early capitalism relied upon people of traditional power forms to coerce and provide the labour. The entrepreneur, the capitalist would hire these 'gang-bosses', who in turn, had to make sure that the work was done. The gang-bosses oversaw the hiring, firing and recruiting of labour. They were not concerned with what the labour was actually doing, so long as it was on time and productive. Taylorism changes foremen's work to 'executive' work to be done by a manager (Littler:1978:373) . This resembles Weber's rationalization and bureaucratization, where traditional forms of authority are replaced with 'legal-rational domination' (Craib:1997:136-142)
Taylorism is a functional organisational change, the relationship within large corporations between workers and between labour and capital remains similar. Clearly Braverman disagrees with this, as he sees Taylorism creating a more systematically exploitative relationship, as the capitalist no longer has to rely on workers' prior skills and knowledge. As work practices become codified then the connection between employer and employee by becomes more bureaucratic. Traditional 'rule of thumb' practices are replaced with 'legal'-rational written instructions. Maybe the relationship has not in its nature changed so much as evolved to a higher form. It was not the shift from an idealistic craft scenario that Braverman envisaged being consumed by deskilling, but nevertheless skill was taken from the 'shop floor' labourers into the 'planning department' (Taylor:1911:Chapter 1). The rationalization of control of work that Littler writes of by its nature changes the relationship between worker and employer, to a more formal and depersonalised one.
Having briefly dealt with the nature of the relationship between employer and employee, it still remains to discover why Taylorism was created. As has already been evidenced Taylorism positions itself neatly into a teleological view of the development of capitalism: it was only a matter of time before capitalists extended their hand to have more control over how work was done. This control was rational, and Weber sees society as rationalizing and 'abandoning god' for science (Craib:1997:136-142). Braverman emphasised the controlling nature of management but as Wood and Grint advocate, the main aim of the capitalist is to maximise profit, not control, and Taylorism is a profit maximising theory (Procter:2004). It seems common logic to simply say that large firms were at a stage of their development where they needed to look inwards for increase profit rather than looking to simply expand into new markets created through imperialism. Diseconomies of scale were present so action was needed in order for efficiency, and hence profit margins to increase. This all makes sense: but why choose Taylorism? Why not one of the alternative management strategies? Taylorism had to be tried and to essentially fail before alternatives could be devised. Managements soon recognised the need to balance pure Taylorism with ideas of job enlargement and job enrichment (Salaman:1992:347).
Taylorism is also logical in a period of greater labour organisation than ever before: the ruling classes were dealing with a new working class who were increasing political power as well as industrial power through unions. If the world is to be viewed through Marxian glasses then it is the conflict between labour and capital that causes social change (Marx:1848/1994:158). Taylorsim being indicative of the struggle for capitalists to maintain the status quo. It was not until after the second World War that labour started to react and resist (Wood and Kelly:1988:184). This reaffirms the to-and-fro struggle between labour and capital, as one develops so the other must evolve and change with it or be engulfed. So far capitalism has shown more flexibility to incorporate workers wants than Marx foresaw.
Finally it is important not to view Taylorism as an homogenous ideology across all sectors of industry. Though by its nature it does require large firms in order for the complete division of labour to occur. A large corporation is clearly a vague notion, how many machine how many workers is it? Braverman says a significant number of workers must be employed by one capitalist for it to be truly industrial capitalism (Braverman:1974:59). But this is no more helpful than large corporation. Taylorism was, and is, applied differently in different work environments. There maybe a new relationship in theory, and in theory Taylorsim is suited to large industrial complexes, but that does not mean that in practise this will always or even often be the case.
In conclusion this essay agrees with the question. Taylorism was a new form of relationship, it was both exploitive, bureaucratized, deskilling and formalising. It was developed because of large corporations need for concentrated power in order to reduce costs and increase profit. Taylorism has developed since its conceptualisation, but such a discussion would require a different question.