Tsunami: A term created by Japanese fishermen, meaning "harbour wave". It was coined after the sailors returned to port to find it had been devastated by waves, which had passed by unnoticed whilst they were at sea.
Tsunamis are a series of large waves in a body of water, such as a lake or the ocean. Tsunamis are often mislabelled as tidal waves - an inaccurate description, as tides play no part in the formation of tsunami. They are in fact caused by various disturbances in the ocean, most commonly underwater earthquakes (directly, or indirectly via undersea landslides) or volcanic eruptions.
The sudden movement of an undersea earthquake (or other disturbance) causes the water above the fault to rise, forming a "hump" of water higher than the average sea level (see diagram above). The hump then ripples outwards across the ocean; similar to the way ripples form when a stone is thrown into the water.
One of the major differences between tsunami and traditional waves is the way tsunami travel through the water. Waves are, in simple terms, the movement of energy through a material, or medium, in this case water. A normal wave will travel above the water's surface (hence surfing is a popular sport); however the energy of a tsunami travels through the entire depth of the water, and thus the speed at which it can travel depends on the depth at that point.
The practical upshot of this is that tsunami will move faster (up to 950km/hour) in deeper water, and as a result the wave is little higher than the usual sea level. This explains why the Japanese fishermen failed to notice the wave that destroyed the harbour - at sea the typical tsunami is up to 1 metre above sea level, scarcely noticeable amongst the usual tides.
This does not mean, however, that tsunamis are all small waves. As the energy is spread over the depth of the ocean, in shallower areas this causes the tsunami to compress, both slowing it down (to about 50km/hour) and raising it higher above sea level. Compare this to using a blunt knife and a sharp knife to cut things - because the sharp knife edge is much thinner and finer, it can cut things the blunt knife cannot. Similarly, the shallower water means the energy of the tsunami is focused in a smaller area, making the impact of a strong tsunami devastating.
The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami is perhaps the best example of the devastating effect of a strong tsunami. As seen in the picture above, the height of the wave grew far beyond 1 metre. The tallest tsunami ever recorded reached a height of 64 metres on impacting Kamchatka Peninsula in Siberia, in 1737. It is a misconception that all tsunamis are huge and devastating, however. Tsunamis are an everyday occurrence, with sizes ranging from barely noticeable, right up to cataclysm.
Another common misconception is that a tsunami only consists of one wave impact. In fact, most tsunami, including the Indian Ocean tsunami, occur in a series, or train, of strong floods over a period of up to 90 minutes after the initial impact (see below left). A single, enormous wave, such as in the picture below right, is known instead as a tidal bore.
To summarize:
Tsunamis are caused by displacement of water, most commonly due to undersea earthquakes. They are NOT caused by tidal forces.
Tsunamis travel through the entire depth of the ocean, and their speed depends on the depth of water they are travelling through.
As the water gets shallower, the tsunami slows down and grows taller.
Tsunamis rarely form a single wave - instead they occur as a series of fast floods. Research why!
When it impacts on a coastline, the damage can be extensive, or the impact can go unnoticed amongst the normal tides.