Popularity is an extremely difficult concept to measure as popularity is variable across cultures and ages. Characteristics defining a child as popular at the age of 8 may not be the same characteristics which define a child as popular at 14. Another problem arises distinguishing friendship from popularity. A child may be perceived as unpopular but still have a few close friends, and it is important to consider this when looking at psychological development because popularity is multi-faceted as opposed to one dimensional. It has been shown that unpopular children are more likely to have psychological difficulties such as schizophrenia, anxiety disorders, mood disorders and criminal behaviour (Kupersmidt, Coie and Dodge, 1990). Because of this, an important issue when looking at the effect of popularity on psychological development is cause and effect. This issue is covered extensively in the essay as it is valuable, yet difficult, to try and determine whether being unpopular causes problems with psychological development, or whether underlying psychological difficulties cause the child to behave inappropriately and become unpopular.
Popularity is an extremely important issue affecting all children. It is more important now than ever as parents tend to return earlier to work so children tend to spend more time with peers in nurseries and after school wrap-around classes. Characteristics of popular and unpopular children have been widely investigated, and there is some variation in the results found. Most commonly however it has been found in primary school aged children, between the ages of 4 and 11, the children regarded as popular tend to be co-operative, helpful, have leadership skills and actively engage in prosocial behaviour (Dekovic and Gerris, 1994). Unpopular children however tend to be aggressive, possessive, verbally aversive and display hostility (Dekovic and Gerris, 1994). To study the effect popularity has on psychological development however it is important to break the notion of "unpopularity" down into further components. Asher (1990) defines two types of unpopular children. The first are "rejected" and these are children who are actively disliked by their fellow peers (Asher, 1990). The second type are "neglected" and these are not actively disliked but tend to be timid and shy and are almost forgotten by peers and also appear to have a lack of friends (Asher, 1990). It is important to make this distinction as psychological development is influenced by whether you are considered "rejected" or "neglected", it appears that neglected children know how to behave socially but have problems putting this into practice, rejected children have difficulties with both (Asher, 1990).
It has been found by Coie and Dodge (1983) (as cited in Asher, 1990) that rejection is a stable process and once you have been rejected you are likely to stay rejected for at least the next five years. This is why it is important to look at the implications for this on the child's psychological development as it is likely the child will remain in their rejected situation until at least adulthood. An important aspect to consider with respect to this is labelling theory and the self fulfilling prophecy. When cause and effect are taken into account a child may remain unpopular because they believe themselves to be unpopular and therefore act in a way appropriate to the label they have been given. Also children are very aware of building alliances to secure their own popularity and if one child is labelled undesirable other children may not want to be associated with the labelled child thus securing their own alliances and popularity.
This may account for why children remain unpopular but it does not explain why the child may become unpopular or undesirable in the first place. One possible reason causing a child to be unpopular may be due to them having an autistic spectrum disorder (Hobson, 1995). Unfortunately many of the characteristics displayed by unpopular children are also displayed by children suffering from an autistic spectrum disorder such as Autism or Asberger's Syndrome. Children who are unpopular tend to only view situations from their own perspective, do not value others opinions and cannot empathise with their peers (Dekovic et al, 1994). Autism is a disorder where it is believed children lack a "Theory of Mind". This means that they find it very hard to see the world from any perspective but their own and fail to understand others emotions or social cues (Hobson, 1995). This may lead to the child becoming unpopular as perspective seeing is essential to being popular as are the communication and cognitive skills that someone with autism may lack. This is one reason a child may become unpopular as autism affects 5 in every 10,000 children (Hobson, 1995). If autism is not diagnosed until the later years the child will be in main stream education and more than likely be rejected by peers and possibly suffer the psychological problems associated with rejection which will be discussed later.
Another cause for a child being unpopular is associated with the family (Henggeler, Edwards, Cohen and Summerville, 1991). The majority of children spend their first few years learning from their parents so it is not surprising that these early years contribute to the child's personality and whether they become popular or unpopular. Ainsworth and Wittig (1969) (as cited in Henggeler et al, 1991) investigated types of attachment between mother and infant. They identified three types of attachment as these have been investigated with regards to child's future popularity. Vandell and Wilson (1987) (as cited in Henggeler et al 1991) found that children who are securely attached become more popular than those who are not securely attached and have more positive peer interactions. This is likely to be because these children have a secure base from which to explore from and feel confident in themselves to make social advances, knowing that they have support. This inner feeling of security may facilitate confidence and an interpersonal family may produce interactional skills.
To support this MacDonald (1987) (as cited in Henggeler, 1991) found that preschool boys who had been assessed as being "rejected" had parents who were less interpersonally responsive and were less emotionally positive. These children were more likely to have been considered to have had an attachment type of anxious avoidant or anxious resistant. If child had this attachment type then they will not have had a secure base from which to explore from and particularly anxious resistant children would have been anxious at leaving the caregiver and facilitating early social relationships.
This may be a cause in why some children become popular and why some children become unpopular. It is interesting to note however that the majority of research completed on attachment type and popularity occurred in 1987. This is just one year after Maine (as cited in Maine and Cassidy, 1988) introduced the new attachment type insecure disorganised. This means that attachment will have been in the media and well heard of, which may have been an incentive to link attachment with popularity and more may have been made of it than is actually there. Attachment suggests that it is causal in determining popularity although this seems a little reductionist and little has been done to investigate whether securely attached children are still more popular in the older years when there is less reliance on the parents. How this effects children in care would also need to be fully investigated before attachment could be seen as a deciding figure in a child's popularity. Also attachment claims to be a causal factor but it may be the child's temperament that causes attachment and popularity therefore attachment is not the cause, but the child's personality. It may not be as much attachment but more to do with Bandura's social learning theory (1969) (as cited in Grusec 1992) as children who's parents are emotionally responsive and communicative to them learn to be emotionally responsive and communicative to others and therefore more popular.
Piaget (as cited in Rubin, LeMare and Lollis, 1990) offers another environmental explanation as to why some children may be more popular than others. He suggests that children who become popular have successfully negotiated mutually engendered behaviours. Because young children are egocentric to learn how to interact and become socially efficient they need to lose the belief that the world centres around them and develop a theory of mind (as cited in Rubin, 1990). Early play and reciprocal friendship allow perspective taking skills and prosocial behaviours to develop, which are important skills to be popular and socially accepted (as cited in Rubin, 1990). This has implications for children who do not have the opportunity to socialise at an early age as may not completely abolish the notion of egocentrism. It also means important cognitive and social skills are not being developed. This is supported by the fact that Dekovic and Gerris (1994) found that rejected children demonstrated more egocentric, selfish behaviours This offers a suggestion as to why children may not exhibit prosocial behaviour but it still does not explicitly offer a cause. Is it opportunity that prevents early socialisation, and if so should this just not occur at preschool, or is it personality which prevents early socialisation or is it attachment type and not feeling secure enough to socialise.
It is clear that there are so many different causes which may lead a child to become unpopular. There is also a large number of children who can be considered rejected or neglected and therefore it is important to investigate any implications of this on their psychological development. It is at this stage that it is important to separate the notion "unpopular" into rejected and neglected. Rejected children tend to be more actively disliked than neglected and engage in more aggressive and hostile behaviours (Asher, 1990). It is this type of child who is more likely to turn to criminality and anti social behaviours (Kupersmidt et al 1990). This is a dangerous assertation to make however regarding the self fulfilling prophecy and also almost makes it acceptable for rejected children to turn to criminal behaviour. Roff (1972) (as cited in Kupersmidt et al, 1990) found that peer rejection was a significant predictor of delinquency and this once again may be a result of the self fulfilling prophecy in that the child believes they are bad and therefore will only survive by being bad. It may also be an attempt for admiration as anti social behaviour becomes more associated with popularity once the child moves towards adolescence, or it could just be a scream for attention.
Neglected children however tend to be less actively disliked by their peers but are more withdrawn and isolated from society (Asher, 1990). This is obviously important for psychological development as there are three disorders noted in DSM IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1995) regarding withdrawal such as "Shyness Disorder", "Adjustment Disorder" and "Introverted Disorder", therefore being withdrawn obviously has psychological disadvantages. Neglected children are also more likely to suffer from internal disorders such as those involving mood and anxiety (Asher, 1990) as opposed to rejected who are more likely to suffer external ones (Asher, 1990). Being neglected however does not necessarily lead to psychological problems however as Coie and Kupersmidt (1983) (as cited in Rubin, 1990) found that neglected children are more confident in smaller groups. There is only a problem however when insecurity and anxiety issues become apparent. Obviously children who are considered unpopular whether rejected or neglected are perceptive enough to pick up on and internalise negative feelings about themselves which has implications for psychological development in itself and can lead to many further complications, particularly that of depression.
There has been links made between children who were unpopular at school and a later development of schizophrenia. A feedback study conducted by Bleuler (1950) (as cited in Kupersmidt et al 1990) describes the preschizophrenic child as anxious, excitable, irritable and aggressive. This seems to be descriptive of a rejected rather than a neglected child. There however problems with cause and effect with this as it is not clear whether rejection in itself causes schizophrenia or the schizophrenia causes the antisocial behaviour which leads the child to become unpopular. From the evidence and knowledge about schizophrenia I believe that being unpopular itself doesn't cause schizophrenia. This is because schizophrenia does not tend to develop until late adolescence. Also Watt (1978) showed that for the preschizophrenic child behaviour in childhood is normal and the child does not become unpopular until adolescence with the onset of schizophrenia. This also concurs with evidence that rejection is stable. If a child is unpopular at adolescence then they will have been unpopular during childhood, the pre-schizophrenic child does not show this pattern so it is more likely that schizophrenia causes the unpopularity and not vice versa.
In conclusion there could be many factors effecting whether a child turns out to be popular or unpopular. The majority however seem to ignore the child's actual personality which probably plays a large role. There is little doubt however that factors such as attachment type and early experiences with reciprocal friendships are valuable in learning the necessary skills to socialise and which therefore give you an increased chance of being popular and having friends. It has been shown that lack of friends or being unpopular may lead to problems with psychological development and these seem to be more extreme with rejected rather than neglected children. There is plenty still to discover however regarding whether being unpopular causes psychological problems, or the psychological problems are already there and cause unpopularity. It would appear from the conclusions made in this essay that it is a likely combination of the two.