GM (genetically modified) foods are a source of much controversy in today's world. Tales of "killer tomatoes" abound - however, behind the scandal and gossip, a real threat lurks. The dangers of GM foods are not mere gossip; they are valid concerns, which need to be addressed before any more harm is done.
To discuss the dangers of genetic modification, first we must understand the concept of genetics. Every living thing known to date is made up of small building blocks, known as "cells". These cells contain a genetic code, unique to each individual, which tells the cell what it should be. In essence, this code, or "DNA", is the biological description of what each creature is, from human hair and eye colour, right down to the shape of bacteria.
Selective breeding, the process of selecting and encouraging desirable traits in a subject population, has been used by humankind for hundreds of years. The principle behind it is the idea that crossing two parents with strong genes leads to the child inheriting those strong genes. If one continues to match parents with certain genes, the traits these genes represent will gradually become more pronounced in the offspring. This has lead to the evolution of distinct types of animal, such as the domesticated dog, whose instincts to attack people and livestock have been selectively bred out over generations.
Genetic modification is different. It uses artificial methods, such as specially designed viruses, to introduce the desired DNA directly into a subject, be it a plant seed, or a living animal. Nor does this DNA have to be a gene the subject could usually carry. Genetic modification has created goats which produce spider silk in their milk (more at ), and pets which glow under UV light (more at ). These unnatural combinations show the potential of genetic modification, for good, or for harm.
The potential benefits of genetic modification are great. It holds the possibility to revolutionise the agricultural industry, through pest-resistant plants, abundantly fertile and hardy crops, and even meat-flavoured vegetables. However, these benefits may be far outweighed by the potential threats of GM foods.
The process by which most plants reproduce is termed "pollination". It involves the DNA of a plant, contained in small cells called "pollen". Each grain of pollen contains randomly selected DNA, totalling half of the DNA of the original plant. These cells, scattered to the winds, or communicated by insects, land on specialised parts of other plants, and allow the mixing of genes of the two plants - half from the pollen of one plant, half from the recipient plant. The offspring created thus has genes, and therefore traits, of both of the parent plants.
However, GM crops contain DNA not normally found in such a plant. If they are allowed to pollinate other crops (by the nature of pollination, it is difficult to prevent them from doing so), those genes could spread to the crop population as a whole. Should the gene be harmful, to the plant or indeed to humans, the damage this would cause is indeed reason to be cautious.
This problem can be managed, albeit with difficulty, such as to minimise the risks of contamination. Other risks posed by GM foods are not so easily dealt with, however. The world of nature is a complex one, such that no-one in current society can claim to truly understand how nature, in all its glory, works. As such, interfering with the natural order of things can potentially cause havoc in the living world.
The introduction of rabbits to Australia, in 1859, forever changed the natural balance of the continent. Rabbits have been one of the major causes of extinction in Australia (12% of the native mammal species are now extinct), as well as causing widespread damage to plant life in the area. If something so seemingly benign could cause such harm to the environment, what untold destruction could genetic modification unleash? Scientists have only a limited understanding of the specifics of various genes - the use of such unknown quantities in foodstuffs, and the release of these potential contaminants into the environment as a whole, is risky at best.
Even with control measures in effect, it is still possible for contamination of the environment to occur. Pollen can be contained with difficulty, however other avenues of transmission are possible. Nature is astoundingly adaptable, to the point where it is possible for genes to be transferred between species. This process, known as "horizontal gene transfer", makes a truly worrying case against genetically modified crops.
Horizontal gene transfer does not require pollen to contaminate other plants - in fact there are three different ways in which the transfer can occur. One requires physical contact between the GM plant and another plant, however no such limit exists for the other methods. The combination of these three avenues holds the potential for a gene to travel from a GM plant, through bacteria, viruses, other plants, and animals, even to humans.
Needless to say, this is a grave threat to the environment as a whole. Should the wrong gene "escape" into the environment, the ecosystem of the local area, and potentially that of the entire planet, could be irrevocably altered. This is a concern from both the biological and ethical points of view - What would the consequences of such changes be? Do we have the right to "rebuild" Mother Nature? In the worst case, what effects would a rogue gene have if passed to humankind?
All of the scenarios above are conjecture - in truth, no-one knows what may or will happen if the use of GM foods continues. However, the risks associated with the use of this technology are sufficiently great to warrant further consideration as to the future of GM technology. We only have one planet; neither science nor technology is advanced enough to replace or repair it should we inadvertently damage the natural balance of the ecology. GM foods are an unnecessary threat to the stability of Nature; to preserve our ecology the use of GM technology must be reconsidered.