Health inequalities are the systematic differences in health and illness that exist between individuals within a population. In the UK they were first seriously addressed with the publication of the Black report in 1980 1, the recommendations of which were largely ignored by successive Conservative Governments. Following their election win in 1997 the New Labour Government commissioned Sir Donald Acheson to revisit health inequalities, and the report 2 he delivered in 1998 has proved pivotal in attempts to address these problems.
Health inequalities have complex and interrelated causes, and whilst numerous theories have been developed to try and understand them it remains unclear just which considerations are of primary importance. However what is clear is that you are more likely to be disadvantaged in health terms if you are also disadvantaged in socio-economic terms.
Some health inequalities are likely never to be resolved because of their essentially genetic nature e.g. higher male mortality in cardiovascular disease. But in the main, many health inequalities are a direct consequence of socio-economic circumstance and demand both a greater understanding of their aetiology and effective action to reduce and eventually, eradicate them. Figure 1 illustrates the prevalence of health inequalities in some of the major causes of chronic illness.
It is with these inequalities in mind that in July 2003 the UK Government launched a comprehensive initiative entitled Tackling Health Inequalities: A Programme for Action
4. By 2010 it aims to reduce inequalities in health outcomes by 10% as measured by infant mortality and life expectancy at birth 4.
A pertinent example of a specific health inequality is in the rate of infectious diseases. In one study, hospital admissions as a result of gastrointestinal infection was observed to be 2.4 times higher in the poorest fifth of the population compared to the richest 5, and in an other in Leeds the incidence of gonorrhoea was four times higher in the most deprived areas compared to the most well-off 6. These data suggest that health inequalities are in some way related to financial circumstances; they are in essence an income inequality. The key question here is why should this be the case?
Many commentators have examined the role of behavioural or cultural, materialist or neo-materialist or psychosocial factors as the underlying causes of the emergence and reinforcement of health inequalities.
The behavioural or cultural explanation posits that inequalities are a result of individual choice, specifically the choice to engage in behaviours deleterious to health, such as smoking, poor diet and lack of exercise 7. It has been suggested that between 10 and 30% of health inequalities are directly attributable to differences in lifestyle choices that affect health 8. If one looks at smoking, a major cause of mortality and morbidity, numerous studies have shown the variation in smoking rates across the socio-economic spectrum. In one such study from 1994 16% of men and 12% of women in social class (SC) I identified themselves as smokers, compared to 40% of men and 34% of women in SC V 9.
The materialist/neo-materialist perspective holds that it is the social differences in material circumstances that lead to health inequalities 7. For example, poor housing tends to be damp, cold and mouldy and is linked to a greater incidence of asthma and respiratory diseases, particularly in children. Neo-materialism goes further and argues that in addition to individual lack of resources, there exists a systematic underinvestment in public infrastructure such as health services, education and transport 10, 11 and that the impact of this falls more squarely on the less well off. As well as broadening and deepening the inequalities themselves, this thinking introduces a historical, cultural and political-economic context to the problem, important when considering how best to address health inequalities.
Psychosocial explanations focus on the perception of one's place in society relative to others 7. It is suggested that perceived lower status leads to the generation of negative emotions that through psycho-neuroendocrine pathways manifest themselves as ill-health and disease 12. Experiments in non-human primates have shown that animals lower in the social hierarchy hypersecreted cortisol, (a stress response hormone), had higher blood pressure, suppressed immune function, more commonly had central obesity, and had a poorer high density lipoprotein to low density lipoprotein ratio - even when fed the same diet13. This societal disenfranchisement can in turn lead to reduced social capital, withdrawal from community activities and antisocial behaviour.14, 15, 16
Another feature of the psychosocial interpretation is the impact of absolute poverty (minimum standards of food, shelter and clothing) and relative poverty (income below a level allowing households to enjoy similar living standards and participate in society in similar ways to higher-income households 17). Numerous studies have shown increased life expectancy in countries with lower rates of relative poverty 12, and narrowing the gap in incomes yields substantial health benefits to the population as a whole 18.
Given the complex nature of this problem it is almost certain that no single theory can completely explain the existence of health inequalities. That they exist and persist is evident, and it is likely that interactions between combinations of the considerations outlined above and other factors, such as genetic predisposition and environmental pollution underpin the existence of health inequalities.
Interestingly, no causal link has been established between poverty and poor health, but it is clear that such an association exists and must be addressed, not only for the benefit of those disadvantaged individuals and families, but for whole communities.
At first glance the prospect of an individual doctor alleviating the health inequalities he sees in his practice in a substantive way seems daunting, if not insurmountable. However, if one examines the problem more closely there is much that can be achieved by health practitioners on a local, regional and indeed national level.
At an individual and local level GPs are the first line in the 'war on health inequalities'. They are uniquely placed not only to treat the very real medical manifestations of inequalities in health, but also to monitor the progression of pre-existing inequalities and the emergence of novel ones. In addition they are key players in the dissemination of important public health messages, such as child and flu vaccination programmes, dietary advice and smoking cessation programmes. Family doctors are still well-trusted figures within the communities they serve and it may well be that in attempts to remove health inequalities this goodwill could be harnessed to effect real and lasting change.
One of the key factors in the development of health inequalities is the difficulty some of the most vulnerable groups in society have in accessing health care services. The increasing centralisation of core healthcare services has been achieved at the expense of local outposts, and this can erect geographical and logistical barriers to access; time off work or childcare may need to be arranged, so improving public transport and extending surgery hours should be considered.
There may be social or cultural barriers such as language difficulties or services that are being delivered inappropriately. This can be tackled through providing information leaflets in different languages and employing interpreters. Doctors can also assist patients in maximising their income by encouraging them to visit organisations such as the Citizen's Advice Bureau that can offer guidance on benefit entitlement and in their own practice can minimise both the financial and emotional costs associated with poor health by not charging for services such as sick notes and providing e.g. nicotine patches and counselling 'on prescription'.
These solutions could be delivered in the Healthy Living Centres that have been built over recent years. The centres could be expanded to have a greater role in primary health care and function as on 'one-stop shop' for advice on benefits, housing, education, lifestyle, etc. They also provide access to personal computers and the internet, thereby going someway to address the information technology inequality.
On a wider scale Primary Care Trusts (PCTs) have been newly designated as 'responsible authorities' and will receive up to 75% of the national health care budget directly from central government. Public health teams within PCTs already have a front line responsibility to ensure that the local translation of national policies from different government departments places the reduction of inequalities in health at its heart. This gives considerable scope for those healthcare practitioners working within the PCT to influence health care provision and consequently, health outcomes.
The impact of this policy can already be seen in the announcement in July 2004 of the establishment of nine pilot Local Area Agreements (LAAs)19. These LAAs are made between central and local government (see figure 2) and aim to "achieve local solutions that meet local needs, while also contributing to national priorities and the achievement of standards set by central government."19
Amongst the priorities identified in these initiatives is an explicit pledge to reduce health inequalities and improve poor health, particularly in the elderly.
In addition the Government has set a Public Service Agreement target to address geographical inequalities in life expectancy, cancer, heart disease, stroke and related diseases. This pilot scheme has been named the Spearhead Group 20 and comprises 70 Local authorities and 88 Primary Care Trusts, based upon the Local Authority areas that are in the bottom fifth nationally for 3 or more of the following 5 indicators:
An interim report is expected from the Spearhead Group in 2010, and this is a further example of an opportunity for doctors to become actively involved in addressing health inequalities.
On the national stage the British Medical Association (BMA) is a very powerful professional organisation and is routinely consulted by governments across the political spectrum on matters of public health. For instance, in recent years the BMA has lobbied for a total ban on smoking, improvements in childhood nutrition, and action to curb underage drinking.
Whilst it is true that some of these campaigns have been limited in their effectiveness it is inconceivable that any policy that genuinely seeks to tackle health inequalities could succeed without the involvement of the medical profession. This would give doctors, both individually and collectively, considerable scope to influence policy locally and nationally.
To a large degree the effectiveness of these measures depends on the motivation and enthusiasm of individual doctors to eradicate health inequalities, both in their own practices and the wider communities. All of the initiatives could achieve their stated aims if the professionals involved are willing to prioritise the reduction of health inequalities.
However, even with the best will in the world, it is implausible that action by doctors as a profession, acting either individually or collectively could bring about wholesale change. Many of the most important causes of health inequalities, for example poor housing and low income, can only be addressed by concerted and committed action from politicians. Whilst the challenge of reducing health inequalities is not intractable, and will require considerable political will and not inconsiderable amounts of money, it is surely one worth pursuing for the benefit of society as a whole.
As Frank Dobson, the then Health Secretary, said in 1997, "Inequality in health is the worst inequality of all. There is no more serious inequality than knowing you'll die sooner because you're badly off."