The tensile testing machine as described by Marsh was designed to investigate the mechanical properties of whiskers and other small crystals or similar specimens.
The specimen is first mounted by gluing and clamping. The X-Y stage is then used to adjust the length of the specimen and to align the jaws of the specimen holder and to clamp the stage. The extension detector is zeroed and a load is applied by the torsion balance by adjusting the micrometer drive to twist the wire. The optical gauge is nulled until the detector reads zero. This is done using the fine adjustment levers provided. By nulling of the optical gauge the tensile force acting on the specimen can be calculated which is nothing but the product of the twist on the wire and apparent stiffness of the specimen holder. The displacement of the nulling micrometer gives the extension in the specimen.
The torsion balance was calibrated by mounting on its side and using a scale pan and weights. The lever system used in the device was calibrated in two ways. In the first method the lever arms were measured accurately using universal measuring machine which has resolution of . The second method makes use of the overall lever ratio by joining the grips and balancing large drum, micrometer movements with the coarse strain micrometer, using the extension detector as a nulling device.
The tensile testing machine designed by Marsh is extremely accurate and has proved itself over a number of decades. However there were a few drawbacks or limitations that could be overcome. They are as follows:
A number of studies have shown it is more economical to build equipment made of simple components which are easy to modify, rather than strive to create a universal all-encompassing piece of equipment.
Flexure error causes variations in lever arm lengths and hence lever ratios. This factor is not helped by the large reduction ratio of 100:1 between the drum micrometer and the specimen.
There is no means to testing the sample in a controlled atmosphere as is required in many cases.
The entire method of measuring the cross sectional area of the specimen is rather crude and is bound to give errors.
The present machine is completely manual there are no means of automated strain recordings.
Since the specimen is held in position by glue there is always the danger of the specimen being bent due to uneven heating or melting of the glue. Hence more attention should have been paid to the design of specimen supports.
Given all due to credit for the design with technology available at that time there was no effort made to design a device to record the results. This is vital to observe occurrences and recording noticeable similarities and differences.
With regard to its properties it is quite similar to the machine designed by Marsh and can be structurally compared to it in many aspects. However in this device the combination of an atomic force microscope and an accurate mechanical testing machine provides unique yet efficient way to study the deformation mechanisms of a wide range of materials as they are incrementally strained. Making use of well controlled states of stress and strain to a material sample and observing the deformation of the sample with nanometer resolution, the nanomechanics of the material can be compared to the macroscopic stress strain behavior. The knowledge thus gained would be very useful in the design of such materials.
There are two basic requirements for instrumentation is the deformation of the sample in a controlled manner and an accurate means of measuring it. A controlled deformation speed must be achieved in order to measure the deformation. The other requirement being to measure the test sample from the cross head movement of the tensile testing machine and this measurement can also be made using three dimensional pictures using the improved technology available.
The torsion balance was used in Marsh's machine for load application because of its simplicity, stability and large range coverage. However the new improved version used a Load cell for load application. This is because load cells with their excellent stiffness minimises errors while measuring strain. The tensile testing machine makes use of three different piezoelectric load cells 25N, 250N and 4.4 KN. This results in a load range varying from 0-25N with a resolution of 125mN, a mid range of 0-250N with a resolution
of 1.25N and a high range of (0-4.4kN) with a resolution of 22N. These loads cells are connected to a data acquisition system.
The use of a motor and sensor enables to keep the sample stationary with respect to the AFM probe and also unlike Marsh's machine it facilitates the same area to be scanned rapidly at every measurement. A stepped motor with an internal planetary gear head combination with a small pitch ball screw is used. This provides 3.8Nm of torque required to generate a maximum tensile force of 4.4kN. However to reduce the drive torque and enable to scan the specimen in a torque free state with motor turned of and eliminate vibration from the servo system a 80:1 gear box system is provided.
Bearing in mind the space constraints and requirement for the machine's centre of stiffness to be as close to the plane of the tensile test as possible the structural loop is so designed such that parasitic angular motions are reduced. The entire setup of the bearings and ball screw are shown in the figure below
The scanning of thin films requires a hard backing material underneath the specimen to prevent unreliable AFM images. This is mainly dude to the fact that the stretched material acts as a sensor itself which amplifies ambient vibrations. A sample support is provided to give reliable backing as the sample thickness decreases in width and thickness. This support is designed to adjustable in height with sufficient stiffness in all directions. A flexure based support is used for this purpose which allows a vertical adjustment of 1.5mm as shown in the fig below
This is a great improvement over the earlier machine which lacked a control unit and was completely manual. This consists of two data acquisition cards that are connected to a computer. One card is used to create square wave signals to drive the stepper motor and to provide location and direction of motion for the slides. The other card is used to digitize the analog signals from the load cells as well as the digital signals from the end switches, which serve for setup of the machine as well as safety of the device.
In the earlier machine there was no means of obtaining real time feed back or recording the results. The graphical user interface provides control over all aspects of the machine. The application software typically used for this purpose is LabVIEW. Once the setup is completed the user can conduct experiments and get real time feedback by operating the system in various modes.