Signal is a form of energy and sensors can be classified according to the type of energy they detect. There are six primary energy domains and their associated symbols are as follows:
The ideal characteristics of a sensor are as follows:
High sensitivity- The sensitivity of the sensor is defined as the minimum input of physical parameter that will create a detectable output change. Hence the higher the sensitivity the better the response.
Fast and linear response- It is the time at which the output reaches some percentage of its final value in response to a step change in the measurand.
Fully reversible behaviour-it is the ability of the sensing mechanism to follow the variations in the environment.
High reliability-The ability of a sensor to perform a required function under stated conditions for a stated period. Hence sensors should be highly reliable despite the environmental conditions.
Selectivity- can be defined as the capacity of a sensor to be sensitive to a specific compound.
Compact- the smaller the sensor the more easily it can be built into hand held devices.
High signal-to-noise ratio-It is the power ratio between signal (meaningful information) and the background noise. In general higher signal to noise is better.
Insensitive to surrounding environmental conditions.
Easy to calibrate.
Low cost-Price is a critical factor for mass production.
No moving parts that can suffer from wear mechanisms.
Etching is a chemical process wherein material is removed by a chemical reaction between the etchants and the material to be etched. The etchant may be chemical solution or plasma. If the etchant is a chemical solution, the etching process is called wet chemical etching. There are two types of wet etching, one is isotropic etching where the etch rate is constant in all directions and the other one is anisotropic etching, where the etch rate depends upon orientation to crystalline planes. In anisotropic etching the lateral etch rate can be much smaller or larger than the vertical etch rate.
The steps involved in wet etching of a single crystal of silicon are as follows:
To grow SiO 2 at 1000C in dry oxygen on the layer on which the process is to be carried out. The oxide is patterned using optical lithography. This forms the channels which holds the chemicals and forms the shape of the cavity.
This is followed by immersing the masked silicon crystal in the etching solution. The choice of etching solution depends on the type of wet etching, i.e. isotropic or anisotropic. For isotropic etching the etching solutions used are HF, HF: HN 4F, and for anisotropic etching KOH, NaOH, EDP etc. are used. The etching solution only removes the film on the exposed areas.
The products are transferred from the surface of the silicon crystal and the etching solution is changed to increase the etch rate.
Finally when the desired shape is reached, the chemical reaction has to be stopped. To achieve this different etch stop techniques are used, such as anisotropic etch stop layers, electrochemical etch stop, etc.
In an ideal situation, the output signal of a sensor is directly proportional to the measured property. For example, if a sensor measures temperature and has a voltage output, the gain is a constant with the unit (V/K).If the gain is not constant there is non-linearity. However in case of chemical sensors the sensor response depends on the temperature of the chemical reaction taking place. Let us consider the response of a Tin oxide gas sensor in terms of its conductance in air. The device is operated at high temperature because the chemical reaction is more specific at higher temperatures, the device responds in just a few seconds. Finally, also operating the device at higher temperatures ameliorates the effects of humidity upon its response a critical factor for chemical sensors. When the sensor is operated at higher temperatures the vacant sites within the nonstoichiometric tin oxide lattice react with the atmospheric oxygen to abstract electrons out of the conduction band of the tin oxide chemisorbed oxygen sites such as O- , O 2- and so on. This reversible reaction is disturbed when the analyte molecule X reacts with the chemisorbed oxygen species to release electrons and promulgate further reactions. In simple physical description, the tin oxide behaves like a n-type semiconductor and therefore, there is an increase in electron carrier density, and hence the electrical conductivity of the material with increase gas concentration. This leads to decrease in response time as the temperature increases. Hence we can conclude that chemical microsensors are nonlinear.
Chemical sensor technology is poorly developed and suffers from a number of complications and hence has never had the same commercial success as
other class of microsensors. Some of the deficiencies are as follows:
The above issues are addressed in building signal processing architectures that are well suited to chemical sensing microsystems:
Relationships between heterogeneous and homogeneous array structures in optimizing a hybrid array for subsequent signal processing.
Making Pre-processing suitable to minimizing random errors among operational sensors (e.g. mismatch) and preventing poisoned sensors from providing input to subsequent signal processing.
Normalization of sensor outputs to improve selectivity (discrimination) capability and to minimize the systematic effects of drift and concentration changes on the discrimination capability of the overall chemical sensing system.
Improvement of response time through signal processing of transient signals.
Determination of a suitable framework for integrating these signal processing architectures and actual sensor arrays.
However there is an exception to the rule. To date the greatest commercial success of a polymeric potentiometric device has been in the field of biosenors. The device consists of an enzyme, such as glucose oxidase, which is attached to an electrode and senses potentiometrically, amperometrically, or impedimetrically. Perhaps the most successful device has been the glucose detector.