A modern Formula One car is a technical masterpiece. But considering the development effort invested in aerodynamics, composite construction and engines it is easy to forget that tyres are still a race car's biggest single performance variable. An average car with good tyres can do well, even very well. But with bad tyres even the very best car does not stand a chance. The racing tyre is constructed from very soft rubber compounds which offer the best possible grip against the texture of the racetrack, but wear very quickly in the process. Formula One dry 'grooved' tyres are typically designed to function at between 90 degrees Celsius and 110 degrees Celsius. To ensure that the tyre pressure stays as constant as pressure it is very important to monitor the temperature changes as the race progresses.
The automotive sensor market is lucrative but niche market. According to Strategy Analytics (Boston, MA, 781-235-6550) temperature accounted for 3.9% (or about $221 million) of the overall dollar-value automotive temperature sensor market in 1998; and in 2003, temperature sensors accounted for 3.3% (or $260 million) of the global automotive sensor market.
Yole Development cites data from Frost & Sullivan that pegs the European automotive temperature sensor market at $86.2 million in 1998 (representing 51.8 million units) and project that the market will reach $89.6 million (representing 54.7 million units) in 2000, and $95.2 million (59.0 million units) in 2004. The growth in the European automotive temperature sensor market is partly due to increased vehicle production. European production of vehicles reached 16.93 million units in 1998, compared to 15.78 units in the prior year.
Among the European countries Germany is the major national market for automotive temperature sensors in Europe (accounting for 32.4 % of revenues in 1998), followed in descending order by France, the UK, and Italy".
The automotives sensor market has seen a steady and predictable rise from 1.75 billion to 2.27 billion from 2000 to 2005.
In the direct sensing approach, a radio transducer is placed inside the wheel, adjacent to the valve stem. The pictured system used on the just-released Mercedes SL-class is typical. It uses sensors located in the tyre valves that measure both the air pressure and the air temperature inside the tyres. The information is broadcast once per minute by radio. Special antennas in the wheel arches receive these radioed messages and pass them on to a microcomputer. The control unit distinguishes between the four wheels by means of their individual codes, and can display to the driver reliable data on the air pressure in each tyre
Non-contact K-type thermocouple device incorporating a silicon sensor to measure the infrared radiation emitted from a tyre.Measurement range -45C to +650C.
The piezoelectric nature of quartz was first discovered by Pierre and Jacques Currie in 1880 when certain crystals polarise when subjected to an applied force. However this phenomenon remained a curiosity until 1910 when Voigt published a book on the properties and theory of piezoelectricity. Piezoelectric devices were first put into practical use in during the First World War. As the years went by and technology was improved upon SAW devices have found practical use in gas and vapour detection to strain measurement.
It is the ability of certain crystals to generate voltage when subjected to a mechanical stress. In a piezoelectric crystal the positive and negative charges are symmetrically distributed, so that the crystal is overall electrically neutral. Each of these sites forms domains which are randomly oriented but align during poling. When a mechanical stress is applied the symmetry is disturbed and the charge asymmetry produces a voltage across the material. For applications in electronics, the piezoelectric effect is used to convert electrical energy into acoustic wave energy and vice versa. Information carried by the surface acoustic waves along the surface of a crystal substrate may be processed during propagation. The most common processing techniques involve either the time delay of the signal, which depends on the geometry of the device and the acoustic velocity, or the amplitude of the signal which can be varied or "weighted" by controlling the efficiency of the piezoelectric transduction.
The IDT comprises two sets of interpenetrating metallic electrodes fabricated photolithographically on the surface of a piezoelectric substrate. A typical SAW device contains two such IDTs, one as input transducer, the other as output transducer to convert the SAW back to the electrical domain, e.g. delay or filtering. When an AC voltage is applied across the electrodes a dynamic strain is induced which in turn launches elastic waves.
The schematic of the IDT and reflectors are shown below. One IDT and two reflectors are fabricated on the surface of a piezoelectric crystal wafer. In this case since it operates in a passive wireless mode the IDT connects directly to an antenna called the device antenna. The function of this antenna is to convert microwave signal from the air to saw signal on the wafer surface and vice versa. A frequency modulated signal generator is used as a reading system with a system antenna that transmits these signals. These Fm signals are then received by the device antenna and converted by the antenna-IDT to SAW waves which propagate along the piezoelectric wafer which in this case is Lithium Niobate. The echoes from the two reflectors are picked up by the antenna IDT and sent back to the system antenna. These echo signals are nothing but the delayed copies of the transmitted FM signal. This delay time depends on the velocity at which the SAW wave propagates and the distance between the IDT and reflectors. A mixer which takes the transmitted FM as a reference signal, outputs the signals of frequency difference between the reflected and transmitted signal is linearly FM, the frequency shift is proportional to the time delay. The time delay depends on the saw velocity, which is sensitive to the ambient temperature. However changes in time delay with respect to temperature is very small; the phase shifts are taken into consideration which is more sensitive than frequency. Hence temperature is determined by the difference in phase shifts of the two IFs corresponding to the two reflectors
An IDT and two reflectors are patterned onto the surface of a YZ-cut lithium niobate wafer. The chosen substrate is YZ-LiNbO 3 , which is a Y-axis cut and Z-axis propagating lithium niobate crystal. The size of the piezoelectric substrate is approximately 4mm by 8mm and 0.5 mm thick. The IDT and reflectors are made of aluminum and deposited by sputtering using appropriate masks. Two reflectors are used instead of one is to eliminate the variation in time delays due to the electronic circuit and signal propagation.
The dimensions are as follows
Frequency of operation =
Spacing between fingers-d =
Width of the IDT fingers (w) =
Distance between IDT and first reflector-d 1=
Distance between IDT and second reflector-d 2=
Where 
1 and 
2 are the delay times of the surface wave traveling from the transducer to the first and second reflector respectively and  is the SAW velocity
The phase difference is given by
(1)
Since
where  is the total travel time of the SAW wave from the first reflector to the second and back. Since the time is inversely proportional to the wave speed the following relationship is used between travel time  and temperature T
where  is the temperature coefficient of the time delay of the saw device and T 0
for YZ cut Lithium Niobate..................... (2)
.......................... (3)
The two reflectors are located such that 
1 and 
2 1 and 1.1 s respectively at room temperature
A carrier frequency range between 900-925MHz is used for this sensor
In operation the distance between the 2 antennas is 1-2 meters and temperature range is between 0-100C. The terms in equation (1) can be calculated
From equations (1), (2) & (3)
A phase shift of 1 gives a temperature reading of
For verification a hand held thermometer is used as standard.
Mask preparation- The SAW designs are created using a computer aided design system such as L-Edit from tanner Tools Inc. The IDT structures are written on a positive resist material deposited with a thin a layer of chromium. The resist is then developed and the chromium is etched leaving behind the required IDT structures.
Wafer preparation- Wafer cleaning is a vital step for the successful fabrication of an IDT device. The wafers are initially cleaned to remove contaminants such as dust, grease and other soluble organic particles by immersion in trichloroethylene at 60C for 10 minutes. The wafers are then rinsed in methanol and deionised water. This is followed by placing the wafers in industrial grade detergent and subjected to ultrasonic agitation at 60C for 10 minutes. Following a rinse in deionised water, the wafers are placed in a circulating water bath for 30 minutes. The wafers are then dried using compressed nitrogen air and stored in a suitable container.
Metallisation- In this step a thin layer of metal is deposited, usually aluminium from which the IDT structures are formed. Typically, a 100 to 150mm layer of aluminium is deposited on a quartz wafer. In this case a thin aluminium film is patterned
Photolithography- this is conducted in a clean room environment. This is done to orient IDT structures correctly with respect to the substrate in order to generate the required waves. In this case the aluminium film is patterned using optical lithography to form a pair of interdigital electrodes connected to a small microwave antenna and a pair of reflectors.
Etching-It involves initial cleaning of the metallised wafers, followed by the deposition of the positive resist. A further exposure to UV for 6 seconds is necessary. The exposed wafer is then developed in a mixture of developer and deionised water. A post bake is performed at 75C for 10 minutes, this helps in hardening and formation of sharp features of the photoresist. Chemical wet etching of the pattern is then performed. The aluminium layer is first etched using a commercial etchant and deionised water at room temperature for 60 seconds. The temperatures of the etchant solutions, together with the thickness of the metal layers, are important factors which influence the etching times.
Wafer dicing- In this step the wafers are finally cut into small, individual chips. Before cutting the wafer a positive photoresist is deposited to improve photoresist adherence to the wafer.