Relationships between unemployment and wages have long been argued about. The Shapiro-Stiglitz shirking model is an example of efficiency wage theory, where the employer pays above the Walrasian market clearing rate. It is based on many assumptions about the labour market and I will be examining each assumption and each variable, particularly unemployment levels which affect the wage rate offered in this model. I will show how the model establishes an equilibrium and also at what empirical evidence there is to support to support it.
The Early Classical economists believed that in market equilibrium, unemployment did not exist and that the markets cleared. If unemployment did exist, it was purely voluntary and caused by wage rigidities. Another theory of unemployment suggested is one of efficiency wages which offers an explanation of involuntary unemployment, even at equilibrium. The ShapiroStiglitz shirking model is one such a example. In essence, it suggests that workers dislike their work and would, if they could, not do their work. The model then establishes why firms choose to pay above the market clearing Walrasian equilibrium.
The shirking model is founded upon many assumptions, of which the first one is that workers dislike their work and if the firm was completely unable to monitor their work, they would choose not to do it. The second assumption is that workers either shirk, or they work at effort level e (ie it is a discrete variable); there is only one level of effort and this cannot be higher or lower. If they do shirk, the model assumes that they are dismissed. The other main assumptions are that all workers and firms are identical; the probability of being dismissed due to reasons other than disciplinary ones, b, is 1 in the long term; and the level of unemployment benefits given out, w, is treated as an exogenous variable
It has always been difficult to observe each individuals' effort to ensure that they do not shirk, but in more recent times it has proved increasingly so. Teamwork, use of initiative and flexibility have become more important skills in the workplace, but the quantity of effort put into these is very difficult to measure in comparison to, for example, the speed of a production line. To be able to perfectly monitor each individuals effort in the workplace is a very rare thing. Supposing that perfect monitoring did exist, it would not, in itself, prevent shirking. The cost of being caught shirking has to be associated with dismissal as alternatives to this such as cutting their wage, will, as I will show later, encourage further shirking.1
Workers choose not to shirk if and only if the value of working is greater than the value of shirking. If VE is equal to the lifetime utility of working and putting in effort, and VS is equal to the lifetime utility of working but shirking, then:
- This is the basic No Shirking Condition (NSC).
Employers will choose to pay at the level where VE = VS , known as the critical wage, and not any higher as workers could not "shirk less" but if they paid at a lower rate where VE < VS then workers would choose to shirk.
The equations for VE and VS can be calculated 2
rVS is given by
rVE is given by  where
The No Shirking Condition can be rearranged to give
rVU is the asset equation for being unemployed. Its equation can be given as
which can be put into the NSC equation to give
The relationship can be illustrated as below
The non-shirking wage level is therefore dependent upon many factors and I will now examine the theory behind each one.
Intuitively, the lower the probability that workers' are caught shirking, b, the more likely it is that they will take the risk and a higher critical wage is required to ensure that the worker does not do so. If the worker did shirk, then with the higher wage, they work would stand to lose something if they were caught shirking.
If the effort level required to do the work is higher, an increase in e, then the critical wage is higher. This is logical as the worker would be even more inclined to shirk if possible as the work is more challenging to do. To persuade them not to, a higher wage is required.
If Vu, the utility of being unemployed is higher, then the critical wage needs to be higher. VU is positively dependent upon the unemployment benefits, w, and the probability of gaining another job, a, the job acquisition rate. The smaller the difference between w and w, then the smaller the difference between Vu and Ve is (assuming that w has a higher initial value) and the smaller the loss of workers utility is of being dismissed. Therefore they have less to lose if they are caught shirking and are more likely to do so which requires a rise in wages to prevent it. 3
Indeed if w = w then, according to this model, workers would shirk as their utility would be lower if they worked and would therefore rather be unemployed. However, I believe this is one of the limitations of the model. Studies conducted by Andrew Oswald and other economists have found that unemployment is a source of great unhappiness 4 and this model does not account for any psychological effects of unemployment on individuals. In view of this, without detailed research, it is not possible to say whether workers' would truly rather be unemployed or employed at w = w.
The second element affecting VU is the job acquisition rate. This is calculated by the number of people entering unemployment, divided by the number of people leaving unemployment.
where N=number of firms, L=the number of workers per firm, L is the number of workers currently unemployed.
One of the key assumptions made by this model and which is relevant to this factor is that all workers are identical. Thus, if a worker is dismissed for shirking, a firm is unable to distinguish that worker from an honest worker and has the same probability of being reemployed as an honest worker does. If the job acquisition rate is 1, this means that every unemployed person can find another job immediately. This also means that the cost to the worker of being dismissed is zero and hence, workers will shirk. In my opinion, I think that the assumption of identical workers is less valid in the present day than it was in 1984 when Stiglitz and Shapiro proposed this model. I think this is due to better information networks which means that almost without exception, a reference from a previous employer is required to get a new job and this casts doubt on the possibility that perennial shirkers are treated in the same way as honest workers.
In this model though, the higher the value of a, the higher the wage rate will be.6
Finally, the higher the rate of interest, the higher the critical wage becomes. This is because the gains made in the short run from shirking will accrue interest and will have greater weight than the losses which eventually happen due to shirking when the person is caught.
I have analysed what factors affect the critical wage, but I haven't established an equilibrium wage level. I start from the basis that all firms are paying the same wage and there is zero unemployment and wages equal unemployment benefits. Shirking is commonplace as there is nothing to be gained from working (except possible psychological benefits mentioned earlier but I shall choose to ignore these now). Thus, one firm raises its wages to act as a worker-discipline device; the worker stands to lose out if they shirk as they would not be able to earn a similar income if dismissed. This starts a wage-price spiral and eventually, all firms raise their wages to the same level as the firms are treated as identical. This in turn decreases aggregate demand for labour which has a negative relationship with wages. Hence, this causes unemployment. When all wages are equal, it may still be beneficial to shirk even though wages are now greater than benefits and there is unemployment. It is dependent upon the other factors such as the job acquisition rate and the probability of being caught. This may result in a further shift in wages up until the point where workers will no longer shirk. This will in turn lead to shifts in the labour demand curve as well and an equilibrium level of unemployment will exist. This unemployment is involuntary but exists as those unemployed cannot credibly commit not to shirk at a lower wage rate.
If unemployment equals zero (so that b=0 and a=0) then, the no shirking wage would be
If employment grew, then the worker would have more incentive to shirk as the expected loss in utility of being dismissed would be smaller (due to the greater probability of being reemployed). Therefore, to prevent shirking, the critical wage will be higher. The whole relationship is illustrated below. Equilibrium is shown at the point of intersection between labour demand and the no shirking condition line.
An increase in the unemployment rate, holding everything else constant, would lead to a reduction in the efficiency wage. However, if you wished to change a variable other than the wage rate in the No Shirking condition equation of w w + e + e(a + b + r) / q, then you could allow q to change, the probability of being caught. The change in q would have to be the same amount as the change in a in percentage terms. If a decreased (representing an increase in unemployment), then ceteris paribus, q would have to decrease to maintain that wage. The probability of being caught shirking is directly related to the level of monitoring there is in the firm. If the probability of being caught falls, then this would be associated with a fall in expenditure on monitoring.
After analysing in some detail the theory behind the shirking model, we can briefly compare it with the empirical evidence. In a second article by Shapiro and Stiglitz,7 they suggested that firms did not always dismiss workers which were caught shirking and this undermines a fundamental assumption of the model. But since the theory was proposed, many economists have attempted to try and establish an empirical link. A study that I found particularly interesting was the one conducted by Krueger in 1991 8 titled "Ownership's, agency, and wages: An examination of franchising in the fast food industry." The conclusions that he came to were that in individual outlets that were franchised, full time employees were paid between 1 and 2% less compared to those who worked in a company-owned outlet. At managerial level this gap increased to between 8 and 9%. The reasons which Krueger put forward for these pay gaps was that monitoring workers' effort in a company owned outlet is much harder. In a franchised outlet, the managers are able to monitor their workers' effort more easily. But Luxenberg in his book 9 suggests that the cost of shirking to the company by a full time employee is comparatively small as there is little opportunity for him/her to significantly damage the company. Hence, this is cited as a reason for the small pay gap between full-time employees.
However, the reason for the large pay gap amongst managers is that in these relatively skilled jobs there is the opportunity to significantly damage the company and that the shirking is a lot harder to detect so due to the NSC, an increase in wages is required. Generally, most studies have found evidence to support the shirking model but it is still not possible to say what the magnitude of the effect is.
In conclusion this model attempts to define accurately the situations where workers will choose to shirk and has provoked a lot of thought. It shows that the firm must pay a higher wage to prevent shirking and concludes by saying that an equilibrium may exist with wages higher than the natural market clearing rate and at this equilibrium, involuntary unemployment does exist. But this model is founded upon many assumptions about firms and workers and these do not always hold in real-life markets. Many extensions have been made to the model such as one by Bulow and Summers (1986) which considered the possibilities of perfect monitoring but overall the model has certainly added a new perspective to the workings of the labour market.