The Law of one price, LOOP, and Purchasing Power Parity theory, PPP, are amongst the oldest and most important economic theories due to their use in theorems attempting to explain Exchange Rate movements. The relevance and actual evidence of these hypotheses is still the subject of much debate and research. The initial assumptions for both hypotheses are that there are no barriers to trade and no associated costs. The models assume no transport costs and perfectly competitive markets. It also makes the important assumption that arbitrageurs have access to necessary funds with which to trade when opportunities arise.
LOOP is defined as being: 'When trade is open and costless, identical goods must trade at the same relative prices regardless of where they are sold.' Gerard Debreu (1959) in "Theory of Value" defined identical goods as those being in identical locations, but here we will treat goods as being identical, if as such regardless of location.
LOOP:
The intuition behind the formula is such that if price differences did exist, then arbitrageurs would buy large quantities of the product in the relatively cheaper country and sell it in the more expensive country at a profit.
Absolute PPP is the point such that the 'Exchange Rate between 2 country's currencies equals the ratios of the country's price levels.' P = eP * The intuition is the same as for LOOP.
Relative PPP is when the percentage change in exchange rates between 2 country's over any period is equal to the difference between the percentage change in national price levels.
Relative PPP is a statement about price changes whereas absolute is about price levels.
If LOOP holds for every commodity then PPP must hold but LOOP need not hold for PPP validity.
There are several problems with these hypotheses. Firstly, there is a problem with absolute PPP which compares national price levels. Price levels are determined by a sum of weighted average prices of a suitably average basket of goods for that country. As consumption patterns are very rarely identical between countries and also that the indexes are not compiled in a standardised way, makes comparisons between indexes biased and inaccurate. For example, Norway will place more weight on the price of whale meat than Italy would as more of it is traded in Norway. This is why relative PPP is so useful as it measures changes, not actual prices.
Secondly, the assumption that there are no barriers to trade such as tariffs and that there are no transport costs are unrealistic. Within the EU and other such economic groups, there are no barriers to trade, but outside of these geographical areas, protectionism is increasing. This distorts prices and can prevent arbitrage if there are quotas. There have been several suggested solutions to transport costs. The first is that output is split into 2 categories: tradable goods, such as raw materials and manufactured goods, for example a car and agricultural products; and nontradeable goods, those goods, for example a haircut where transport costs are so large relative to the cost of producing some goods and services that they can never be traded internationally at a profit.
An alternative view regarding transport or trade costs is that they may be linearly related to the value of the product, as suggested in the Iceberg model and hence is like an ad valorem tax and is in proportion to the product value. This would have no impact on relative PPP, but unfortunately, it is rarely the case (see appendix).
Another problem with the hypotheses are that markets are commonly imperfectly competitive and that firms may price to market, and are price setters as such. This is a large problem encountered in the manufacturing sector.
The Balassa Samuelson theory suggests a reason why simple PPP empirical tests may fail and attempts to explain why prices are lower in poorer countries and hence such why LOOP does not hold in some goods. The model assumes that manufactured tradables have the same price regardless of location (LOOP holds). It also assumes that poorer countries have poorer technology functions and it take more labour hours to produce one manufactured unit than it does in richer countries. Since final prices are the same, wages have to be lower in the poorer country. The wages paid in tradables and non-tradeables will be the same in the country. Since productivity differences in non-tradeables (such as haircuts) will be negligible, prices of these products will be lower.
PPP and LOOP have important implications in Open Macroeconomics. PPP forms a key assumption in theories such as the Monetary Approach to Exchange Rates, which when combined with the Fisher equation, has important implications.
The Monetary approach assumes perfectly flexible markets and outputs. It assumes that the Foreign Exchange markets set the Exchange rates such that PPP holds. Exchange rates are fully determined in the long run by the relative supplies and demands for money such that Md = L(R t ,YUS). Changes in the interest rates or output only affect exchange rates through their effect on the demand for money. The monetary approach concludes that in the long run, Exchange rates move in proportion to money supply and also, somewhat against immediate intuition, that an increase in interest rates leads to a long run depreciation in the economy. These conclusions are derived in the appendices.
The Fisher equation is  such that the real interest rate, R, is equal to the nominal interest rate, r, minus inflation and defined as "all else equal, a rise in a country's expected inflation rate will eventually cause an equal rise in the interest rate that deposits of its currency offer." Assuming that Uncovered Interest Rate Parity (UIRP) holds as well as PPP, the end result is that of 'PPP in expectations':  (see appendices for derivation) This has important implications when trying to test PPP empirically as all the variables are unobservable. Here I bring in the concept of the real exchange rate, RER, defined algebraically as .
In the appendices, the concluding result that the RER must equal 1 and cannot change if PPP is to hold is derived. If foreign prices rise more quickly, it will be exactly offset by a change in the price ratio. However, the RER may deviate from 1 if there is a change in world output markets. An increase world relative demand for domestic output would cause the domestic currency to appreciate. If domestic output increases relative to world output, we would see a long run depreciation of the currency. Overall, we can say that when there are only monetary effects in the economy, exchange rates obey relative PPP in the long run as set out in the Monetary model. However, changes in the output market will have an effect which is not in line with PPP.
The Dornbusch model was an attempt to explain why exchange rates are far more volatile than predicted in the Monetary approach. It combines the concept of short-term sticky prices with the long-term results of the Monetary approach. It also contrasts in that it does not assume that PPP holds but does forecast UIRP to hold at all times. It predicts the exchange rate to make short term deviations from its equilibrium. Empirically, the model fails badly. First Generation Currency Crises show how any country with a fixed or pegged exchange rate and that has an increasing money supply (domestically generated) will suffer a currency crisis whereby its foreign exchange reserves become empty. PPP determines the 'shadow' exchange rate through the monetary approach which will be the exchange rate to replace the fixed regime once it collapses.
The empirical evidence found in support of LOOP and PPP is rather poor; all versions do badly. Absolute PPP, as identified earlier, is expected to do poorly empirically due to different goods baskets used across countries to compile their national price levels. Initial research through the 1970's showed no relationships to support either hypothesis. Isard's research into LOOP in 1977 found evidence of substantial deviations on the basis of regression analysis for the equation pi * +s = a + bpi + u. For LOOP to hold, the null hypothesis was such that H
0:a = 0,b =1 but these were not the results he obtained. Deviations from PPP are predicted in the Dornbusch model due to the price-stickiness in the short term and the monetary approach is a long-term view. Hence, economists are suffering from an insufficient data period as the deviations may last many years. Most researchers now believe that the half-life of deviations from PPP are between 3.5 and 5 years depending on the currencies, the price indexes and the sample period which can be tested by Dickey Fuller Unit root tests.
Michael Mussa came to the conclusion that floating exchange rates lead to much larger and more frequent short run deviations from relative PPP, due to the freedom of capital flows. A cause of possible LOOP failure identified earlier was that of transport costs. In the last decade, researchers have found much evidence to support this. Once the price deviations are higher than the transport costs (arbitrage costs), then prices will revert to the mean, by which the adjustment process is known as the 'Threshold Autoregressive Model.' This expects a band of transactions costs which result in no adjustments in deviations towards LOOP. One study looked at overcoming the transport cost to see if it was the only variable causing PPP to fail. The Engel and Rogers study looked at the price volatility for a range of goods in many American and Canadian cities The resulting conclusion was that "The distance between cities explained a significant amount of the variation in the prices of similar goods in different cities, but the variation of the price was much higher for two cities located in different countries than for two equidistant cities in the same country", pointing to a Border Effect.
In conclusion, LOOP and PPP fail to hold in the short fun but in the very long run, there is some support but with a very slow speed of convergence which would take many years to revert to.