The aim of this exercise is to calculate the enthalpy of formation of several simple cyclic alkane and alkene hydrocarbons by using PCModel and a MMX force field.
The MMX force field is a molecular mechanics method instead of a quantum mechanical method, and thus is quick to perform simple calculations. However since molecular mechanics is highly empirical, the force fields are highly specific- and can only be applied to a very similar compounds. Here the MMX force field was designed exactly for the purpose of calculating the enthalpies of formation of cyclic hydrocarbon compounds- using Allinger's() work as a basis.
The calculations are quick and simple because the energy of the system is calculated from very trivial mathematical formulae (in comparison to electronic structure calculations such as Hartree Fock.) The force field is a sum of the individual force potentials:
Each force potential represents an energetic penalty- a deviation from reference equilibrium values- for example the bond stretch term takes reference bond lengths taken from x-ray diffraction or gas phase spectroscopy, taking the form of Hooke's Law:
The molecules (see structures (1)-(6) in appendix) were drawn in PC model, then its structure optimised using MMX force field, at which point the steric energy and heats of formation were calculated and recorded.
Each optimised structure was examined by eye to check to see if it formed the lowest likely conformation; in the case of menthol extra adjustments were required to ensure the large bulky groups were equatorial instead of axial thus avoiding a 1,3-diaxial strain; which gives rest to unfavourable van der waal interactions leading to a higher energy conformer than the true lowest energy and most likely conformer (see structure (7) in appendix). The computed results were then compared to experimental results to verify the force field's ability to reproduce enthalpies accurately.
The MMX force field calculated H f in the gas phase which is not measurable directly experimentally, but inferred from other data and the use of Hess' Law.
Graph 1 shows the heats of formation - experimental values vs. calculated (MMX). It also reports a PMCC of 0.9878.
Since the enthalpies are calculated directly by using the steric strain energy, I investigated the percentage error of MMX calculation (compared to experiment) against the steric strain energy, this is plotted in Graph 2 to investigate if the error was directly related to the strain energy.
Experimental measurements incur an experimental error of approximately +/- 1 kcal mol -1; and as such this is the level of accuracy we can compare the calculations from MMX force field to.
Graph 1 shows the plot of experimental literature values of the heats of formation against those calculated by MMX force field. The black line is the product moment correlation coefficient line (PMCC)- a measure of how well the data fits to a straight line. The red line is the ideal- i.e. experiment should be exactly the same as computational results. The PMCC is 0.9878, which is a very good fit, however the line lies above and at a gradient not parallel to the ideal. Also most of the data is outside of any experimental error which would allow for anomalies within +/- 1 kcal mol -1.
Graph 2 was to investigate whether steric strain had been under estimated in the calculations (i.e. principally the enthalpies could be calculated just from bond energies, but since these are special ring systems- the strained part of the system plays a large role.)
There is however sadly no correlation between the percentage error of calculating H f and strain energy as can be seen in graph 2. Also looking at the structure of the compounds there is no correlation between the type of bond and the scale of the error of MMX calculation.
The MMX force field reproduces some of the enthalpies of formation well (-pinene for example), however very poorly in the case of limonene- which even required user intervention to find the lowest energy conformation. However we shall see in some cases the calculations are as good as quantum mechanical methods.
Allinger's paper (1) refers to the calculation of enthalpies from the steric energy calculated in MMX force field of cyclic hydrocarbon systems.
The enthalpies are a simple sum of the individual parts:
Where the H steric are part of the calculation of energy minimisation with the MMX force field; H conform is the energy of any other co-existing conformers at 25C H bond are the individual bond enthalpies and H 1
, H 2
, H3 are the correction terms for primary, tertiary and quaternary carbon atoms.
Ebmeyer studied the conversion of -pinene (2) into camphene (1) using Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. This interconversion by catalytic TiO 2 is key to fragrance intermediates and thus an interesting study to make. In his calculations he calculates the enthalpies of the two structures at Becke3LYP/6-31G(d) level.
From this data we can directly compare the relative energies of the (1) and (2) by using different methods of computation and then compare the two to experimental results.
The enthalpy difference of DFT calculations by Ebmeyer and MMX are within
1.43 kcal mol -1 of each other, however both are approximately 5 kcal mol -1 away from experimental enthalpies. The two methods provide a very similar answer, and are similarly inaccurate in terms of relative energies. The MMX calculation is a lot faster to run than the DFT calculation and less resource intensive and yields similar results and thus one could argue from this case that MMX is sufficient to calculate enthalpies of formation for simple cyclic hydrocarbon systems.
The MMX force field provides a good estimate of enthalpies of formation of cyclic hydrocarbons with varying accuracy. However when compared to more time consuming and resource intensive methods the calculations stand up since their accuracy is as good as the high level DFT calculations (in case studied).
However since the MMX force field is highly empirical I question the range of compounds it is capable of handling; this is exemplified in the percentage errors seen in graph 2- showing the model completely breaking down with limonene. It would be interesting to compare this to high level calculations of the enthalpy of formation with less empirical ab initio methods.
The MMX forcefield required tweaking and experimenting with to find the lowest energy conformer of menthol- a relatively simple cyclic system. It raises concerns that if the system were larger and more chiral then the MMX force field would struggle to find this conformer and require more user intervention. Whereas DFT or HF methods would almost certainly find the conformer just requiring more resources to do so. Looking at these results collectively it is certain that overall they provide a mixed picture and in essence are not reliable.
The underpinning message from the Ebmeyer results is that empirical molecular mechanical calculations can yield almost as good results as high level DFT calculations, and as such it would be prudent to use them instead of time consuming computer resource intensive DFT methods for simple enthalpy calculations. This however may be an exceptional case, and would need further investigation to ascertain whether or not this were true for all compounds in thus study- a side by side MMX, DFT, Experimental comparison would prove this.