Hundreds of years ago, Saint Augustine explained language acquisition by stating that babies learn by listening to the words parents use when pointing to objects around them (Gopnik et al, 2003). Whilst this account might seem intuitive, and does play some role in an infant's learning (Harris, 1983, in Butterworth & Harris, 2002), it is far from explaining the complicated language acquisition process in its entirety. Gopnik et al (2003) point out that children do not only learn names of objects, but verbs, adjectives and prepositions too. They have to distinguish human speech from other sounds in their environment, break down this continuous sound-stream into separate, meaningful words and understand different voices and pronunciations. Whilst these are hurdles which the most modern computers are nowhere near overcoming, normally developing children are able to conquer understanding and producing grammatical language to an almost adult-like standard by the time they are four years old (Gopnik et al, 2003). This essay will explain how the preferences infants seem to possess innately help them to use the abilities they all have to help them to master their native language in such a short time.
Our ability to perceive and attend to language begins even before we are born. A foetus' inner ears are fully grown at 20 weeks from conception (Butterworth & Harris, 2002) and soon are working well enough to hear the sounds conducted through the mother's abdomen and the amniotic fluid. We know this because unborn babies do not only move in response to loud noises but because they have also become tuned into their mother's voice, and learned to distinguish it from other women's, by the time they are born (Butterworth & Harris, 2002). Furthermore, when only a day old, infants can not only already distinguish human voices from other noise in their environment, but preferential sucking tasks show they prefer to listen to voices over anything else (Decasper & Fifer, 1980, in Butterworth & Harris, 2002). This suggests that babies are already programmed to be attentive to language by the time they are born.
What is even more fascinating is that newborns have the ability to remember words, as well as the sounds of voices, that they have heard prenatally. Snow (1977, in Butterworth & Harris, 2002) showed this by giving mothers in their last three months of pregnancy a story to read aloud frequently. As expected, one day-old infants chose to hear a recording of their mother (whose voice they were familiar with) reading this story than a stranger. However, given the choice, they preferred to listen to a stranger's voice reading the familiar story than their mothers reading a different one. This highlights that foetuses can in some way attend to the content of the language they hear as well as how the voice speaking it sounds. Therefore it seems babies are born with a preference to listen and tune into voices and words they have heard, remembered and become familiar with. This early preference to focus attention on speech sounds will be vital for helping the babies to learn about language and later produce it themselves.
As well as being able to tune into and remember the language they hear, babies seem to be more sensitive to some speech sounds than adults. This is especially apparent when regarding the differences between phonemes. In English, the sounds /r/ and /l/ are pronounced, heard and spelt differently. So if a recording plays sounds where /r/ gradually becomes /l/, English adults will perceive a sudden change from one consonant to the other (Gopnik et al, 2003): we turn a graded input into distinct categories. Conversely, Japanese adults, who do not distinguish between these phonemes in their language, will perceive no sudden change (Gopnik et al, 2003). Whilst adults seem constrained by their mother tongues, babies under six months old who have only been exposed to one of English, Hindi and Salish can discriminate the phonemes of the other languages as well as their own (Butterworth et al, 2002). This initial high sensitivity to many changes in language sounds means humans have the ability and potential to learn any language they are exposed to, regardless of their race or genetic heritage.
However, this impressive ability to distinguish so many phonemes soon diminishes. The Japanese babies will no longer perceive /r/ and /l/ differently after they are around six months old (Butterworth & Harris, 2002) when their phoneme recognition ability becomes similar to an adult's: 'exposure to a particular language has altered their brains' (Gopnik et al, 2003, p.104). Gopnik et al (2003) believe this process is caused by babies listening to what we say and constructing prototypes for each phoneme; 'grouping the sounds they hear into the right categories, the categories their particular language uses' (p.108) so English babies will develop separate /r/ and /l/ prototypes, but the Japanese will include both sounds in one. Whilst such narrowing may seem restrictive to a baby's potential, in fact this eventual 'learning by forgetting' (Duplox & Mehler, 1994, in Butterworth & Harris, 2002) means that they will be able to focus more attention on understanding the phoneme distinctions that matter in their own language. This will help them later to recognise and learn whole words and their meanings.
As well having equal potential to learn any language and preferring to listen to human voices over other sounds, four day-old babies have already learnt to recognise their own language. French babies of this age prefer listening to French over Russian (Butterworth and Harris, 2002). They seem to be able to make this distinction by paying close attention to various sound features; as well as phoneme categories babies recognise the prosodic and rhythmic features of the language they hear. For example, a two month old English baby will distinguish more between Japanese and English recordings than Dutch and English recordings, presumably because Dutch has similar stress patterns to English (Christophe & Morton, 1998) and they will prefer to listen to languages with similar rhythms to English (Cutler et al, 1993, in Butterworth & Harris, 2002). This awareness of the many distinguishing features language sounds have and the preference they have for listening to their native language sounds will also help infants to concentrate on and begin to understand more aspects of how their language works.
Despite the fact that newborns will not begin to produce these speech-sounds they which are so interested in for a few months (Butterworth & Harris, 2002), they show an ability to initiate and maintain some kind communication with adults from much earlier on. Most obviously, from birth they have the ability to cry to communicate distress and in the first few weeks some parents claim they can distinguish a 'hungry' from a 'tired' cry (Evesham, 1989). From six weeks, babies smile in response to their mothers' voices (Butterworth & Harris, 2002) which will presumable encourage her to speak more to them. This will be helpful because the more a baby is spoken to, the faster its language learning will progress; unlike other knowledge, there is no way of finding out about language other than listening to those who use it (Gopnik et al, 2003). Babies show delight in games that involve turn-taking, such as peekaboo, highlighting the social context in which early language development begins (Butterworth & Harris, 2002) that babies seem to be keen to participate in; for Kugimutzakiz (1999, in Butterworth & Harris, 2002) their 'untimate motive is a deep seated need to communicate' (p.129). Making adults see them as social creatures ensures babies are exposed to language which they will be able to listen to and learn from.
Of course, for babies to be eventually able to produce language themselves, they will have to be able to reproduce these words they hear. Long before language-like sounds are produced, babies show keenness to imitate adults. Meltzoff & Moore (1977, in Butterworth & Harris, 2002) found that newborns will not only copy an experimenter who sticks out his tongue, but will make an obvious effort to find their own tongues (Meltsoff & Moore, 1994, 1997,1999, in Butterworth & Harris, 2002). This suggests that babies already regard imitation as a worthwhile pursuit. Furthermore, it is interesting that the tests of imitation with the most significant results involve the organs of articulation, since it is essential that babies master motor skills in this area for them to be able to produce the hundreds of different sounds in their future language (Butterworth & Harris, 2002).
Once babies are in the 'babbling' stage, this drive to imitate is applied to language sounds too. Between two and five months of age, the percentage of infant sounds matched to what the mother had just produced increases from 27% to 43 %, with pitch being the most frequently replicated feature, followed by duration and rhythm (Papousek & Papousek, 1989). Gopnik et al (2003) tell us that when five month-olds heard an /ee/ vowel sound for 15 minutes, they responded with a similar cooing; 'just hearing a grown-up produce the sound motivates babies to try and produce it themselves' (p.125). Babies also pay close attention to the visual display played alongside the sound (Kugimutzakiz, 1999, in Butterworth & Harris, 2002 ) perhaps to work out how it is made, before testing this out by trying to produce the sound themselves.
Such behaviour demonstrates babies' strong desire to practice the sounds they have learned to make. Butterworth & Harris (2002) identify a stage where this is most obvious, called 'vocal play'. They tell us it emerges after a change in neuronal networks at 3-9 months of age, which renders the baby better able to coordinate motor movements with the vocal organs. Infants' increasing expertise allows them to experiment with different volumes, pitches and tongue positions familiarising them with 'a kind of mouth-to-sound gap' (Gopnik et al, 2003) which they seem to delight in discovering. Such desires to practice using their mouths to produce different kinds of sounds will be a useful route for the babies to perfect their pronunciation of the phonemes making up their future language.
The abilities and preferences of infants discussed so far may explain how infants learn individual words as labels, but they do not allow for the thousands of grammatical rules children learn with regard to how to put these words together into sentences and how to give these sentences meaning. I will now explain how grammar would be impossible to learn through imitation alone.
The most obvious example to consider is that children in all cultures often make mistakes by over-regularising irregular word forms. (Gopnik et al, 2003). They might use the past tense suffix ' - ed' to produce words like 'goed' or 'eated' or the suffix 's' to indicate plurality for words where this is not normally used, for example 'sheeps' or 'foots'. It is unlikely that the babies would have heard these words from adults, so they cannot be produced through imitation alone. These mistakes cannot be accidental; four year olds introduced to a made-up word such as 'wug' will infer the plural form is 'wugs' (Gopnik et al, 2003). To produce the above mistakes illustrate that infants have grasped the concept that words are divided into morphemes and affixes can alter their meanings. To use these affixes appropriately, they must also understand the concepts of plurality and tense. Therefore these mistakes, although non-standard English, are actually intelligent because they illustrate the infant has the ability to apply grammatical rules generally and to novel words, rather than by learning each instance separately.
In conclusion, babies seem to be designed to acquire language even before they are born. They have the abilities to tune into human voices, remember familiar words and sounds and encourage adults to communicate and teach them. Furthermore, they seem to desire and actively seek exposure to language and choose to practice what they learn until it is perfected. Once given the cue of exposure to adult speech, and time for some practicing, they are able to grasp the rules of grammar and begin to make their native language their own.