Archer (2001) claims the reason we 'think as we do today' is 'natural selection has made us this way' (p.414). Reviewing the literature, it seems Evolutionary Psychologists call on Darwinian Theory of biological evolution - that the genes for physical properties which aid human survival will be passed on more than those that do not, because individuals possessing those genes are more likely to survive and reproduce - and apply this to psychological dispositions to think and behave today in terms of survival. This essay will discuss claims made by evolutionary psychologists, as well as various criticisms of their methods. I will focus mainly on the issues of attraction, mate selection methods and criteria and rape, because these are areas causing controversy amongst academics.
I have interpreted the title quotation as follows: by 'single unifying starting point' Archer implies we should begin all psychological enquiry by first asking what help the given behaviour would have been to our ancestors in surviving to pass on their genes; by saying 'why we think as we do today' I assume Archer agrees with my view that thoughts are expressed in behaviour, so I will consider thoughts in this context to be the conscious or unconscious motivation behind actions. I will discuss the strength of his and other evolutionary psychologists' claims with specific examples in this essay.
In my opinion, the greatest appeal of Evolutionary psychology is that is 'makes sense'. Issues such as why we are more prone to irrational phobias of spiders (Campbell, 2001) than cars, which are more lethal to us, can be explained simply and logically with ideas like this: the early humans who were scared of spiders avoided them, so were not killed by the poisonous ones and survived to reproduce, thus we have inherited the psychological tendency to avoid them. Cars are a recent invention and evolution has not yet caught up with industry; 'the lag time between adaptive problems and solutions' (Campbell, 2001, p.426). Archer (2001) claims another benefit; that Evolutionary Psychology uncovers knowledge which would not be examined if generating hypotheses from 'conventional' (p.414) methods. He says that 'by viewing present-day mechanisms as reflections of past adaptations' (2001, p.414) and theorising accordingly, discoveries have been made which would not have been found using 'culturally based explanations of social behaviour' (p.430).
I would say that the main objections to Evolutionary Psychology are that first, explanations such as the above phobia theory seem too simplified. Secondly, the theories are hard to prove because they are often based on 'indirect evidence, notably broad evolutionary principles, cross-species comparisons, cross-cultural surveys and present day human behaviour' (Archer, 2001) and so the claims made are wide open to criticisms. Thirdly, these 'explanations' have been considered socially irresponsible (e.g. Rose & Rose, 2001) because of the worry that immoral behaviour might be excused by a claim of biological pre-disposition. As Archer (2001) says, 'science is located in the social world; it is subject to social pressures derived from political and social beliefs' (p. 430). These criticisms will be discussed throughout the essay by critically examining various Evolutionary Psychology theories.
First I will discuss attraction. Fredrickson et al (2003) tell us although people do not rank physical attractiveness as important in how much we like someone, various studies have shown it is. However, this research has mainly occurred under test conditions with unknown people. Obviously with first impressions, looks are all we have to judge someone by. In real relationships, other factors cause us to like other people. These include the convenience of being close-by, people being familiar to us and similarity; people tend to marry people of the same nationality, religion, class and educational status as themselves (Fredrickson et al., 2003). These factors do not seem to be caused by evolution, but more by culture and convenience; for example most religions encourage same-faith partnerships, and if you meet your spouse at University you will obviously have similar educational backgrounds (Fredrickson et al., 2003).
To expand on this topic, Evolutionary Psychology expects the sexes to select partners differently due to their different levels of input in reproduction. Since the male role in mating need only take minutes (or seconds) and supplies of sperm are limitless (men have no monthly cycles or menopause) they can potentially father hundreds of children. However, a female spends nine months pregnant and more nursing; she can have far less children and her time investment in each child is greater (Fredrickson et al, 2003). These observations have been used by evolutionary psychologists to explain the findings that women are 'choosier' than men when approached for either a date or sex in a bar (Buss, in Fredrickson et al, 2003) and why there are more societies allowing male polygamy than female (Fredrickson et al, 2003). According to evolutionary theory, men should take any available opportunity to spread their genes, but as a women can only have limited offspring she should ensure she only mates with good quality men to ensure the best genes and increase her offspring's chances of survival.
However, this theory does have some problems. If a man impregnates hundreds of women but does not look after his offspring they will die before they can reproduce, and his genes will not be passed on. This could explain how today's tendency for monogamous relationships has 'evolved'. As Fredrickson et al (2003) point out, Evolutionary Psychology could be used to explain both male infidelity and faithfulness. Does this make sense? Some critics might take the view that evolutionary psychologists could invent any story about early humans and make it fit to how they want to view the world today.
Fredrickson et al (2003) mention studies by Peele and Hatfield (1988;1988) which found that long-lasting relationships begin with what they call 'passionate love', with intense sexual attraction, but as the relationships progress passion subsides and gives way to 'companionate love' which is a strong intimate and trusting bond. The tendency for relationships to so progress could have evolved so couples stay together to rear young, although not all relationships progress like this, some do break down. It seems to me an equally reasonable explanation that people grow to love each other because of the reasons illustrated above; they are familiar and similar to each other and these social factors might be what determines whether their bonds last. The development of companionate love could also explain why so many arranged marriages do work out - Gupta and Singh (1982, cited in Hogg and Vaughan, 2002) found that although Indian arranged marriage couples initially rated lower levels of love for one another than 'love matches,' over time this reversed. A Western equivalent is the rising popularity of dating agencies; we are placing trust in more qualified others to find a long-term partner compatible with us rather than trusting our own attraction instincts (Hogg & Vaughan, 2002).
Another area of relationships Evolutionary Psychology attempts to explain is the differences in criteria the sexes use to select partners. For example Buss (2003, in Fredrickson et al, 2003) points out women are far likelier than men to consider economic wealth and this is a strong predictor for the effort she will give to maintaining the relationship (Buss, 2001). Men tend to place more emphasis on physical attractiveness and youth. Evolutionary psychologists could theorise that this female choice has evolved because she needs a provider while she is busy with nursing to help her offspring survive. However, as Buss and Barnes (1986, cited in Fredrickson et al, 2003) suggest, this criteria is not necessarily evolved; it could be because of practical and social reasons. Until relatively recently, with the development of contraception, women spent most of their adult lives pregnant and breastfeeding. This means men have got jobs, got involved in politics and gained the positions of power, 'excluding women from any other opportunity to obtain economic wealth' (Buss & Barnes, 1986, in Fredrickson et al, 2003, p.672) than through men. This idea is similar to social exchange theory (Hogg & Vaughan, 2002) which applies economic concepts to relationships; we put in the resources we expect to get out of them, whether in the form of money, love, time, services or social status. We will give what is available to us, and seek what we do not have, which makes practical sense without appeal to natural selection.
However, Buss (2001) argues that since his information comes from 37 countries (a 'cross-cultural' survey method) including Scandinavian countries where the sexes are approaching equal incomes, the fact that these criteria still emerge means women must have some sort of genetic tendency to obtain resources. However, I would contest this claim as the women's movement only occurred within the last couple of generations. It is likely that cultural patterns and social norms such as what women should look for in a man will remain for quite a while, especially considering that in Western politics, top positions in companies, and in other positions of power and influence men still out number women. I predict in future generations women will place increasingly less importance on men's wealth, although of course we cannot know this yet.
Evolutionary Psychology could explain why men generally prefer younger women (Fredrickson et al, 2003) since youth increases the chances their mate is fertile. According to this theory, what men find attractive would be features implying youth and fertility. This is suggested by stereotypes such as obsessions with big breasts and also scientific studies; it has been found that hip-waist ratio affects how attractive men find women (Singh, 2002). These theories do, as usual, make evolutionary sense. However, they are difficult to prove and there are other convincing theories such as social learning (Hyde, in Fredrickson et al, 2003). The example is if a boy dates an ugly girl, he will be ridiculed by friends and he and onlookers will learn to prioritise attractiveness in future. Although this might be true, this social learning theory does not explain why boys should ridicule friends more than girls, so it does not completely counter the evolutionary explanation.
One controversial Evolutionary Psychology paper is Thornhill & Palmer's (2000) account of rape. They claim men rape as a result of a psychological mechanism which has evolved to enable them to obtain a large number of mates in a society where females have choice. They imply that all human intercourse might once have occurred this way, by comparing our species with beetles which, they claim, also 'rape' each other. However, I believe not only do their arguments not apply to humans, they do not make evolutionary sense. First, it has been discussed above that a high number of offspring does not guarantee survival of genes if the offspring do not reach maturity. Rape would therefore not make sense on these grounds. Second, their account does not take into account the violent nature of rape - this sexual attack is often accompanied with horrific injury to the woman - if the rapist's sole purpose was to father a child, why would he be inclined to harm its mother? Thirdly, the authors offer 'no data to suggest that the genes of men who rape have been selected over men who do not' (Segal, 2001, p.423).
Furthermore, Rose & Rose (2001) criticise the comparison of human rape with forced-sex in animals. Animals only mate with fertile members of the opposite sex. The method of cross-species comparison cannot apply: human rape victims are often too young or old to be fertile, are the same sex as the attacker, or are raped anally or orally (Rose & Rose 2001). Conception could occur in none of these cases so would be no use ensuring the survival of the attacker's genes. I agree with the Roses (2001) that Thornhill & Palmer's (2000) accounts are not only misguided but also socially unethical theories to be suggesting in a society where rape victims are often terrified in trials, or too frightened to report the crime. However, Evolutionary Psychology as a discipline should not be disregarded on the grounds of this one publication, especially since I have found no other psychologists backing up Thornhill & Palmer's claims.
My final major criticism of Evolutionary Psychology is that it seems to imply that spreading our genes is the most important influence over our choices and behaviour today. However, nowadays Westerners live in a comfortable and safe society. Although we obviously avoid situations which are unsafe, everyday life is no longer a struggle for survival. Given this, we are free to enjoy our lives, with careers, hobbies, education and fun. If spreading our genes was our utmost concern why would women in the 1990s UK put off children until their 30s (Segal, 2001)? Although Evolutionary Psychology might help to explain motivations for behaviour we cannot understand the logic of, such as irrational phobias, humans live in a different world today then in our formative years and we have adapted accordingly.
In conclusion, the title quotation implies the Evolutionary Psychology approach should be our primary consideration behind psychological theorising. In my opinion it can be very useful, for example in generating hypotheses about 'why' rather than 'how' explanations (Campbell, 2001, p.426) and should by no means be ignored. However, I would not agree with Archer (2001) that Evolutionary Psychology should be the 'single unifying starting point' to explain all behaviour, because it is also equally important to take into account social and environmental factors motivating our thoughts and actions today.