This essay will discuss various advantages of using qualitative methods. I will explain why I believe that, despite controversy, qualitative methods can be valid and reliable whilst highlighting the care psychologists need to take to use them affectively. I will conclude by explaining how qualitative methods can best be used in psychological research.
Burt and Oaksford* (1999) say scientific research involves experimentation to test a hypothesis. However, whilst in long-established physical sciences such as chemistry, 'the depth of knowledge from past theorising constrains the choice of sensible hypotheses,' psychology remains a relatively 'new' science (Burt & Oaksford*, 1999). They argue that qualitative methods are essential when generating hypothesis for research in new fields, which we are interested in but unsure which questions to ask. Without them, we could only resort to an 'armchair technique'; reading limited existing literature, then 'sitting around' waiting for a hypothesis to strike you (Burt & Oaksford*, 1999).
As a practical example, Abaunza et al (2005) used a grounded approach in a longitudinal study on 'the social mechanisms that encourage and discourage the uptake of smoking' (2005, p.397) in young people. They say discourse analysis of interviews with youth-club attendees, allowed research 'from the perspective of young people themselves' (2005, p.400). Such research could uncover ideas the researchers would not have discovered in text books.
Despite the usefulness of qualitative methods in hypothesis generation they have encountered criticism involving 'reliability' and 'validity' and questioning whether qualitative methods could ever pass tests for them. Reliability, put simply, is the extent to which an experiment is stable 'within itself' (Flanagan, 2000, p.170) and the likelihood of the results being repeated. Validity involves the 'truth' of the results and whether findings could be generalised to the greater population (Flanagan, 2000). However, Merrick* (1993) points out these concepts have 'traditionally been used to access the quality of quantitative research'. In my opinion the issue is whether these concepts should be of consideration with regard to qualitative research and if so, how should we define them?
Morgan* (1998), a biologist, proposes 'a minimum attribute of good science is that it should be based upon observations that can be repeated by other competent scientists.' However, in Coyle et al's (2004) study it is hard to see how or why this could be expected. The participants were informed the study was about 'what men had to say about emotions' (2004, p.403) and the 'interview guide was brief, relatively unstructured and non-specific' (2004, p.403). Clearly, a natural conversation could not be reproduced. Does this mean the results are not 'reliable'?
Merrick (1993) takes a post positive position, rejecting defining 'reliability' regarding qualitative research on the basis of replicability. Instead, she suggests we should consider how 'dependable on' (*1993) the research is, by considering methods, the researchers' backgrounds and how these would influence the results. I agree that qualitative methods can be declared 'reliable', and therefore useful in psychology, without using the criteria developed for quantitative studies. In my view, the concern of qualitative research is the patterns emerging from the data, which can be looked for in future similar studies, not an exact replication of what they find.
Some critics also question whether qualitative research could ever be valid. Morgan maintains it is essential 'observers should try to keep personal prejudices out of science' (*1998). However in both Abaunza et al's (2005) study and Coyle et al's (2004) study researchers lead discussions and undoubtedly influence responses. This is 'reflexivity... the ways in which the researcher influences the research' (Johnson*, 1999). If we apply here the traditional ways of ensuring the internal validity of quantitative research - minimising extraneous variables so it is certain the Independent Variable is what is influencing the Dependent Variable - then Morgan would be right. However, in qualitative studies validity should not be so simply defined.
To illustrate, Hammersly and Atkinson (1983, as cited by Johnson, 1999) regard reflexivity as an important aspect of research because 'researchers should set about understanding the effects they will have*.' In Coyle et al's (2004) study they discuss ways they personally could have influenced interpretation ; 'we drew on our familiarity with mainstream and critical European social psychology... our different gender positions also meant that we positioned ourselves differently in relation to the text and the speakers' (p.404). I believe as long as researchers give as much relevant information as to how they may have influenced research, and do not try to pass off results as objective truth 'out there' (a concept which Morgan, 1998, p.488 thinks science should involve), the results can still be internally valid.
Furthermore, I agree with Woolgar (1996, cited by Johnson, 1999) that reflexivity is a problem in all research, whether quantitative or qualitative - all interpretation of results will depend on who is interpreting them and why. Merick (1993*) says that in qualitative research, 'reliability and validity depend on the relationship between the researcher and research purpose... (and) between the researcher and the interpretive community.' Therefore psychologists must be aware of these relationships and take these into account, so that qualitative research does not mislead.
The last major consideration is external validity - if qualitative results are dependent on context, how could we generalise to the greater population? Johnson (1999) points out that making generalisations is not usually the intent of qualitative research. For example, discourse analysis 'recognises that objectivity is never actually obtainable and that intense scrutiny made of each discourse produces data that is as biased (or unbiased) as any other form of research' (Flanagan, 2000, p.130). Normally more research would be necessary before any generalisations could be made and psychologists should keep this in mind.
Another advantage of using Qualitative methods is when studying groups. For example when studying 'men's talk about emotions' (Coyle et al, 2004, p.401) the 'placing of an individual, in relation to one or two others' (p.402) was of interest. In my opinion it would be ridiculous to suggest that a quantitative method such as a questionnaire would be a more 'valid' or 'reliable' way to study individuals in groups than discourse analysis.
Finally, qualitative research may be of use to psychologists when quantitative methods are not practical or are simply unethical. An example is Burt's postgraduate research on treating survivors of child sexual abuse (unpublished, cited by Burt & Oaksford, 1999). They point out that to study this quantitatively, they would need unbiased samples of people who were or were not abused and who are now adjusted or maladjusted. Ethically, survivors can only take part voluntarily, and it unlikely many would come forward for laboratory testing. However, most respond well to discussions in a 'nurturing environment' (Burt & Oaksford*, 1999) and good treatment methods have been derived from this source. As Burt and Oaksford (1999) point out, there is a pressing need for such studies; society needs answers to psychological questions such as 'how do we best treat survivors of abuse?' and 'how can we stop young people starting smoking?' right now, and right now qualitative methods appear to be productive methods to reaching answers for them.
In conclusion, qualitative methods can best be used by psychologists to generate hypotheses in new areas, study groups, develop treatments, and as an alternative when quantitative tests are not possible. However, if conducting the research psychologists must give detailed information so that the study can be considered in the appropriate context. If reading a qualitative study, psychologists must be careful not to over-generalise. Under these guidelines, qualitative research is very valuable in psychology.