This essay will first explain what stage theories are and then give an outline of the theory of Piaget, the major stage theorist with regard to developmental psychology. Various criticisms of Piaget will then be discussed. Vygotsky's stage theory will be mentioned, with regard to its similarities and differences to Piaget's, as will the implications these comparisons have on how stage theories should be considered in general. We will then look at the influence Piaget has had on other psychological stage models. Finally, I will conclude that although stage models do not explain all there is to know about development, they are important ways of studying the changes in cognitive ability as a human matures.
Harris & Butterworth (p.41 : 2002) define stages in development as meaning each stage involves some sort of change caused by development. They cite Flavell (19623) whose criteria for a stage theory were:
Qualitative changes at each stage, so the child either does something new or does something in a novel way. His example is crawling becoming walking - a stage of motor development.
The new ability acquired must be manifested across a wide range of behaviours. The example is when children acquire the concept of symbolic representation they show this not only by learning to speak (words are symbols) but also through play (a doll becomes a person).
The transition between stages should be relatively quick, for example the changes at adolescence often occur together.
Piaget is a stage theorist, whose theory emerged through studying his own children and keeping diaries, providing him with detailed longitudinal information. It could be argued that this method could provoke bias or misrepresentation. However, Piaget also conducted experiments on other children based on his findings, providing cross-sectional data too. In order to examine the advantages and disadvantages of his theory, I will go through each of the four main stages and asses Piaget's claims about each one.
The first main stage is sensori-motor, from birth until around 2 years, where baies discover 'the relationships between their actions and the consequences' (Fredrickson et al, p.76: 2003). By touching and observing they learn to distinguish themselves from their environment. Piaget observes the 'reflex reaction'; the baby will automatically such, thus make new discoveries about even non-food objects, such as her hand, and she will elarn from this experiment. Piaget strongly belived that babies were incluned to test out their world and assimilate new knowledge they gained thought this (Fredrickson et al, p.75: 2003).
Piaget believes this is when babies acquire the concept of object permanence, i.e. the knowledge that hings not immediately present can still exist. This clian is based on tests which involved placing a toy in front of an eight-month-old baby, who reacts to it, but shows no surprise or attempt to search for it when it is then hidden behing a screen. This is taken as evidence that the baby is acting 'as if the toy no longer exists' (Fredrickson et al, p.74: 2003). It is not until a baby reaches 10 months that they are seen to search.
However, Piaget's conclusion about the baby's thoughts seems tome to be based entirely on her action. Perhaps the baby dos realise the toy been hidden, but she is simply not yet aware of her own ability to search or has no desire to do so. It seems presumptuous to assume she has no concept of object permanence. Furthermore, Baillargeon & Graber (1987) said Piaget's tasks were too demanding. Their 'violation of expectations' test did not rely on motor ability (i.e. obvious searching) but instead studied preferential looking. Infants were shown sequences involving rabbits. In one there was an 'impossible event' where there was a gap in the wall the rabbit was behind which should have allowed viewing of the ears but they didn't appear. Babies of just five-and-a-half months looked longer at this 'impossible event', suggesting they understood the rabbit still existed behind the wall. However, although this study could show faults in Piaget's method it does little damage to stage theory; object permanence is still suggested to be a concept which isn't possessed by the newborn but is acquired is the early stages of development.
After the sensori-motor stage is the pre-operational stage, from around ages 2  - 6, where 'children gradually acquire systematic, logical thinking' (Butterworth & Harris, p.185: 2002). This is where they take the abilities they have concerning the physical world, like separating and combining, and apply these to their own thoughts. 'Although the young child can reason about simple problems, the system of mental operations lacks critical linkages' (Butterworth & Harris p.185: 2002). This means that the child recognises two rows of 10 coins are the 'same' if they're spaced equally, but if one is stretched then it will contain 'more'. Piaget saw this as evidence the child lacked the concept of conservation.. However, critics such as Donaldson (1978) and Siegal (1997) do not agree that children are incapable of logical thinking, but believe their mistakes at this stage are due to Piaget's confusing tasks, which do not make 'human sense.' In a Donaldson's task, where 'naughty teddy moved the counters' 71.9% of children in the pre-operational stage showed conservations, as apposed to Piaget's 33.6%.
The next stage is the concrete operational stage (7-11 years) where Piaget believes the child 'achieves conservation of number, age, and weight' (Fredrickson et al, p.75: 2003). Here abstract terms can be understood, but only with regard to concrete objects. It is only in the formal operational stage, reached around adolescence, where we are able to think in 'purely symbolic terms' (Fredrickson et al, p.75: 2003).
Whilst the points detailed above may be fair criticisms of Piaget's method, they do not suggest the fundamental idea of stages to be wrong, so we will now take a look at Vygotsky, another stage theorist. His stages coincided with Piaget's. although the approach was slightly different. Whilst Piaget was a trained biologist, Vygotsky concentrated on social and environmental influences. Concerning the relationship between language and thought, they also differ. Vygotsky placed more importance on the roles of social interaction on the development of thought (Butterworth & Harris p.27: 2002) and concentrated more on the typical ages behaviour emerged than making assumptions bout how developed the mind was at this stage.
Despite having different research interests, Vygotsky and Piaget make similar stage divisions. Respectively, birth-2 years is affiliation/sensori-motor stage, 2-7 years is play/preoperational stage, 7-12 years is learning/concrete operational stage and adolescence through to adulthood is work/formal operational stage. These common transition periods suggest that there are a number of obvious qualitative changes occurring at each boundary, so do support the idea that some sort of stage model is appropriate even if there were flaws in those of either psychologist.
Early stage theorists such as Piaget have influenced the work of many psychologists. Smilansky's play stages (1968) largely fit in with Piaget's cognitive development stages. Her 'functional play' stage, where children do things with their toys (like dialling a phone) is in accordance with Piaget's Preoperational stage; the 'constructive play' stage (like building a tower), followed by 'socio-dramatic play' stage (make believe games) and then finally 'games with rules' stage all show a progression in understanding of abstract circumstances with age. The transition ages are similar to those of Piaget's stages, reiterating what he believed to be the cognitive capabilities of children of specific ages.
Kohlberg (1966 & 1969), who produced a stage model of the development of gender identity, was also heavily influenced by Piaget. His stages show a progression from a two year old being aware of sex, but believing it can change (e.g. a boy in a skirt 'becomes' a girl) to realising it remains the same over time and across different situations. This follows the theoretical foundations laid by Piaget, who believed that abstract concepts such as time were acquired in later stages of development.
The fact that very similar patterns emerge from these four stage theories discussed, which were developed at different times by psychologists with different research interests, is a strong argument for why stage theories should be supported. However, despite their merits there still remain some problems with stage theories.
First, the impression is given that most children go through the transitions at the same ages. In fact, development occurs at quite different rates for all children. Piaget also failed to acknowledge that whilst some forms of development are maturationally controlled, such as puberty, others can (to some extent) be hastened. For example, the Kipsigis tribe in Kenya 'teach' their young to sit up, stand and walk by tapping into the 'stepping reflex' babies have when their feet touch a surface (Cole & Cole 2001, as cited by Fredrickson et al, p.68: 2003) and these babies reach such milestones around 4 weeks before Americans do. However, the stage theorists are still correct in that all children do go through such stages, and that the stages must occur in the specific order.
Another critical aspect that the stage theorists appear to ignore is the importance of social interaction for normal development. For example, Chomsky's theory of language acquisition (1968) involves a language acquisition device (L.A.D) which he believes we possess innately, but requires exposure to adult speech to be stimulated. Likewise, Lennenberg's critical period theory (1976) highlights the importance of language-learning at a specific stage (before puberty) because at puberty 'lateralisation' occurs and language will not progress past basic stages.
In conclusion, the advantages of stage models of cognitive development are that they appear to log essential pathway s all humans must go through throughout maturation, and highlight that the order certain milestones occur is universal. They also illustrate our developing capacities of reasoning and how the way we think changes as we mature. Despite several problems with Piaget's experimental methods, and perhaps the over-simplification of the stage boundaries, stage models have proved to be successful and donsistent ways to study cognitive development.