Prior to the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999, the doctrine of privity "had long been a central, albeit controversial rule of English contract law", and was defined by Lord Irving as "the rule which senior judges have criticised more than any other rule of English contract law". The two rules of the doctrine were that a third party to a contract could not be subject to burdens arising out of it, and, parallely, he could also not sue upon it to obtain the promised performance, even if the contract was entered into with the express purpose of benefiting him.
In order to determine whether there is a need in today's contract law for the doctrine of privity, it may be useful to trace back its historical development, analysing the character of contract law before the existence of a doctrine of privity as we know it, and considering the conditions in which it took root, until it finally developed into what was considered a fundamental principle of English law.
We are told that in the 16 th and 17 th centuries, no doctrine of privity existed; third parties were held to be entitled to sue upon a contract entered into for their own benefit. Thus, in Dutton v. Poole (1677), it was found that "the consideration and promise to the father may well extend to the children".
It was only with the development of the doctrine of consideration that the right to sue came to be regarded as depending upon the plaintiff showing that he had provided a sufficient reason for him to enforce the promise. "During the early years of the 19 th century, with the emergence of the bargain theory of contract, the view was taken that it was only the parties to that bargain who might enforce the obligations thereby undertaken", as seen in Price v Easton (1833). This approach was crystallised in the decisive case of Tweddle v Atkinson (1861), where the plaintiff was held not to be entitled to enforce a promise which had been made to his father, not to him. Third parties were thus no longer considered to have a right of action; this marked a turning point in the history of the doctrine of privity. In fact, Wightman, Crompton and Blackburn JJ all appeared to base their judgements on the rule that a stranger to the consideration cannot enforce the promise; this eclipsed the need to explain the result in Tweddle on the basis of an independent doctrine of privity.
For a number of years, no doubts were expressed as to the correctness of the decision in Tweddle. In Gandy v Gandy (1885), Bowen L.J. said that it had laid down "the true common law doctrine". In the second leading case on the doctrine of privity before the 1999 Act, more than 50 years after Tweddle, Viscount Haldane L.C. remarked, in Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co Ltd v Selfridge and Co Ltd [1915], that it was one of the fundamental principles of English law that "only a person who is party to a contract can sue on it." His views were reiterated by the House of Lords, in Midland Silicones Ltd v Scruttons Ltd [1962], and in Beswick v Beswick [1968], "a sanguinary defeat for those who would hope to see the doctrine of privity curbed, if not abolished", and accepted by members of the High Court, in Wilson v Darling Island Stevedoring and Lighterage Co. Ltd (1956), per Fullagar J., and in Coulls, per Windeyer J.
However, the doctrine of privity was not left unchallenged; in Smith and Snipes Hall Farm Ltd. V River Douglas Catchment Board [1949], 
Drive Yourself Hire Co. (London) Ltd v Strutt [1954], and in Beswick, Denning L.J., in a full frontal assault on doctrine of privity, argued that Dutton had established that a promise made expressly for the benefit of a third person could be enforced by him, and that Tweddle was thus "a mistaken departure from this view."
According to Greig and Davis, the 'historical perspective' of Lord Denning is unacceptable; since Dutton "was decided at a time before there was any notion of a bilateral contract, and hence could not have laid down a rule as to who may, and who may not, sue on a contract." According to Windeyer J., the true explanation of Dutton turned on "the expansive views of consideration then held, and that the decision in Tweddle, far from being a historical aberration, must be accepted as having settled the rule of common law as to privity".
A significant challenge to the doctrine of privity was made in 1937, when the English Law Revision Committee recommended its abolition in its Sixth Interim Report. Lord Diplock, in Swain v Law Society [1983], described the doctrine as "an anachronistic shortcoming that for many years has been regarded as a reproach to English private law". In Beswick, where Peter B's widow could not sue her nephew in her own capacity because she was not a party to the contract between her husband and her nephew, she was able to bring a successful action as the administratrix of her husband's estate. "So on the facts of the case no injustice was done and it was not necessary for the House of Lords to create an exception to the doctrine of privity in order to give the widow the remedy which it was thought she deserved." However, Beswick so clearly demonstrated that the doctrine of privity was capable of giving rise to injustice that Lord Reid was prompted to remark that "if one had to contemplate a further long period of Parliamentary procrastination, this House might find it necessary to deal with this matter", a view which was approved by Lord Scarman and Lord Keith in Woodar Investment Development Ltd. V Wimpey Construction U.K. Ltd [1980]: Windeyer J. in Olsson v Dyson (1969), Lord Goff in White v Jones [1995] and, amongst others, Steyn L.J. in Darlington Borough Council v Wiltshier Northern Ltd [1995], who observed that "there is no doctrinal, logical or policy reason why the law should deny effectiveness to a contract for the benefit of a third party where that is the expressed intention of the parties."
Clearly, the evolution of the doctrine of privity is intricately bound with the doctrine of consideration, certain aspects of it in particular. Viscount Haldane L.C.'s assertion, in Dunlop,
 that privity was a fundamental principle of the common law, was accompanied by the assertion of "another, equally fundamental principle, - that, except in the case of deeds, "if a person with whom a contract ... has been made is to be able to enforce it, consideration must have been given by him to the promisor"; this was reiterated by Lord Wright in Vandepitte v Preferred Accident Insurance Corp. of New York [1933]. Opinion is divided, however, as to whether the principles of privity and consideration are "separate and distinct", or merely "two ways of saying the same thing".
The view that the doctrine of privity is part of the doctrine that 'consideration must move from the promisee', and that they both perform the same function, is shared by Salmond, J. and Williams, J., Furmston, Smith, J.C. and Thomas, J.A.C. and Cheshire and Fifoot.
However, a number of scholars do not agree that privity is just a part of consideration, because both the requirement of consideration and the requirement of privity must be satisfied in order for the plaintiff to enforce a contract; in this sense, it is possible to regard privity as merely a procedural rule, which comes into play only after the existence of a contract, and therefore rests upon the assumption that a valid contract exists
Greig suggests that "In many circumstances, there is no practical difference in result between applying the doctrine of privity or demanding that consideration move from the promisee", with the example of Price, where Littledale and Patterson JJ. refused the plaintiff relief on grounds of privity, while Denman C.J. relied on the fact that he had not provided consideration, which was also the ratio decidendi in Tweddle.
However, the two doctrines are more easily distinguishable in cases where a contract is made with joint promisees, for example, where X promises to pay a 100 to Z, in exchange for Y's promise to undertake some repairs to X's car. In the event that Y carries out the repairs, but X refuses to pay Z, then, if privity is no more than an aspect of the doctrine of consideration, Z would be unable to enforce the promise, for although Z is a party to the contract, he has provided no consideration. If however, the two doctrines are distinct, Z would not be "debarred" by the doctrine of privity. In a sense, privity and consideration would constitute two separate hurdles for Z to surmount and not one. "Whether the promisor has been provided with consideration is a separate question, and, if it is satisfied, C would be able to recover the payment." This concept is reiterated in Coulls v Bagot's Executor and Trustee Co. Ltd, where Barwick C.J. and Windeyer J. held that as regards a promise made to joint promisees, it was irrelevant whether the consideration moved from one or from both. Though the "High Court was divided upon the construction of the agreement, four of the judges were of the opinion that if, on its true interpretation, the wife was a party to the agreement, she was entitled to receive the royalties payable after her husband's death even though she personally had given no consideration for the company's promise." This example affirms that though the two doctrines very closely converge and seen to be similar in certain situations, they can be separated, and are quite clearly separate.
This distinction is apprehended by the Law Commission in its Consultation Paper No 121, where it distinguishes, in policy terms, the third party rule, and the rule that 'consideration must move from the promisee': the former determines who can enforce a contract, while the latter determines the types of promises that can be enforced. This disrelation reinforces the argument that a reform of the third party rule does not necessitate an associated review of the doctrine of consideration, and is consistent with the English Law Revision Committee's 6 th Interim Report, which emphasised upon the separateness of the two doctrines.
The Law Commission also considers the somewhat ambiguous maxim, "consideration must move from the promisee", and remarks that it may be interpreted in two ways; firstly, "it can be taken to mean that to be binding a promise must be supported by consideration", i.e., gratuitous promises cannot be enforced; it is essentially in this sense of consideration being a necessary requirement for a valid contract that the maxim was used in the Consultation Paper. The more common interpretation, however, is when it is used to mean that, "even though the promise is supported by consideration, the consideration must move from the plaintiff", i.e., the party seeking to enforce the contract must have provided the consideration. "Used in this sense one cannot, even at a formal level, reform the privity doctrine while leaving untouched the rule that consideration must move from the promisee. A reform allowing a third party to sue would achieve nothing, or almost nothing, unless there was also a departure from the rule that a plaintiff could not sue on a contract if it has not provided consideration. Used in this sense, the rule that consideration must move from the promisee and the rule of privity that only a party to a contract can enforce it are so closely linked that the essential dispute is whether they are distinguishable at all; whether, in other words, there are two rules or one." The Law Commission proceeds to suggest that this "dispute ultimately turns on what one means by 'a party' to a contract where the contract is supported by consideration rather than being made under deed", referring to the oft-used example of a contract made with joint promisees.
It emerges that privity and consideration are not synonymous either in terms of origin, historical development, scope, effect, or legislative intention; this, however, has not prevented the occurrence of situations where the two doctrines interact with each other, or overlap, in such a way as to cause undue complexities in the law, spurring the use of various artificial and uncertain exceptions and subterfuges to avoid injustice. Such unsatisfactory conditions are created as when the right to sue for breach of contract and the loss which it causes become separated, or when the promisee can obtain a satisfactory remedy for the third party, but cannot be compelled to do so.
This situation was remedied in November 1999, and new rules for the twenty-first century were created, with the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999, which reformed that part of the doctrine of privity under which a contract was prevented from conferring rights upon anyone except the parties to it. According to s.1(1) of the Act, a third party may in his own right enforce a term of the contract, if the contract expressly provides that he may, or if the term purports to confer a benefit on him. If this were to be applied to an existing case, it appears that Mrs Beswick would have a claim in her own right under s.1(1)(b).
The Law Commission "does not appear to have had much doubt that the privity doctrine was ripe for reform", and used two main arguments to support the reform to the third party rule. Firstly, it suggested that if the theoretical basis for the enforcement of contracts is the will of the parties, then "the failure of law to afford a remedy to the third party where the contracting parties intended that it should have one frustrates their intentions, and undermines the general justifying theory of contract." The second argument is non-conditional, and "focuses on the injustice to the third party."
This suggests that the doctrine of privity is not entirely devoid of use; despite the many limitations of the 1999 Act, (such as the difficulty of identifying the intention of the contracting parties for the purposes of s.1(1)(b) when it is not expressed, the problems consequent to the assignment of the rights of one of the main parties to a third party, or the requirement of the third party to be expressly identified or described in the contract), the reformed doctrine of privity certainly does offer a number of advantages, not the least of which is the instilling of greater freedom in English contract law.
To conclude, our present question may be answered in two parts; though the doctrine of privity has contributed to its share of injustices in the pre-reform years, it is difficult to dismiss it as strictly unnecessary. The doctrine of consideration, however, cannot be held to perform the same function, for though they share an intimate relationship, both doctrines are separate and distinct, and fulfil different roles in the law of contract.