In order to determine whether James, as an individual "aggrieved citizen", is entitled to seek redress in the courts, the rules of standing must be considered and applied to the facts of his case. James' objections to the new planning policy are on the grounds of noise, the likely fall in the value of his property and the lack of prior consultation before its implementation. The rights that James seeks to protect are his private proprietary rights, and it is the actions of the local authority, which is a statutory corporation, that have invaded these rights; furthermore, these actions of the local authority were in the public law domain, as part of it's public functions. "The challenged decision must ... be in the public domain and not about aspects of a public body's 'everyday' decisions about employees, contractual powers etc." James has thus suffered a private wrong for which he must seek a remedy in public law.
In order to seek a remedy in private law for a public law wrong, such as an injunction or declaration, fulfilling the requirement of standing is a necessary precondition. In Boyce v Paddington Corp
 the plaintiff's right to bring an action to prevent the Council from constructing a hoarding adjacent to a building site, which would compromise his right to light, was accepted, in respect of a public wrong where the plaintiff suffered damage to his private rights.
Similarly, in Steeples v Derbyshire CC
, it was held that when the plaintiff's private propriety rights were affected by the exercise of public law powers, there was sufficient locus standi for a private action against a public authority. The plaintiff was deemed to have sufficient standing to challenge the grant of planning permission over two leisure complexes, on the basis that his private rights of enjoyment of his property were infringed upon, such as his use of a lane, and as a result of nuisance caused by noise and the risk of litter and vandals. He also claimed that there was a breach of natural justice in the granting of the planning permission. Both these private rights gave rise to grounds for standing which were sufficient to enable him to make an application for judicial review if necessary.
Applying Steeples v Derbyshire CC, the fact that James's private proprietary rights have been compromised due to the action of the local authority in permitting the construction of factory outlets adjacent to a residential area is likely to give him sufficient standing for judicial review, which would be brought by way of an application for judicial review, under Order 53 of the Rules of the Supreme Court, amended by s.31 of the Supreme Court Act 1981, now CPR 54. James must first obtain the leave of the court; this is based on the existence of an arguable case. Normally a single judge hears this first stage on affidavit evidence. The application for leave must be made without "undue delay", within the time limit of three months, as per s.31(7) of the Supreme Court Act 1981. Upon the granting of leave, the application will proceed to the second stage; a full hearing of issues will ensue, and all parties will be heard.
The Courts' efforts to restrict the availability of private law remedies to directly affected citizens has the effect that ratepayers, taxpayers or "aggrieved citizens" may only sue in their own name where a public right causes 'special damage', applying Boyce v Paddington. "A litigant who seeks redress for a public law wrong in a private action must establish, in order to have standing, that the public law wrong has invaded some legal right of his or hers, recognized in private law, or has caused him or her some special damage." Typically, it is property rights, such as those of James' in our present case, that are sought to be protected in such situations. In order that James be entitled to sue, it must be established that 'special damage' was caused to his enjoyment of his property as a result of the new policy granting planning permission for the factory outlets adjacent to his property. "Special damage is damage over and above that suffered by the public at large or some significant section of it affected by the decision."
The case of Gouriet v Union of Post Office Workers
 may be used to illustrate the courts approach to special damage. "A boycott of mail to a foreign country adversely affects all persons who might wish to use the mail service to the country. It would inflict special damage on a person who had just posted a business letter the purpose of which would be defeated by any exceptional delay. Special damage is not defined in terms of the right of the plaintiff which has been invaded but in terms of the effect of the challenged action. It seems that the requirement of special damage may be satisfied by potential damage, and it may be possible to rephrase the requirement in terms of the plaintiff having a special 'interest in or concern with' the challenged action. ... The question of whether someone has suffered special damage or not depends on the facts of the particular case, and so is very much in the discretion of the court." However, if James is not found to have sufficient standing, he may still be able to seek redress for the public law wrong he has suffered by using the relator procedure, with the Attorney-General as the nominal plaintiff.
James' objections, particularly on the grounds of noise, are likely to fall into the category of 'special damage'. He may also have grounds for an action in nuisance, but the possibility exists of the nuisance being condoned in the exercise of statutory powers, depending upon judicial interpretation. "The legal solution to many administrative disputes inevitably involves some form of judicial discretion. Even if the relevant principles are clear, their application to a particular dispute is seldom clear-cut."
James may also challenge the new planning policy on the grounds of procedural impropriety, arising out of the fact that the decision to grant planning permission was implemented by the local authority without any prior consultation. James may allege that this amounts to a breach of the very first rule of natural justice, according to which both sides of a case must be heard. Since the rights of the litigant are affected, the courts have the discretion to apply such rules to the case. However, James is not guaranteed a remedy, since judicial review does not always afford the citizen redress, and the granting of a remedy and the ultimate success of the application is discretionary.
A significant element of the motivation for James to apply for judicial review is derived from the fact that the action sanctioned by the new policy of the local authority, i.e. the construction of the proposed factory outlets, has not yet begun. "If an authority has decided to do an act which is allegedly illegal but has not yet done it then, ... the applicant will want to challenge the decision to act and to obtain an order instructing the authority not to carry out its decision." However, in the event that the construction process had begun, it is probable that the possibility of James succeeding in his claims would be further complicated, though it would not affect his capability to take legal action, except of course in terms of technicalities such as time limits. "If the authority has already acted and the act can be easily undone, the applicant can challenge the decision to act and seek an order requiring the authority to undo its action. For example, if an authority has granted planning permission to A but building has not yet started, B might be able to get the permission revoked." In the present case, the Local Authority permitted the building of the factory outlets, but since building has not started, there is a possibility that an "aggrieved citizen" such as James can succeed in getting the order revoked.
The case of Fleet Street Casuals
, despite being a leading case on interpretation of the rule of standing, leaves a certain amount of uncertainty as to the precise legal principles that apply to the law of standing; though a liberal approach to standing was taken, there was a large measure of judicial discretion, and it is doubtful whether there is a single test for standing under the new procedures under Order 53. Since standing is, in practice, a matter of "mixed law and fact", the determination of whether "Save Our Green Peace" has sufficient interest is dependant upon statutory interpretation, the general context of the case, and judicial discretion. From Fleet Street Casuals, it is clear that the question of what constitutes sufficient interest is partly a question of legal principle and partly of fact, to be decided in the light of the circumstances of the case before the court. "So it will often be impossible to be entirely sure, in advance of litigation, whether any particular applicant has a sufficient interest." Thus, the question of sufficient interest has to be judged in the light of the relevant statutory provisions, the substance of the applicant's complaint, whether the case raises issues that are justiciable, and the seriousness of the alleged illegality.
The likelihood of success of a legal challenge brought in the name of the local movement "Save Our Green Space" must now be examined.
That there is a fundamental objection to citizens challenging a decision of a public authority has been adequately demonstrated by the restrictive view of public interest litigation taken by the courts in the Rose Theatre case. Schiemann J. considered the question of whether standing had been established by the trust formed from local residents, consisting of archaeologists of a certain expertise and leading actors. It was found that where a number of individuals do not have an interest, the act of their joining together to form a group does not create an interest for the group thus formed. Thus, despite being concerned with the preservation of national heritage, and possessing expert knowledge about the monument, it was found that the applicants failed to meet the requirements for standing, and that in fact, upon consideration, no individual had the standing to move for judicial review. This approach is unduly protective of the powers of the Secretary of State, and reflects a reluctance on the part of the courts to become a channel for pressure group activity, possibly on the basis of the administrative difficulties that would be consequent to an increased volume of judicial review, and also on the grounds that the formulation of policy is the task of the Parliament, rather than that of courts. The crucial distinction in the context of standing, however, is whether the private interest of the applicant is affected, or if judicial review is sought not for the recognition or enforcement of some private right, but simply on the basis of the wider public interest, or as an attempt to regulate official power. Challenges of the latter sort have been permitted by the courts on a restrictive basis, but mainly in the context of large, well known groups, such as Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace and the World Development Movement, which play an important role in the lobbying process for the protection of the environment. Five years after Rose Theatre, the important role of pressure groups was highlighted with the Pergau Dam
 case, where the World Development Movement successfully challenged the payments from the overseas aid budget to build a dam in Malaysia. Both the cases have a number of implications for the future of pressure group activity through the courts; am important question raised is that of the role of membership in helping a pressure group overcome the rules of standing. "The Law Commission... has acknowledged that interest groups may have good grounds for having standing, in the public interest, to make an application for judicial review." However, the judicial approach towards permitting pressure groups to bring a matter of public interest before the court is quite flexible and thus fairly unpredictable. The Rose Theatre case can be interpreted in such a way as to suggest that an ordinary citizen, in the absence of an express statutory right is unable to challenge decisions, even where this would serve public interest. In the case before us, it appears that the local movement "Save Our Green Space", with charitable status and is concerned with religious, ecological and environmental principles, may move for leave for judicial review; however, the result of such an action cannot be determined with any certainty. After Pergau Dam, there is a possibility that it might be successful. One factor that is to its advantage is that it is an established pressure group, unlike that in Rose Theatre, which was created specifically for the purpose of dealing with the issue at hand.
The rules of natural justice have the significant effect of stressing upon the duty of public authorities to act fairly in making decisions. "The question that was often asked was whether in reaching a particular decision there was a duty to observe the rules of natural justice. Thus, if the exercise of power affected a person's rights, property or character, it was more likely to be subject to natural justice; so was a decision which followed a procedure involving the confrontation of two opposing views, in a manner resembling litigation." In Cooper v Wandsworth Board of Works
, the plaintiff recovered damages from the board in trespass for demolishing his partly-built house; it was held that the board should have given a hearing to the plaintiff before exercising their statutory powers of demolition. This rule against bias was applied against local authorities in a similar manner in Steeples v Derbyshire, where a decision to grant planning permission to the development of an amusement park by a private company was held to void since the council had previously made a contract with the company, making it liable in damages if planning permission was not granted.
It is the duty of the courts to ensure that all administrative powers are exercised fairly, in accordance with fair procedure. In the context of natural justice and fairness, it is important that the product of consultation be conscientiously taken into account.
As a last resort, if all domestic avenues fail, James can take recourse to the Human Rights Act 1998, which states that it is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way that is incompatible with a Convention right, according to s.6. However, the public authority is not liable in legal proceedings if it can be shown that there is a statutory requirement upon it to act in the manner that it did; in such a case the court would deliberate as to whether the statutory requirement can be made compatible or issue a declaration of incompatibility.
James will seek to show that there was no statutory requirement upon the local authority to act in the manner it did. We are told that the factory outlets are part of a new job creation scheme promised by the Main political party, and that the new planning policy was announced as soon as the party took control of the local authority. The election manifesto of the Main party may be considered by the courts; however, in the case of Bromley LBC v Greater London Council [1983], Lord Diplock observed "that the manifesto did not provide a local authority with a mandatory requirement to carry out policies. Members of a local authority must not "treat themselves as irrevocably bound to carry out pre-announced policies" in election manifestos." Though this view is not consistently followed, it reflects the current view of the courts.
According to the House of Lords, disputes involving planning matters such as the determination of planning conditions did involve rights protected by the Convention; it was stressed that there should be a review of the legality of the decision and of the relevant procedures followed. In Marcic v Thames Water Utilities Ltd. , Article 8 was invoked to protect the rights of a householder in a flood-prone area. "Proceedings for a person who claims a human rights infringement or breach of the Convention may be by way of appeal or judicial review." However the person must satisfy the "victim" test for the purposes of Article 34 of the Convention, which is the same test of standing that applies before the European Court of Human Rights, and is narrower and more restrictive than the liberal rules of standing that a claimant has to overcome for judicial review in the UK. Clearly, since pressure groups are barred from taking proceedings under the victim test, the local movement "Save Our Green Space" will not be able to bring an action except in judicial review.
Thus, James should bring an action for judicial review, on grounds of procedural impropriety; this would be more likely to achieve success than an action brought by "Save Our Green Space".