Working memory, the more contemporary term for short-term memory, is conceptualized as an active system for temporarily storing and manipulating information needed in the execution of complex cognitive tasks. The concept of short term memory store is a store where memories are kept temporarily until the information starts to exceed the short term store capacity and those memories are forgotten and replaced by new ones. Alternatively, if it is information which is imperative, the short term memory is encoded and transferred into long term memory. A working memory is composed of three different components: a modality-free central executive, a phonological loop and a visuo-sketchpad. (Parkin, 1993) Each component is unique and possesses a different function. The three components can operate relatively independently, so that the articulatory loop and the sketchpad can both hold a limited amount of information without interfering with one another. However, each component is inter-related and all are required for the functioning of a working memory.
The phonological loop is a slave system that stores and manipulates auditory information. (Eysenck and Keane, 1990) It enables a person to remember information in the order in which he was presented it. The phonological loop is composed of two parts: a passive phonological store and an articulatory process. Information is processed differently depending on its method of presentation; whether it was presented visually or auditorily. Auditory presentation of words has direct access to the phonological store, but visual presentation only has indirect access via subvocal articulation. Information presented in an auditory form is processed by the phonological store. The phonological store is a memory store that can retain speech-based (phonological) information for a short period of time. Unless rehearsed, the information tends to fade and be forgotten within about 2 seconds. The second component is the articulatory control process, which is responsible for two different functions: it translates visual information into a speech-based code and deposits it in the phonological store; and it enables information to be retained in the memory store.
There was numerous research done to back up this theory on the phonological loop. An experiment carried out by Baddeley, Thomson and Buchanan (1975), as cited in Baddeley (1999), found a connection between word length and memory span. It was discovered that memory of shorter words is significantly higher than memory of longer words. This suggests that capacity of the phonological loop is determined by the temporal duration and that memory span is determined by the rate of rehearsal. This supports the idea of rehearsal by the phonological store. As "longer words" are longer than "shorter words", it would take longer to rehearse these words compared to "shorter words" and therefore the memory of shorter words was more successful.
They further tested the theory on the phonological loop by articulatory suppression: requiring the subjects to generate repetitive irrelevant speech and therefore preventing subvocal rehearsal. Subjects when under suppression were unable to transfer visually presented information to the phonological short-term store. As a result of this, the acoustic similarity effect and irrelevant speech effect was removed. As the subjects were unable to subvocalise the information the information being visually presented to them, the information was not translated into a phonological code. The information was therefore not registered in the store and any irrelevant speech did not cause any disruption. It was concluded that a process of subvocal rehearsal is necessary to refresh a fading memory trace before it decays and the information is lost forever. Subvocal rehearsal also includes subvocal speech and can be disrupted by irrelevant spoken material. This provides evidentiary support for the theory behind the phonological loop.
Another component of the working memory is the visuo-spatial sketchpad. The visuo-spatial sketchpad is concerned with temporary storage and manipulation of spatial and visual information. Logie (1995), as cited in Eysenck and Keane (1990),
argued that it can be subdivided into two different components: the visual cache and the inner scribe. The visual cache is concerned with the storage of visual form and color. The inner scribe handles spatial and movement information. Information is rehearsed in the visual cache by the inner scribe. The inner scribe also rehearses and enables transfers of information from the visual cache to the central executive. It is also instrumental in the planning and execution of bodily movements. The visuo-spatial sketchpad is mainly concerned with visuo-spatial manipulations such as geographical orientation. (Eysenck and Keane, 1990)
Evidence for Logie's theory was provided in a study carried out by Beschin, Cocchini, Della Sala and Logie (1997) as cited in Eysenck and Keane (1990). The subject was a man, NL, who had suffered from a stroke. NL had difficulty describing details from the left side of scenes in visual imagery. However, he found it easy to perceive the left sides of scenes which indicated that his visual perception system was intact. It was reported that NL performed badly on tasks that required use of the visuo-spatial sketchpad unless there was some form of physical stimulus or a drawing. It was concluded that as NL had suffered damage to the visual cache, he was only able to create mental representations of scenes and objects. The use of stimulus was very helpful as it enables him to use intact visual perception skills to compensate for the redundant visual cache.
At the crux of a working memory, is the central executive which is the most significant and essential component. It is assumed to be a limited-capacity attentional system that controls the phonological loop and sketch pad, and related them to long term memory. (Baddeley, 1999) Baddeley (1996) as cited in Eysenck and Keane (1990), has identified four major functions of the central executive: switching of retrieval plans, timesharing in dual-task studies, selective exclusive attention to specific stimuli and temporary activation of long term memory.
Baddeley has used tasks with random generation of letters or digits to study the central executive. A study by Baddeley (1996) was cited in Eysenck and Keane (1990), in which participants had to hold between one and eight digits in short term memory while trying to generate a random sequence of digits. It was discovered that as the number of digits increased, the harder it was to produce random sequences. This proves the theory that close attention is needed to avoid producing non-random sequences. Further research was carried out which involved participants pressing numbered keys along with random digit generilsation. Some of the experiments were also done in combination with reciting the alphabets, counting from 1 or alternating numbers and alphabets. The results showed that randomness was reduced by the alternation task suggesting that rapid switching of retrieval plans is a central executive function.
Baddeley also studied the role of time sharing and attention distribution amongst two tasks. (Eysenck and Keane, 1990) A study was done on Alzheimer's patients who suffer from progressive loss of mental powers. The patients participated in a dual-task study involving digit-span tasks combined with the task of placing a cross in each of a series of boxes arranged in an irregular pattern. The results showed that the control group showed no reduction in digital span performance in the dual task condition. However, the Alzheimer's patients showed a marked reduction in performance. This highlights the view that Alzheimer's patients have difficulties distributing attention between two tasks.
A working memory is like a company run by a director and the people under him. In this case, the "director" is the central executive and "the people under him" are the two slave systems: phonological loop and visuo-spatial sketchpad. The phonological loop is made up of a passive phonological store directly concerned with speech perception; and an articulatory process linked to speech production that gives access to the phonological store. The theory on the phonological loop was studied with the use of articulatory suppression which is the prevention of subvocal rehearsal by generating repetitive irrelevant speech. Results showed that it is necessary for subvocal rehearsal to occur in order to refresh a fading memory trace before it decays and the information is lost forever. The visuo-spatial sketchpad is composed of the visual cache which is a visual form and color store and an inner scribe which is concerned with spatial and movement information, allows transfer of information from visual cache to the central executive and is involved in the planning and executing of body movements. Evidence consistent with this theory was acquired from an experiment done on a stroke patient. It was reported that it was necessary for some form of physical stimulus or a drawing as he had difficulty performing tasks that required the use of the visuo-spatial. It was concluded that the damage the patient had suffered had damaged the visual cache and as a result he was only able to create mental representations of scenes and objects. The central executive system controls the other two slave systems. It has four major functions: switching of retrieval plans, timesharing in dual-task studies, selective exclusive attention to specific stimuli and temporary activation of long term memory. This theory was tested in an experiment on Alzheimer's patients and it was discovered that they have difficulties distributing attention between two tasks due to their brain damage. Another experiment involving random digit generilisation and alphabets clearly depicted that rapid switching of retrieval plans is a function of the central executive.
All three components have a limited capacity and are relatively independent of the other components. However, it must be noted that all three are required in order to form a working memory.