Sensation is an impression on the consciousness from a stimulation of the senses.
Perception is the recognition and interpretation of sensory stimuli based mostly on memory. A sensation does not occur without a perception following. Humans utilize their senses to perceive their surrounding environment.
To make sense of their connection, one has to delve into the biological beginnings. The science of sensation is called psychophysics. Psychophysics is concerned with physical stimuli of the senses and the occurring psychological reactions. Perception is an individual incidence and to be able to study them, psychologists have reduced these perceptions to numbers. Simply put, sensation is a physical response to a stimulus that is converted to a perception in the brain.
On a very different note, an exception to the sensation/perception link is perceptual illusions. The occurrences of perceptual illusions imply that what we sense from our sense organs is not necessarily what we perceive it to be. (Sternberg, 1999) We utilize our sensory information and manipulate it in our minds to create a mental picture that connects to a previous memory. Often though, what we perceive differs from the sensory information we started out with. For example, when we look at pictures, they are on a flat surface. This visual sensory information is transmitted to our brain which then utilizes depth cues and the whole original visual sensation is manipulated to create a perception. The presence of perceptual illusions demonstrates that the information that was originally gathered from sensation is not the final perception that is made.
There are many theories that involve perception. One such theory is the Gestalt approach to forming visual perception. This was founded by Kurt Koffka, Wolfgang Kohler and Max Wertheimer. This theory is based on the idea that when met with a visual array, the mind organizes all the different parts together to form a complete picture. In other words, a focal point is perceived and all the extra parts form a background for the focus. The Gestalt approach is based on five principles which are proximity, similarity, continuity, closure and symmetry. (Sternberg, 1999)
Proximity relates to when a group of objects are seen close together, we tend to perceive them as forming a group. Similarity refers to the tendency of classifying items of similar characteristics as belonging to the same group. Continuity occurs when there is a perception of a continuous form rather than a discontinuous form. Closure refers to how we perceptually complete objects that are not complete. Symmetry relates to how we perceive objects in mirror images about their centre point. The Gestalt approach provides us with a form and pattern explanation as to how humans perceive. These five principles form the basis of any stimuli that instigate any form of perception. (Sternberg, 1999)
Another form of visual perception is distance perception. Distance perception is affected by the presence of depth cues. A depth cue is used to provide information about distance in a three-dimensional world. There are five depth cues in all and they are: relative size, interposition, relative height, linear perspective and shading and shadows. (Atkinson, Atkinson, Smith, Bem and Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000)
Relative size refers to the perception that an object of smaller size than another object, in a picture, is further away than the bigger object. Interposition occurs when an object obstructs the view of the other. People tend to perceive the overlapping object as closer in distance. Relative height relates to when an object is perceived closer to the horizon than others in the picture, it is further away. Linear perspective occurs when two parallel lines converge; people tend to perceive the lines as vanishing in the distance. Shadows and shading are another important cue about object shapes and distances between objects and the light source. These five cues come together to provide information about images. Artists have used these cues for many years in their paintings to convey perceptions about distance and size. Depth cues are also often used in the trick of illusion. (Atkinson, Atkinson, Smith, Bem and Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000)
Another theory about perception is Gibson's theory of direct perception. (Sternberg, 1999) The theory states that all one needs for perception to occur is a visual system and an environment in which to operate. All the cues necessary for perception to take place, are already present in the environment, and it is not necessary to invoke any higher cognitive processes. For instance, depth and distance information can be determined by their regularity of surfaces. In this case, the person's perception is immediate and spontaneous. For example, people can instantly recognize unfamiliar but biologically relevant stimuli. Also, information for perception can only be obtained through movement, since, the perceptual information derived from motion leads to a more accurate action in the future. This viewpoint excludes intelligence from the process of perception. It is stated that any information about the object being viewed can be inferred from the stimulus informant. Intelligence only comes during the cognitive processing but only after perceptual processing has been completed. Hence, this model views perception and intelligence as two separate entities and processes that may possibly be sequential but not simultaneously.
An additional theory about perception is known as the template theory which states that humans have pre-stored sets of templates which are highly detailed models for patterns that allow for easy recognition. When observing something, we mentally compare it to templates and try to match our observations with the pre-stored templates. We then select the template that completely corresponds to our observation. It is in this way that we perceive our surroundings. (Sternberg, 1999)
In contrast to the template theory, there are feature theories. These theories state that unlike template theory, we do not match entire patterns to a template but instead match features of a pattern to features stored in memory. An example of such a theory is "pandemonium" formed by Oliver Selfridge in 1959. The theory states that neural clusters "shriek" to indicate the presence of particular features of the perceived stimulus. Each of these neurons or neural clusters were referred to as a "demon". "Image demons" would pass on an image to "feature demons". "Feature demons" were specialized to respond to aspects of an observation that matched particular features. The "volume" at which each demon shrieks in response to a match in the feature of the observation will depend crucially upon the amount of evidence available for the presence of that feature. The pandemonium of shrieks will then be interpreted by a "decision demon", whose job is to "perceive" (that is, decide on the basis of the evidence) which letter was actually present in the original stimulus. (Sternberg, 1999)
A theory that is a completely different approach to perception is known as constructive perception. Constructive perception involves the formation of perception by means of sensory information gathered as the foundation for the structure. Coupled with other sources of information, a cognitive understanding of the stimulus is formed. With this viewpoint, intelligence plays a big role in the forming of a perception. During perception, we apply three different sources. We base our perceptions on what we sense from the observation, any prior knowledge stored in memory and what we can infer using cognitive processes. These processes are known as unconscious inference. Unconscious inference occurs when we unconsciously make use of information from a variety of sources to infer and create a perception.
(Sternberg, 1999)
The link between sensation and perception is distinctly significant. One cannot occur without the other. Sensory information is always gathered before being transmitted to the brain to form a perception. There are many theories about the different types of perception and their formation. There is the Gestalt approach to visual perception. This theory revolves around the five principles which are proximity, similarity, continuity, closure and symmetry. The five principles are utilized for perceptual organization. Depth cues are a major factor in distance perception. The presence of depth cues helps us to infer information about a 2D picture.
The theory of direct perception suggests that we only require the use of our sensory receptors to form perceptions. The template theory states that our minds have stored templates which we use to recognize patterns of our observations. These templates help to form perceptions. On the other hand, there is another type of theory which differs from template theory known as feature theory. Feature theory is different from template theory in that it says humans match features of patterns to templates stored in memory rather than an entire pattern. Conversely, there is another theory known as constructive perception which is based on the idea of unconscious inference. Unconscious inference is the application of information from a variety of sources to create a perception.
In summation, with every theory, perception comes about after sensation has occurred. Sensory information is gathered from the senses and transmitted to the brain which then transposes all the information to form a perception.