Communication is the facilitation of information from one source to another. Humans communicate to let others know our wants, desires and feelings. Interaction is done on a daily basis using both verbal and non-verbal types of communication. Verbal communication entails information transferred through the contents of vocal speech. Non-verbal communication involves any other means of communicating that does not consist of vocal content. In the daily form of communication, occasionally a person might use deception to conceal information they do not want others to know. A son may need to lie to his parents about his whereabouts or a husband to his wife about whether he has done the household chores. "Lying is a stressful and anxiety arousal experience." (Siegman & Feldstein, 1987, 314) As such, repressed and concealed emotions are likely to find an outlet to release. This usually results in types of behaviour that can be classified as cues of deception. These cues can be released either non-verbally or verbally.
Non-verbal communication in relation to deception has been studied in detail numerous times with the same few conclusions. The amount and pattern of gazing provides an insight to a person's feelings and attitude towards others, their credibility, honesty and attractiveness. (Kleinke 1986 as cited in Hogg and Vaughan, 1995) Sitton and Griffin (1981), as cited in Siegman & Feidstein (1987) carried out a study on black and white females who were randomly told to either lie about personal information during an intake interview or not given any instructions. It was discovered that when participants were instructed to lie, they tended to gaze at their interaction partner significantly more so than those who had not received those instructions. This could be because the participants were actually told to lie; therefore the onus of the deception was not on them but on the experimenter who gave the instructions. Therefore the participants felt confident enough to lie confidently. It has also been thought that gazing is a way of exercising control. People tend to gaze more to underscore a point or be more persuasive. (Kleinke, 1986 as cited in Hogg & Vaughan, 1995) The participants who had been told to lie could have been trying to make their answers seem more honest by repeatedly gazing at their interactor.
On the other hand, cultural differences should also be considered in order to make the research more reliable. Watson and Graves, 1966 (as cited in Mehrabian, 1972) discovered in an observational study on different cultural groups interacting, that Arabs compared to North Americans, preferred more eye contact and touch when talking. Therefore, intensity and frequency of gazing is not a definite lying trait as different cultures tend to have different standards of communication. Additionally, it is important that this study investigated cross-cultural differences. Different cultures have differing culture norms and what may be acceptable in one, may not be in another as proven by this study.
A study was done by Vrijial. (2000) on nurses to identify common traits of deception. Nurses were recruited and paid for their participation. They were told that good nurses should be able to lie well. They had to watch a video and were interviewed twice. Once in which they were to lie and once in which they were to tell the truth. The nurses' behaviour was observed and coded in a scale called the criteria-Base Content Analysis technique (CBCA) and the Reality Monitoring technique (RM). It was concluded from the results that liars made fewer illustrations with hand and finger movements, paused significantly longer and frequently punctuated their speech with "ah". This study has obvious ethical breaches such as deception to the nurses and putting emotional stress on them to lie by informing them that a good nurse must be able to lie. The study lacked internal validity as it might have been subject to extraneous variables such as the nurses being paid 5 to participate might have had an effect on their effort to lie. Additionally, the nurses were told to tell complete fabrications. It is very unlikely that in a real situation, anyone would tell a complete fabrication. There is a good chance that people will try to stick as close to the truth as possible as it is easier and there is less of a chance of making a mistake and therefore some of the correlates for deception may be an exaggeration as the participants were under extreme stress. On the other hand, as this study uses the triangulation method of gathering data, the reliability of the results will have increased. The results have been reaffirmed by the different qualitative methods such as the CBCA and RM. Furthermore, the nurses' behaviour was actually coded with scales which also increase the reliability of the observations as it eliminates observer bias and observer effects.
Research has also proven that personality has a significant effect on lying. A study was done by Exlineal. (1970), as cited in Siegman & Feldstein, (1987), on high and low Machiavellian males and females on their behavior when lying. Low Machs were found to gradually decrease their gaze level with the experimenter pre-accusation after which, it decreased even further when they were accused of lying. In contrast, High Machs maintained eye contact throughout and further increased their gaze when accused of lying. Exline et al. suggested that characteristics of a Machiavellian such as social manipulative skills and emotional detachment enabled them to be such skilled actors. This research illustrates that gaze level is not a foolproof method of detecting duplicity. This in an interesting contrast to the previous study as the results show that the non-verbal correlates displayed is strongly affected by personality. It all depends on each individual; their characteristics and personality. Unlike the previous study, this one relied on observations and therefore the results are subject to observer effects.
There is a different type of non-verbal communication which is not immediately obvious to the naked eye. When a person participates in a deception, his body reacts with physiological changes. There are now different ways to record these changes and analyze a person's honesty/dishonesty: a polygraph test. Polygraph tests in conjunction to the Guilty Knowledge Test (GKT) and the Guilty Actions Test (GAT) are psychophysiological techniques used to determine deceit. In a study by Gamer et al., 2005 participants were paid 5 EUR to participate and were told they could earn more by successfully passing the various lie-detector tests. Their electrodermal responses, respiration rate, relative aterial blood pressure and phasic heart rate were all tested and the results were recorded. It was found that electrodermal, respiratory, and cardiovascular measures were effective in differentiating between the truth and deception. As polygraph test are physically intrusive, the results recorded from the test may not be entirely valid as the participants could have been physiologically aroused by the test itself. Also, the participants were paid to participate in the experiment and were offered money as an incentive to successfully passing the polygraph test. This could have added pressure onto the participants to lie successfully and that might account for the results rather than just cognitive arousal at having to tell a lie. This study eliminated individual differences by standardizing. Each subject had a Standard difference scores specially calculated for them and each measure was also given the same attention. This elimination of individual differences increased the realiability of the results. The study participants were made up of a small number with a wide age group although most of them were students. The small number of participants and the fact that most of them were students makes the results less representative. However, having a wide age-gap does increase the reliability of the results slightly. Most importantly, this study utilized triangulation by comparing quantitative data such as the polygraph test results with qualitative data such as the GKT and the GAT which greatly increased the reliability of the results.
Emotionally, telling a lie can be difficult and could leave a person with a lot of guilt. In an effort to distance themselves from their lie, they might give indirect or over generalized statements or answers that are void from self-references. An example of this is President Clinton's answers when questioned about his alleged affair with Monica Lewinsky. When asked if Ms Lewinsky was lying when she told someone she had a sexual affair with him, Clinton answered: "Its certainly not the truth. It will not be the truth." (The Independent, 30 July 1998, p.14 as cited in Vriji, 2001) This is a clear example of his use of negative and over-generalized statements. He also made no mention to himself at all in his answer. All of which are classic signs of deception. However, it is important to also understand that if he was telling the truth, answering a direct "yes" to the answer would mean he was accusing her of lying under oath which he might have a reason not to want to do. (Vriji, 2001)
In opposition, psychologists have found that the use of direct and indirect style of speech is also a cultural difference. Direct speech is concerned with explicit verbal messages that express the speaker's desires, needs and wants. Indirect speech conceals and camouflages the speaker's true intentions and any feelings or desires they might have are subtle unlike direct speech. North Americans have a tendency to use direct speech with major emphasis on the "I" as the beginning or most sentences in accordance to the English syntax. Whereas Asian cultures such as the Japanese, use indirect speech and tend to use ambiguous words such as "maybe", "probably" and "perhaps". Often, "I" does not appear in communication as Japanese syntax does not require the use of subject in a sentence. (Gudykunst & Ting-Toomey, 1988) In light of this, we cannot assume that over-generalized statements and self-references or the lack of are traits of deception. We have to consider cultural differences as a factor of speech. Cultural studies are important as they help us to explore the different cultural norms and prevent us from being ethnocentric in our views.
Liars are often fraught with guilt and anxiety and this often results in them being irritable and un-cooperative. It is difficult to keep spinning stories off the top of their head and sometimes the frustration of having to be one step ahead could result in them losing their temper. An example of this is the use of negative statements. For instance, in the Watergate scandal, President Nixon exclaimed that 'I am not a crook' instead of a more positive answer such as 'I am an honest man'. (Depaulo, 1998 cited in Vriji, 2001) However, we also have to consider that he might merely have been frustrated at being slandered and maligned that he reacted with a negative outburst after being repeatedly hounded by the press. (Vriji, 2001)
In summation, although deception is a stressful procedure for most people, some people seem to be better at it than others. They are more aware of the verbal or non-verbal correlates of lying that might give them away and are very much more careful to ensure that it does not. After a discussion of all the studies where there has been sufficient evidence to determine the correlates to lying, one thing rings true. There is always the exception that proves the rule. There is no hard and fast way to ensure that any one method is foolproof. Probably the method that is most accurate is polygraph testing as it is harder to control a physiological reaction than it is to maintain eye-contact. Nevertheless, it is possible to actually control these reactions. Government spies are trained to be able to pass a polygraph test. Cultural differences have to be taken into account as well as each culture ahs different norms for behaviour and this could affect they way they interact. By ignoring this, we are being ethnocentric in our believes.
It has been suggested by many psychologists that the most accurate way of determining the accuracy of results is by triangulation. By combining multiple methods of research i.e. qualitative and quantitative research we can obtain verification of findings through convergence of results. This cross checking of one result against another increases the reliability of the results. (Crane, 2005) People often underestimate their own intuition as a natural lie-detector. Often we feel that someone is not being honest with us but we just cannot put our finger on what gives us that feeling. More often than not, we are probably right. Nature has given us the ability to detect lies, its just a matter of whether we acknowledge those lingering doubts or rationalize it away.