The presentation was given by Group C and outlined advantages and disadvantages available to Chinese firms and their effect on western multi-nationals. The model used to illustrate this business dynamic was 'Porter's Diamond of National Advantage' shown below.
The four corners of the diamond are aspects that can lead to a national competitive advantage and can be explained as follows:
Factor conditions - A country creates its own factors such as skills and technology. Lack of these factors forces innovation ultimately leading to a national competitive advantage.
Demand Conditions - A stronger and more demanding local market helps local firms anticipate global trends. When local demand is greater than in foreign markets, local firms devote more attention to it leading to an advantage when exporting that product.
Related and Supporting industries - When supporting industries are competitive more cost effective and innovative inputs are available
Firm Strategy, Structure, and Rivalry - Strategy and structure helps determine in which industry a country may excel. Low rivalry can make a firm attractive, however increased rivalry can lead to improvement and innovation to provide an advantage.
Traditional theories implied there were five factors that gave a region a 'comparative advantage'; Land, Location, Natural Resources, Labour and Population Size. These 'Factor Endowments' are difficult to influence and as a result, Porter believes they are inadequate. He argued that sustained growth has rarely been built on these inherent factors and that they may even impede a nation's drive to innovate. The diamond model is best used as a tool to help understand a nation's competitive position in global competition.
The presentation focused on sources of advantages and disadvantages to China but also developed explainations of how these may threaten western firms. To this effect the Diamond Model is useful and well used by the group. However, both the model itself and the group failed to give any indication as to the impact of Foreign Direct Investment on the region in question. Benefits of internationalisation of production seem to be over looked and it seems to be assumed that only outward FDI is useful in creating a competitive advantage. In short, the model seems to place too much emphasis on domestic determinants.
The concepts raised in the presentation helped provide me with an insight not just in how a given nation can seek to innovate but also how, as a rival nation, threats and opportunities can be identified. Taking into account the question answered in the presentation it seems that Porter's model ties in particularly well with the SWOT analysis tool to assess a region's credentials.
Despite being heavily used in teaching, a number of Porter's models have been heavily criticised in recent years. Questions have been raised as to its applicability, as it was derived from case studies into 10 major industrialised economies. This means its application is best suited to developed economies. Porter's Diamond also seems to over emphasise micro-factors and tends to disregard factors such as exchange or interest rates. Given his acknowledgement of the role of the government, it seems to me that these semi-controllable influences are of a significant importance.
This reflection has helped me clarify the models highlighted in the 'Internationalisation & China' lecture of Term 2. I now realise that the models applied during the seminar presentations are best understood when used in conjunction with a prior understanding of their context. I will therefore seek to research the concepts employed before the next seminar so that the subjects explored are more easily recognisable.