There have been relatively consistent findings regarding the effects of group decision making compared with individual decision making. Groups tend to polarize towards the given majority and individuals often become more extreme in their preferences after the group discussion compared to before (Myers and Kaplan, 1976). The mediating mechanism operating between the pre and the post decision is the deliberation process. Deliberation has a large impact on jury decision making, which is reliant upon individual jurors discussing the evidence as a group, and returning with an often unanimous verdict. The majority of research on the jury has focused upon how individual jurors reach a verdict before the discussion, such as studies supporting the Story Board Model of juror decision making (Pennington and Hastie, 1992). Although this is a theory investigating how the individual decides upon a verdict, it does have implications for the deliberation process. There have also been attempts to produce Social Decision Schemes to assess the probability of deliberation resulting in a guilty, not guilty or hung verdict, depending upon pre deliberation verdicts (Davis, Kerr, Stasser, Meek and Holt, 1977). Although both offer reasonable attempts to explain or predict jury decision making, neither provide a complete theory of the deliberation process.
The Story Board Model of jury decision making proposes that in order for jurors to understand the vast and complex body of evidence presented at trials, they need to interpret the evidence in a way that makes sense to them. (Pennington and Hastie, 1992). In order to do this the juror imposes a narrative structure on the evidence to create a story. This story then acts as causal model to allow the jurors to interpret the evidence in a context from which they can draw their own experiences and evaluations, whilst allowing them to perceive the evidence as a coherent mental representation (Pennington and Hastie, 1992). Stories are created from schemas which are composed from experiences and preconceptions held by the individual and built up over a life time, it is through these that the facts of the case can take on their different meanings (Holstein, 1985). People can create completely different stories for the same evidence which is where the Story Board Model has implications for the deliberation process, as these many individual stories have to be integrated into one, often unanimous, verdict. Unfortunately the majority of research on the Story Board Model does not focus upon how this final verdict is created and concentrates upon how the initial individual pre deliberation verdict is reached. This research will be considered however as inferences can be drawn as to how this might impact upon the deliberation process.
Pennington and Hastie (1992) conducted a study in which they hypothesised that presenting the evidence in a fashion that conformed to one particular story, would cause jurors to adopt this story, and depending on the nature of the story, result in a guilty or not guilty verdict. In order to achieve this effect, instead of presenting evidence to the jury in witness order (as would happen in a real trial), Pennington and Hastie (1992) organized the evidence in a way that would make one story easier to construct than another, without altering the nature of the evidence. They found that verdicts returned were consistent with the order in which the evidence was presented, thus implying that stories are a mediating mechanism in jury decision making.
There is however a large problem with this evidence regarding it's generalisability to real jury decision making processes. In real trials the evidence is not presented in "story order" but is presented in "witness order", which produces a complex disorganization of the evidence. All Pennington and Hastie (1992) have shown is that in certain situations, where the evidence is neatly ordered into a coherent story, this is likely to influence the jurors' interpretation of the evidence, and therefore the verdict. This does not contemplate the complex reorganisation the brain has to implement on the evidence and how in this situation stories are created. The whole point of the story board model is to demonstrate how jurors take complex and disordered evidence and make sense of it by imposing order and meaning onto it through the narrative of the story. This is not illustrated in research such as this which already imposes the order.
To further investigate the utility of the story board model Huntley and Costanzo (2003) conducted research on how jurors compose stories without manipulating the evidence as Pennington and Hastie (1992) did. Huntley and Costanzo (2003) found that individuals were predisposed to either prosecution or defence stories for a sexual harassment case. This result is presumably as a result of their different schemas. Huntley and Costanzo (2003) do not make this link explicit, although they did find a significant main effect for gender in the way that females were significantly more predisposed to a guilty verdict than males. This can be interpreted in a way that females may have more experience with being sexually harassed than males, and as a result, have schemas which reflect this. This may have caused the creation of prosecution stories which resulted in the females propagating a guilty verdict. Huntley and Costanzo (2003) also present this research as evidence for the story model because whilst evaluating the evidence within the causal model of the story, jurors relied upon extralegal, contextual information about the plaintiff and defendant when there was little hard evidence. This was to create the coverage, coherence and uniqueness which are proposed by Pennington and Hastie (1992) as necessary conditions for a successful and convincing story. Jurors selectively incorporated this biasing information into their stories providing it served as an enhancement to their story. Any biasing information that went against their story was dismissed. This evidence, when taken at face value, appears to support the story board model of jury decision making because it illustrates how jurors favour prosecution or defence stories depending on the interpretive schemes operating within each individual.
It is important however, to take care when regarding this research as direct evidence that jurors compose either a prosecution or defence story. Firstly, it is likely that jurors compose more than one story of the evidence, and are not simply "plaintiff or defense jurors" (Huntley and Costanzo, 2003, pg35). It is more likely that jurors are more open to the interpretation of the evidence and, as suggested by Morley (1996), develop both prosecution and defense stories and select the story which, consistent with their own criteria, is most satisfactory for coverage, coherence and uniqueness (Pennington and Hastie, 1992). Also the methodology of Huntley and Costanzo's (2003) research is not consistent with what actually occurs in a trail, so the generalisability of the research to suggest that real jurors create stories, may be limited. Huntley and Costanzo (2003) asked jurors systematic questions of their interpretations of the evidence after each attorney had presented their case. In doing this Huntley and Costanzo are surely promoting a Bayesian method of processing where evaluation of the evidence is updated with each new piece of evidence (Hastie, 1993). By asking the jurors to evaluate the evidence in this Bayesian fashion, they are going against the fact that the story model advocates that jurors do not evaluate the evidence in such a systematic fashion, but as a global memory representation (Pennington and Hastie, 1992).
Huntley and Costanzo's (2003) finding that different people can create different stories for the same evidence is widely supported however (Stephenson, 1995), and this is where the research is relevant in creating the implications for the deliberation process. Holstein (1985) investigated the effect of story generation on juries and the deliberation process and found that the higher the number of individual stories that were propagated into the deliberation process, the less likely the jury was to return a unanimous verdict. Holstein (1985) demonstrated that as deliberation increased the additional interpretations of the evidence, the task became more complex. This implies that if people do not initially have stories based upon similar assumptions, then the deliberation process is not going to largely alter people's stories, and it is this that makes the deliberation process more complex and a unanimous verdict less likely (Holstein, 1985). Holstein (1985) also found that even when people have two different stories favouring the same verdict, if the underlying assumptions are different, this still reduces the ability of the jury to reach a unanimous verdict and increases the complexity of the deliberation.
The hypothesis the jurors compose stories to account for and interpret evidence appears to be a likely resource jurors use for interpreting evidence. Problems arise however in that the evidence used to support the notion that jurors reach verdicts in this way is not always reflective of how real trials work, so inferences made can not be generalised. Problems also arise as to whether the story model is causal. Pennington and Hastie (1992) propose that the story the juror generates determines the verdict. It is not made clear however whether jurors contemplate all the evidence and then decide upon the most appropriate story (Pennington and Hastie, 1992), or whether jurors make a very early decision as to guilt or innocence, and interpret all following evidence in the way of this initially decided verdict, as suggested by Huntley and Costanzo (2003).
Less subjective approaches to jury deliberations are social decision schemes. Davis (1973) (as cited in Parks and Kerr, 1999) used social decision schemes which encompassed applying probability matrixes to initial distribution of jurors preferences in order to gain a probability of achieving a particular verdict (Parks and Kerr, 1999). The basic aim of a social decision scheme is to show how initial preference distributions relate to eventual group output, so unlike the story board model, the social decision scheme is directly concerned with the deliberation process and how this creates a single unanimous verdict.
Research on group decision making outside the realm of juries has shown that whilst deliberating in a group, people tend to polarize towards the given majority (Myers and Kaplan, 1976). If this assumption were to be applied to jury deliberation processes, a social decision scheme would emerge that would predict that the final verdict would be the verdict of which the majority support. This however is not an accurate assessment of the jury deliberation process however and has been shown not to be a successful predictive matrix (Davis et al, 1977). The main reason for this is that juries have to consider the evidence with a criteria for conviction "beyond all reasonable doubt". It is proposed by MacCoun and Kerr (1988) that this produces a leniency bias in jury deliberations which must be accounted for by any accurate social decision scheme. This shows that jury deliberation is far more complex than simple polarization as it was even found by Tanford and Penrod (1986) (as cited in MacCoun and Kerr, 1988), that even when there is an initial majority favouring of conviction, a not guilty verdict can still prevail.
Davis et al, (1977) generated fifteen social decision scheme matrices to investigate which provided the most accurate fit to their data. To gain the data Davis et al asked participants to watch a videoed case of a rape trial. Participants were then randomly spilt into six member juries and asked to find a verdict. As a general finding, Davis et al (1977) found that the verdict initially favoured by the majority, was predominantly the jury's final verdict. What is important however is that when there was a three by three spilt in the initial verdict preference, there was a strong tendency for acquittal and a near zero tendency to convict. This illustrates that in most cases a majority rule social decision scheme can be implemented, but it needs to have a sub scheme allowing for this leniency bias (MacCoun and Kerr, 1988) This was termed matrix D15, "defendant protection, hung otherwise" (Davis et al, 1977).
To support that a social decision scheme of jury deliberations requires a sub scheme allowing for a leniency bias, or an asymmetry effect, MacCoun and Kerr (1988) produced a meta analysis of twelve previous studies of jury deliberations in which there was an equal split of jurors on each jury, initially proposing a guilty or not guilty verdict. They also found that the leniency bias was active when two thirds of the jury initially believe that the verdict should be guilty (MacCoun and Kerr, 1988). In another study by Kerr and MacCoun (1985) they demonstrated that this social decision scheme was also strong enough to consider the size of the jury and that it still produced consistent results whether there were six person or twelve person juries.
This mathematical approach to jury deliberation does appear to be an effective way of predicting the effect deliberation will have on the initial set of references. A problem however is that the assumptions of the leniency bias could be explained by the fact that most of the data was collected using students, and it has been shown by Simon and Mahan (1971) (as cited in MacCoun and Kerr, 1988). In an attempt to remedy this as an explanation for the leniency bias, MacCoun and Kerr (1988) conducted a further experiment where student decision making processes were compared to those of the general public. They did not find student juries to be more lenient. In this comparison however, MacCoun and Kerr (1988) only compared student and general public juries consisting of four members. It may have been that four members was not enough to really allow the deliberation process to generate results showing that students were more lenient.
Another problem is that the social decision scheme does not take into account situational factors which may effect which scheme is most appropriate. As an example of this, Davis (1975) (as cited in Davis et al, 1977) found that on a different set of data, matrix D15 was not the most effective predictor of the data, matrix D7, the "simple majority hung" matrix provided a better fit. This can also be shown by the fact that Schonemann (1979) found that a ridiculous matrix (where the probability of a guilty verdict is inversely related to the number of jurors favouring it), fitted Davis et al's (1977) data perfectly. Schonemann's (1979) point in illustrating this was to show that a social decision scheme could fit the data perfectly without being plausible.
Social decision schemes also do not explain how group processes of deliberation are undertaken. It does suggest that the majority will rule unless the majority only slightly favour guilt, or there is an equal split in verdict choice, but it does not explain under which circumstances this is likely to happen. It appears that although social decision schemes are accurate in predicting verdicts after the data has been collected, it is far more difficult to select an appropriate social decision scheme in advance because the social decision scheme does not specify which situation factors will effect it and why. It has also been shown by Sandy and Dillehay (1995) (as cited in Devine, Clayton, Dunford, Seying and Price, 2001) that in real split juries, 71% convict, so they are clearly not showing a leniency bias in this instance which would be predicted by the social decision scheme.
There are many difficulties in studying the jury deliberation process, predominantly because it is illegal to view the process, or even to ask jurors about their experiences after a case. As a result of this the majority of the evidence is conducted under contrived circumstances under which the juries face no consequences for their decisions, or pressure as they would in a real jury. It may be because of this that research on mock juries has not been able to produce a unified theory of the jury deliberation process. It may however be that there cannot be a single unified theory of jury deliberation as there are so many situational factors which could be acting upon the process. The fact that shadow jurors fail to consistently reach the same verdict illustrates this (MacCoun and Kerr, 1988). It has been suggested that personality traits such as authoritarianism contribute to how juries deliberate, although there has not been much support for these ideas, (Parks and Kerr, 1999). It is important however not to see the story board model and social decision schemes as being mutually exclusive to each other because they are not. Both contribute to our understanding of how juries deliberate although, as discussed, neither provide a comprehensive theory. It is important to keep researching the area however to improve our legal system and to try to reduce such variability in proceedings.