The presentation was given by Group C and outlined advantages and disadvantages of the enlargement of the EU in 2004. The model used to illustrate this business dynamic was 'Porter's 5 Forces Model' shown below.
The 5 Forces model is an 'outside-in' strategy tool that is used to "make an analysis of the attractiveness of a industry source." The analysis is made through the identification of 5 competitive forces:
Entry of Competitors: the ease with which new entrants are able to compete and what barriers to entry exist
Threat of Substitutes: the ease with which the firm's product can be substituted especially when it can be done at a lower cost.
Bargaining power of Buyers: the strength of the buyer's position i.e many or few sellers?
Bargaining power of Suppliers: the strength of the seller's position i.e many or few other sellers and how many potential buyers are there?
Rivalry among the existing firms/countries: is one firm currently dominant or are they all of equal strength.
Porter's model is best used to understand the industry context in which a firm operates and to develop a strategy for entry. The presentation was primarily about the effect on a current market - forestry - of the EU expansion and as such the use of the Five forces model is applicable. The points raised regarding the increased rivalry and the buyer power were particularly valid when looking at the addition of the 10 nations and the obvious growth of the available market and could clearly be linked to the Five Forces concept. I did feel points such as brand identity as a barrier entry and the threat of substitutes, which are limited in the timber industry, were artificially fitted in to complete the model's analysis and weren't necessarily well founded. "A comprehensive description and analysis of all five forces gets very difficult in complex industries with multiple interrelations, product groups, by-products and segments."
Care must be taken not to underestimate the importance of the existing strengths of the organisation or industry. In an era when change is often rapid and systemic, a more flexible approach to strategy formulation is required than Porter's Five Forces model provides. Traditional models such as this focus only on the company's external competitive environment. I have therefore found it is useful to combine these models with a 'Resource-Based Perspective' to highlight the need for a fit between the external market in which a firm operates and the internal capabilities it possesses.
Whilst regularly used, Porter's models have been heavily criticised in recent years, with the main weakness of the 'Five Forces' cited as the historical context in which it was developed. "In the early eighties when it was developed most industries were stable and predictable compared with the dynamics of today". The model assumes a classic perfect market and therefore becomes less useful in the more 'regulated' markets. It also assumes a relatively static market structure and doesn't take into account technological advances etc that may cause a dramatic change in supply chains in short periods of time. It is therefore unhelpful in providing advice on preventative measures for competition and is sometimes only reliable when looking at an industry retrospectively.
The concepts raised by the presentation helped provide me with an insight not just into how to assess how attractive entry into an industry is, but also the identification of problem areas which firms can seek to improve upon in any industry in which they are currently a part of. Using the porter model and combining it with others such as SWOT analysis the firm should be able to develop a strong business strategy. It does however have major limitations in today's market environment and is more valuable when used as a structured way to analyse a current market situation as a starting point for strategic planning.
This reflection has helped me clarify the models highlighted in the 'Strategic Issues' lecture of Term 2. I now realise that the models applied during the seminar presentations are best understood when used in conjunction with a prior understanding of their context. I will therefore seek to research the concepts employed before the next seminar so that the subjects explored are more easily recognisable.