Given the basic resources, the contract can be met at a cost of 8580.
There is no affect on production if the future plan using 700 hours of the Vats comes into being.
With the basic resources, it would be beneficial to purchase 80 hours at a cost of no more than 120. The decision about whether or not to purchase the extra Carding machine capacity will depend on the other variables mentioned. The price paid for this is also dependant on these factors.(see Table 2).
A 30% reduction in the cost of buying in yarn would cause it to be cheaper than producing it, but if the supplier's reliability is questionable, it may be more sensible to try and gain a 20% reduction from the current supplier.
A 1 increase in cost of producing yarn will boost the cost of fulfilling the contract but will have no effect on production quantities.
Using the information supplied, I have simulated the problem & calculated production costs and quantities necessary to fulfil the contract. I have also calculated these factors given the possible changes you mentioned may be available in the future.
To calculate these results I used Microsoft Excel's Linear Programming Solver. This is a statistical tool which provides the optimum quantities of resources needed given the criteria and restrictions specified. From these, I have calculated the relevant costs of the project. I have assumed that the Vats are interchangeable and as such have combined their total usage for the sake of my calculation.
If we consider extending and increasing the contract beyond 6 months there are a number of issues that have to be taken into consideration. Based on the original resources the contract could be increased to 640m. This would include 320m produced internally and 320m bought in. The problem with this is that it would increase the cost from 17.16 per metre(to complete the basic contract) to 18 p/m to supply 640m. The terms of the increased contract would have to reflect this.
There are 2 plausible alternatives to this. (1)The policy regarding only buying in 50% could be reviewed. If this is increased then more yarn could be supplied. (2) The capacity of all areas of the factory could be extended to facilitate increased production. You would of course have to look into the cost of such investments and weigh up the gains and losses involved before deciding whether or not to proceed.
I have assumed that more then one of the possible future plans can come to be and as such have included combinations of events in my analysis.
I have made no assumptions about the value of the contract, but as long as the fee is greater than the total cost mentioned above, the department is capable of satisfying the contract. I have suggested increasing the percentage that can be bought in as long as the fee per metre is greater than its purchase price. My findings are based purely on the figures and as such, implications on staffing and other areas of the business must be considered.