Cosmopolitans consider that the EU is an incipient form of cosmopolitan democracy. Is their assumption valid? This essay will make a critical interrogation of the possibility to apply the concept of cosmopolitan democracy to the European Union. Cosmopolitan democracy basically refers to democratisation as a double-sided process - deepening of democracy within nations and extension of democracy across territorial boundaries. The European construction is for cosmopolitans the first living example of such an ideal, (though imperfect and only at the regional level). The EU present itself with loosen communal boundaries, increased influence of minority nations and local regions, re-conceptualisation of citizenship with duties and rights beyond borders, transnational democratic structures, and equality of participation. The first section of the essay will describe the EU construction pointing out to the fact that it may be viewed as the most developed regional integration arrangement, which already displays a history of common development towards. The second part of the essay will explain how and why can the EU be seen a cosmopolitan democracy. However, as the third section of the paper will argue, both the European construction and the cosmopolitan democracy project suffer from crucial flaws. Some of these flaws are common to both. For instance, the concept of liberal democracy may not be the proper 'standard' model of democratisation neither at the regional nor at the global level. Moreover, the communitarian critiques refer to both cosmopolitan and EU construction as artificial inventions that will never enjoy the same communal attachments as the nation-state. The paper concludes that even if the EU may be seen as a model of transnational (cosmopolitan) democracy, the model itself (based on the hegemonic concept position of liberal democracy) needs re-conceptualisation as it cannot be just re-iterated as such at the supra-state level.
In envisioning the ideal of cosmopolitan democracy, authors like David Held or Daniele Archibugi use the term 'globalisation' to capture some significant developments that have changed the nature of political communities and of democracy. These developments refer to global economic processes, the development of international law, intensified media/cultural exchanges, as well as collective and co-operative security. These in turn have prompted an increasingly multi-layered system of governance with sub-state and supra-state authorities as well as global private authorities. The world politics has changed significantly, making transnational decision-making unavoidable. But one can easily notice that, for instance, the meetings of the World Bank or other global agencies are held behind closed doors. These kinds of institutions cannot be held accountable not even when their decisions have a negative impact. Is there a possibility "to reconcile the principle of the rule by the people with a world in which power is exercised increasingly on a transnational (...) scale"?
One of the most articulate responses to the quest to democratise global governance is the theory of cosmopolitan democracy. Cosmopolitan democracy refers to democratisation as a double-sided process - deepening of democracy within nations and extension of democracy across territorial boundaries. This essay will make a critical interrogation of the possibility to apply the concept of cosmopolitan democracy to the European Union following the assumption that "the first international organisation which begins to resemble the cosmopolitan model is the European Union." The European construction is for cosmopolitans the first living example of such an ideal, (though imperfect and only at the regional level). The EU present itself with loosen communal boundaries, increased influence of minority nations and local regions, re-conceptualisation of citizenship with duties and rights beyond borders, transnational democratic structures, and equality of participation. Despite the well-known 'democratic deficit', the EU may be viewed as an incipient form of cosmopolitan democracy. The first section of the essay will describe the EU construction pointing out to the fact that it may be viewed as the most developed regional integration arrangement, which already displays a history of common development towards democracy.
Nevertheless, democracy seemed designed for relatively small and definitely territorial spaces like the 'polis' or the nation-state, where the "demos" is the nation. However, cosmopolitans urge us to analyse democracy and the concept of political community comparatively because they have never been fixed concepts. For instance, the Ancient "polis" is no longer democratic enough for us today and for long time women had not been considered citizens lacking any political rights. The new conditions of our days require that democracy, like politics, be no longer perceived as nationally defined. Held mentions that "More and more people recognise the need for enhanced political accountability, for transparency and openness of decision-making, in international, social and economic domains". That is why, the idea of democracy has to be reinvented. This way, cosmopolitan democracy is not optimistic or pessimistic it is a project and a 'position of advocacy'. As one can notice, the EU seems to have attempted a cosmopolitan project of re-invention of democracy at a supra-state level. The second part of the essay will explain how and why can the EU be seen a cosmopolitan democracy.
However, as the third section of the paper will argue, both the European construction and the cosmopolitan democracy project suffer from crucial flaws. Some of these flaws are common to both. For instance, the concept of liberal democracy may not be the proper 'standard' model of democratisation neither at the regional nor at the global level. Moreover, the communitarian critiques refer to both cosmopolitan and EU construction as artificial inventions that will never enjoy the same communal attachments as the nation-state. The EU as well as the cosmopolitan democracy project should focus less on institutional changes and more on identity construction. The paper concludes that even if the EU may be seen as a model of transnational (cosmopolitan) democracy, the model itself (based on the hegemonic concept position of liberal democracy) needs re-conceptualisation as it cannot be just re-iterated as such at the supra-state level. Overall, the EU offers useful insights on the applicability of the cosmopolitan democracy project. But given the fact that even after more than fifty years of development, the model suffers from crucial democratic deficits, one can easily question the genuine possibility of the applicability of the cosmopolitan democracy project as such regionally or globally.
This section will describe the European Union construction pointing out to the fact that it may be viewed as the most developed regional integration arrangement, which already displays a history of common development towards democracy. The EU is not only an international organisation, it is surely not a state or a complete federation, and it might perhaps be better called a confederation. As Joseph Weiler specifies, "the very language of modern democracy, (...) revolves around the state. The Union, (...) is not a state. The result is a description of oranges with a botanical vocabulary developed for apples". The EU policy is the result of a complex interplay of interconnected institutions, at the supranational, national and sub-national levels, forming a multi-level system of governance. Although states are important players, sovereignty is less exclusive and states no longer enjoy the monopoly over policy-making: (...) in many ways the EU may present itself as a challenge to the prevailing norms of the international system."
Nowadays, a complex system of checks and balances operates within the EU. The Commission alone has the power to initiate and draft legislation, but, given the increased checks and balances at the European level, it can not override the European Parliament or the Council of Ministers in decision-making. The Council's power to create soft law provides strong ways to circumvent the Commission. In addition, even though the main legislative body is the Council of the EU, governments are conditioned by the legislative power vested in the EP, and the Commission as well as interests groups that erode the dominance of their influence. It seems, therefore, that both the European citizens and all the EU member states are given more and more power to influence decision making at the European level through the EP, the COR or interest-groups and respectively through the Council of Ministers. At the same time there are certain supranational institutions, such as the Commission or the European Court of Justice, which safeguard what is prerequisite for the Union's harmonious development.
Furthermore, the Single European Act and the Maastricht Treaty introduced and extended the Qualified Majority Voting procedure, which is now used within the Council of Ministers in major fields such as agriculture, trade, issues connected to the internal market, competition policy, and transport. The decision making process is very complex and thus individual governments, even powerful groups of governments, may very well be outvoted. Consequently, since state control has become a weaker instrument to protect state-sovereignty, the decision-making procedures are designed to promote a consensus, reflecting the so-called "Community method" characterised by ongoing negotiations, openness to compromise, incorporation of as many parties as possible and mutual trust. This near-commitment of the EU member states to take into consideration the concerns of all member states is definitely important for the democratisation of the EU as a supra-state body. We witness a "very strong inclination of the Council to seek consensus irrespective of the voting rules." Some authors call this model a model of "consensus democracy", which is required by the diversity of interests at stake and facilitated by the similarities among the members of the Council, who share similar education and background and create something like a club-spirit.
Furthermore, the EU has a dual executive structure: - The Council of the EU has not only legislative but also executive powers, as does the European Commission, and there is no clear-cut separation of powers between the two. It reflects both supranational and national dimensions because, while EU lawmaking is a federal (supranational) business, it is the function of the nation states to implement those laws. Thus, the Council's participation in the lawmaking is needed for the domestic implementation of those laws.
The limitations imposed on state-sovereignty are beneficial for the democratisation of governance at the EU level. At the same time, state power is not completely shackled. We can see that the EU has helped member-states to cope with globalisation and to redress its uneven effects within the community. How otherwise can we explain the strong support for the EU of smaller states like the Benelux? The opportunities provided by the EU enhance their capacities as states while the level of social and economic protection and administrative competence achieved through the community's institutions is greater than at the domestic level. The EU is creating the infrastructure and the instruments needed for development and for reducing the gap between richer and poorer states and regions. Moreover, high institutionalisation of regional co-operation is crucial particularly for weaker states because these are given a voice and equitable support within the EU, and are not dominated by a powerful and small elite of "permanent" members (as in the UN for instance).
Integration is said to have increased the power of manoeuvre Europe has and its autonomy within the system of global economic relations. For instance, the single currency, Euro, now has the international weight that none of the previous European currencies could ever obtain. The EU has institutionalised intergovernmental co-operation to address collective and transferred problems. Current WTO negotiations witness the European countries acting as a unitary commercial power; each country can seemingly protect its interests by being part of this power.
Despite democratic deficits, the European Union displays a continuous struggle between more efficiency (performance) and more democracy. The gains in terms of governmental and institutional performance (also a feature of democratic legitimacy) have generally been priorities for the member-states. The technocratic perspective on the EU's functioning stresses that experts in certain fields across all countries gather together as epistemic communities and, since they seem to know best what is needed, they may not really need a mandate from citizens. Normative arguments are offered to support this vision. First, the prevalence of bureaucracy in the EU is justified by the political consensus on the Union's mission and goals and by the technical nature of problems to be solved. Since the major problem is in fact maximising wealth, and economics is widely considered a policy realm to be governed by technical expertise, it appears natural to let the experts deal with it. Second, the main business of the EU is regulation. Regulation is best carried out by independent agencies, staffed by specialists, who are entitled to act precisely because they are not constrained by the electorate and hence not subject to political manipulation. However, even technocrats admit that their judgement is a complement and not a substitute for democratic legitimacy.
Nevertheless, the European Union was inspired by the liberal cosmopolitan belief that the likelihood of conflict between and among states can be limited through the establishment of mutually beneficial frameworks of co-operation. The EU has given world politics a lesson about the possibility of fruitful co-operation in a region frequently affected by national conflicts. After this brief presentation of the EU, the next section will try to see how and why the EU may be seen as an incipient form of cosmopolitan democracy.
This section explains how and why can the EU be seen a cosmopolitan democracy. The argument is based on the several observations. First, the EU has undergone economic integration (by which a transnational economy is fostered), but also political integration (transfer of sovereignty to supranational organs) and social integration (creating a transnational society). Integration has been facilitated by the fact that the structure of EU decision-making displays a relatively equal distribution of power in comparison with, for instance, the states that form the UN or the WTO. All EU members are ensured a voice in the decision making. They have willingly surrendered sovereignty for the sake of co-operation to solve transnational problems that they alone can no longer solve. This surrender is rewarded. Not only are states and regions supported to develop and compete in the global economy but also European citizens are provided with authorities to which they can appeal. In addition, since transnational problems require a transnational approach, one can notice that the EU has institutionalised the process of transnational decision-making (although still imperfect in terms of democratic criteria).
From the intergovernmental perspective, the EU's democratic legitimacy is an indirect one, dependent on the legitimacy of the states involved, as in the case of other international organisations. But since EU policy is not exclusively a result of state-action we can easily conclude that the EU's democratic credentials and legitimacy do not exclusively arise from national governments and parliaments. Consequently, new channels of democratic control had to be created, such as the EP and the Committee of Regions.
The EU has now reached an important level of supranationalism in decision-making. While states still have a say, decisions made after a process of bargaining may also be imposed on states. Therefore, democratic accountability and the legitimisation of the entire decision-making process cannot be assured only nationally. As the ideal of cosmopolitan democracy asks, the EU seeks to preserve both democracy inside nations and among nations and these levels are mutually re-enforcing themselves. The EU already has its own directly elected parliament, parliamentary party groups and a system of transnational party federations. Further mechanisms supportive of democracy already in place are accountability to the Parliament, which can enact sanctions, a strong and accessible Court of Justice, and free and regular elections. Political leaders in the EU are, to a certain extent, directly or indirectly authorised by the people. Consequently, a constant concern for empowerment of the EP and accountability of the other institutions does exist.
However imperfect, the EU has dual parliamentary legitimacy: - If we take into account its intergovernmental structure, the legitimacy stems from National Parliaments, - while if we consider its supranational structure, legitimacy stems from the EP, which can be seen as a strong policy-shaping legislature. Moreover, as Beetham and Lord stress, there are good reasons to have such dual legitimisation and to acknowledge that both NPs and the EP have a role to play in providing consent, representation, and accountability. Moreover, the EU faces a dilemma: it cannot rely only on the legitimacy it gets from national governments but it must preserve this in order to defend the interests of states and reach out to the citizens.
Following the cosmopolitan perspective, the role of regional political arrangements in enhancing transnational democracy is a key role. Hence, the second element, which may base the assumption that the EU is an incipient form of cosmopolitan democracy, is the European Parliament. The requirement of cosmopolitan democracy is enhanced political power of the EP: "the "cosmopolitan model of democracy" presupposes the creation of regional parliaments (for example, in Latin America and Africa) and the enhancement of the role of such bodies where they already exist (the European Parliament)". Nevertheless, the EP is a unique transnational institution that must however be further strengthened. One can notice the gradual increase of the EP's legislative power Co-decision has brought a qualitative transformation because the Council can no longer override the EP. If the EP or the Council reject the other's position, a conciliation committee, consisting of representatives from both institutions with the Commission as broker, tries to reach a compromise, which can achieve absolute majority in the EP and qualified majority in the Council. If no agreement is reached the proposal goes back to the Council, which can make a "take-it-or-leave-it" offer, which the EP can reject. Hence "the Parliament has the final word."
The EP has several formal rights of a debating parliament, which are used in plenary, such as the right to interrogate the Commission, set question times, or the right to conduct urgent debates and to give political groups the opportunities to express their positions. The EP is also a controlling parliament. It has controlling rights such as co-decision and the power to set up committees of inquiry, to censure the Commission and to appoint, approve or veto a new Commission (the case of the Santer Commission). The EP must approve the President of the Commission, has the right to influence appointments to other institutions, like the European Central Bank or the Court of Auditors, and elects the European Ombudsman, who investigates the complaints of citizens about maladministration in the EU. Moreover, what is particularly important is the power of the committees of the EP, which are seen as the EU's backbones, keeping its institutions upstanding by acting as the brain and the voice of the EP. These have the right to interrogate the Commission, hold public hearings with special experts (which leads to more expertise, more information, debates and expert analyses and links with the public), and to file reports for the plenary of the EP.
Not only has the European Parliament gradually increased its legislative power, its functioning through the various committees is a very important channel of communication with the public and of representation of public needs. Consequently, in the puzzling and confusing processes of world politics, the Europeans at least know that besides their (less powerful) states, the EU functions as another representative organ for them. Furthermore, the constant and genuine concern for the democratisation of the European Union has also been evidenced by the creation of the Committee of Regions. As the EP, the Committee of Regions has pushed for greater powers requesting, for instance, that the principle of subsidiarity be redefined to refer explicitly to sub-national levels of governance. Consequently, representation of the needs and values of citizens and regions (although imperfect) is a reality.
Third, as another resemblance with the cosmopolitan democracy requirements, the social and political dimensions of the EU seem to bring politics closer to the citizens of Europe, by conferring rights as well as duties upon them. Democratisation implies constitutionality and shared identity or citizenship. EU law prevails over national law (including constitutional law), even if it is far from having the simplicity that constitutions generally have, comprising more than 700 articles. In this context, the role and power of the European Court of Justice is important. Given the unique "surrender" of sovereignty by member states, the European treaties are considered by the Court as the basis of the European constitutional framework. The Court has defined and shaped a new legal order for Europe. As Ulrich Preuss states, "the European Union is largely seen as a successful model of the institutionalisation of supranationality." Its most important achievements are the principle of direct effect (provisions of Union law must be applied by the national courts of the member states and the supremacy of Union law over national law (a directly effective provision of Union law always prevails over a conflicting provision of national law).
In a liberal cosmopolitan fashion, the subjects of this new legal order are not only member states but also most importantly individuals, and it confers duties but also rights upon them. Every person being a citizen of a member state is also a citizen of the Union. European rights include the right to move and reside freely within the territory of any member state. Those who reside in a member state of which they are not nationals take up employment in that member-state under the same conditions as a national of that state and have the right to vote in and become candidates for municipal elections or elections to the EP. Consequently, the principles of direct effect and supremacy create a bond of affiliation between the EU citizens.
The ECJ is the ultimate arbiter to which national courts can turn in case of conflict between domestic and European legislation. Although EU decision-making power is restricted to certain fields of law, it has transcended the traditional distinction between international law (applying to states) and domestic law (applying to citizens), creating a new constitutional order. Consequently, the unique and willing surrender of sovereignty undertaken by the EU member states is "rewarded" with a unique situation in world politics. A supra-state institution is not only supporting states and regions in developing and competing in the global economy but is also assisting European citizens, offering them a channel of communication, an authority to which they can appeal.
Moreover, identity formation has relied on various techniques, ranging from symbolic attempts (creating a flag and the anthem) and mutual relationships (Union passport, civil rights or even the Socrates network of student exchanges) to civic participation (direct election of the EP) and daily reminders of authority (the EURO). But national structures are still hesitant to surrender authority to such an extent as to let another centre of power provide for cultural reproduction. Such "surrender" would contradict the traditional principles of national liberal democracy, which are so deeply rooted in national consciousness that a different dimension can be added only with great difficulty.
Although identity formation is a difficult and long process, the EU is concerned with it and makes much effort to create a European identity and citizenship. To the extent that, as cosmopolitans argue, globalisation means a deterritorialization of social relations, regional integration might be an opportunity for re-territorialization. The EU has taken some steps towards this form of re-territorialization by searching for a European identity and citizenship (as reflected in the development of the European rights). The next section will describe the problems associated with democracy within the EU, problems that may be attributed to the cosmopolitan democracy project as well.
This section shows that both the European construction and the cosmopolitan democracy, as liberal projects suffer from crucial flaws. Moreover, some of these flaws are common to both. The most common critique articulated with regard to the EU is that it still displays crucial democratic deficits. Just as globalisation is criticised because it is limiting the possibilities for democracy, the EU suffers from the same neo-liberal flaw since it has also become an exponent of economic growth at the expense of political values, culture and citizenship. Accusations of technocratic action monopolised by certain elites who represent states or corporate interests are expressed with regard to the EU as well. This accusation is even more strong if one notices that it is precisely this deficit that motivated the cosmopolitan urge to re-invent democracy in order to reform the current unfair system of global governance, in a globalised world politics.
The deficits of the EU are even more strongly popularised because, by contrast with the global system, it has institutionalised a system of governance. These deficits usually refer to the unelected character of the Commission, the weakness of the EP, or the withdrawal of powers from national parliaments. Most of all they refer to the lack of a European identity or 'demos', enforced by the fact of low voter turnout, the absence of political parties, and the obscurity of its procedures. Moreover, "the Union has no single decision-making authority which can ultimately be held accountable for EU decisions."
Moreover, the communitarian critiques refer to both cosmopolitan and EU construction as artificial inventions that will never enjoy the same communal attachments as the nation-state. The EU as well as the cosmopolitan democracy project should focus less on institutional changes and more on identity construction. Nonetheless, "there is no coherent 'other' against whom Europeans could identify themselves collectively". Democracy can be meaningful only within a community of shared fate and responsibility. Neither the EU nor the global community enjoys this level of communal attachment. People's sense of solidarity has not reached a regional or global level. For communitarians, the EU "can never expect to generate affective commitment from individuals, only instrumental use by them as they see fit". The EU is not loved but nevertheless its citizens enjoy its benefits. However, although "the EU citizens can vote and stand in elections to the EP in a member state in which they reside but whose nationality they lack" they do not seem too eager to 'enjoy' this privilege.
Kaldor argues that the EU's democratic flaws lie in the absence of a 'European domestic politics' and not so much the democratic deficit in formal or institutional terms. There is no sense of civic belonging, no channels of influence and hence no room for change from below which is so powerfully stipulated by the cosmopolitan democracy project. Kaldor considers that respect for national cultures and institutions is essential but also invention of 'grand collective' projects for Europeans to identify with, and build their own common future. However, she sees the Amsterdam treaty as a step in this direction.
In addition, the concept of liberal democracy may not be the proper 'standard' model of democratisation neither at the regional nor at the global level. Public pressures drive efforts for democratisation within the EU but they do not question whether the model to be implemented should be the liberal democratic model. The conceptual hegemony of this model is not challenged and although cosmopolitan thinkers urge for a re-invention of the concept of democracy, they build their theories upon the same liberal democratic premises. The whole edifice of cosmopolitan democracy is based on a hierarchical account in which the principles of representation and accountability remain territorial. Held's model is criticised of Eurocentrism since the history of Europe is simply presented as the history of the entire world. That is why, instead of providing a detailed blueprint of future institutional arrangements, global and regional systems of governance should focus on the ethical problems of the open-ended process of global democratisation.
Moreover, both the EU and the global model of cosmopolitan democracy are based on the assumption that liberal democracy should underpin their progresses. But they neglect that liberal democracy, by definition, relies and is dependent upon the existence of a state and a 'demos' which are simply non-existent. Not only that the Europeans do not see their identify shaped by the EU but the EU itself does not present itself as a state and hence cannot possibly have the monopoly of legitimate violence, raise taxes directly or even make its decisions binding. The same can be true of a global centralised governing structure. Hence, the liberal democratic blueprint "is inadequate because its compromise between liberalism and democracy is insufficient, and always likely to privilege economics given its view that government functions should be minimised". Supra-state democratisation (as an open-ended process) and not democracy as a static ideal seems to require a much more sophisticated and complex approach.
This essay has tried to assess the extent to which the concept of cosmopolitan democracy applies to the European Union. The first section of the essay described the EU as the most developed regional integration arrangement, which already displays a history of common development towards a liberal-cosmopolitan type of democracy. One can admit that the EU is the only instance where there has been an attempt (though imperfect it may be) to introduce democracy at a supra-state level though different theoretical accounts are divided in terms of which model of democracy is (or should be) developed by it. The second part of the essay continues the description of cosmopolitan democracy inside the EU. Although the EU by definition cannot be a cosmopolitan, as in global, type of democracy, it may nevertheless provide a lesson for future projects of global democratisation. European integration has been facilitated by the fact all member states are ensured a voice in the decision making process. The EU has willingly surrendered sovereignty for the sake of co-operation and integration in order to solve transnational problems that the states alone cannot solve. This surrender is rewarded. Not only are states and regions supported to develop in the global economy but also European citizens are provided with authorities to which they can appeal. In a cosmopolitan fashion, individual rights in the EU are prior to state sovereignty. The social and political dimensions of the EU seem to bring politics closer to the citizens of Europe, by conferring rights as well as duties upon them. Representation of the needs and values of citizens and regions (although imperfect) is a reality, as evidenced by the direct elections to the European Parliament, the workings of the Committee of Regions, and the activity of the European Court of Justice. Indeed, the EU has taken some steps towards this form of re-territorialization by searching for a European identity and citizenship.
However, as the third section of the paper argues, both the European construction and the cosmopolitan democracy project suffer from crucial flaws. Some of these flaws are common to both For instance, the concept of liberal democracy may not be the 'standard' model of democratisation neither at the regional nor at the global level. Moreover, the communitarian critiques refer to both cosmopolitan and EU construction as artificial inventions that will never enjoy the same communal attachments as the nation-state. The EU as well as the cosmopolitan democracy project should focus not only on institutional changes but most of all to identity construction. Moreover, the observation that only strong elites usually encourage enhanced supra-state regulation as well as the accusation that supra-state democracy will always be in deficit applies to both the European construction and the cosmopolitan democracy project.
The paper concludes that even if the EU may be seen as a model of transnational (cosmopolitan) democracy, the model itself (based on the hegemonic concept position of liberal democracy) needs re-conceptualisation as it cannot be just re-iterated as such at the supra-state level. The attempt to draw the map of European or global democratisation following traditional liberal democratic patterns may have crucial flaws. Overall, the EU offers useful insights on the applicability of the cosmopolitan democracy project. But given the fact that even after more than fifty years of development, the model suffers from crucial democratic deficits, one can easily question the genuine possibility of the applicability of the cosmopolitan democracy project. Is it because the conceptual base of both projects, namely liberal democracy concept, cannot be applied at a supra-state level? Is it because people need more time to attach to another artificial creation, which is even larger than the state? These questions may be answered in another research paper.