This problem-centred essay deals with all facets of bias that may affect the judiciary. It will give an answer to the problems raised in the case above as well as trying to give an impression of what bias actually is and where the law on bias as a ground for judicial review stands today.
Judicial impartiality is a fundamental characteristic of a civilised legal system under the rule of law. In the UK the rule against bias together with the right to be heard form the principles of natural justice. Consequently 'the non-observance [of this rule] is a basis for judicial review.'
The origins of this principle date back to Roman times where the maxim was expressed with the Latin terms nemo judex in causa sua
 or ne quis in sua causa iudicet (vel sibi ius dicat) which both mean that 'no man [could be] a judge in his own cause'
The significance is reflected by the implementation of this right into domestic law with the creation of the Human Rights Act 1998. Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) establishes the right to a fair trial.
Two main grounds of personal interest for which a judge can be automatically disqualified from sitting in a case are established.
Probably the most common ground for such a judicial review is a pecuniary interest like in the 'Dimes' decision. Since the famous 'Pinochet' case, a non-pecuniary interest could also lead to the exclusion of a judge. The case involved whether the dictator, Pinochet, could be extradited. A member of the judiciary, Lord Hoffmann, was involved in Amnesty International Charity Ltd. (AICL), an organization closely related to the accuser Amnesty International (AI) but Hoffman did not make public his link to the organization.
Other personal interests, however, need a more qualified suspicion of bias. In this category fall family relationships, business connections and commercial ties, as well as membership of an organization interested, as we have just seen in the Pinochet case.
The House of Lords has held in 'Porter' that overriding consideration to be taken into account is "....... whether the fair-minded and informed observer, having considered the facts, would conclude that there was a real possibility that the tribunal was biased
This decision 'resolved the long-standing uncertainty' concerning the question to what extent an objective observer would doubt the impartiality of a judge, whether a 'reasonable suspicion' was sufficient, or if 'real likelihood' or even 'real danger' has to be present.
This new threshold set by the House of Lords does not require a real likelihood which underscores the long-standing rule that 'Justice should not only be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done'. Therefore 'the answer to the question [whether a judge was biased] depends not upon what actually was done but upon what might appear to be done.' The canon of judicial impartiality has been rescaled and secured.
The Employment Tribunal in the case is composed under the Employment Tribunals Act (ETA) 1996, s.4 with Fiona as the chairman and two lay members, Geoffrey and George. One of these lay members is representing the employees, the other one the employers and both are appointed by the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. The reason for this representation through lay members is 'to give balance and to bring to the decision-making process an element of industrial relations knowledge, which a legally qualified person might not have. It is important to know that they all have an equal say in the judgement. A system with such a peculiarity in the composition of the panel has to meet concerns about the independence of their members and arising conflicts of interest. This certainly does not per se cause a higher suspicion of bias. Such a system is wanted and it lies in itself that the lay members are part of the environment that they represent. As any other judge, the members of an Employment tribunal are expected to be unbiased and specially trained for this. In real life it is often the case that one of the lay members may have a connection to a trade union or a particular company. Of course this is valid for the chairperson as well.
The exclusion of judges who appear to be involved in some way with one of the parties or to be biased in any other way does 'protect the integrity of the decision-making process' and strengthens confidence in our legal system. It is of foremost importance that this rule is abided by and that no exceptions may be made.
Danger faces this awareness of bias solely if it is turned into a means to exclude judges that are disagreeable to one of the parties. The danger mentioned above lies in a widening of this ground to appeal more to the social background. Slapper & Kelly paint the image of law firms that might use special units focusing on the judges' private life and trying to exclude certain judges. We should not forget that courts are not helpless against arbitrary pursuits of alleged bias and may put the party that raises such allegations at risk of an order for costs.
The case above gave a good impression of how bias can affect our legal system of the day. And the examples given are certainly not unlikely. They can occur every day.
As Gareth's legal advisor, I would appeal against the decision of the Employment tribunal within 42 days according to the EAT Tribunal Rules 1993, which means from the date on which the written record of the judgment was sent to Gareth. I would submit a complaint under regulation 20 or 21 of the 1999 Regulations Act, made in the required way, which means in writing and accordance with the provided Form 4A of the Schedule to these Rules. It is important that the complaint against the conduct of the Employment Tribunal, here bias of the Chairman Fiona, includes in the Notice of Appeal all necessary information to have chances of success.