A stable and healthy-performing currency market is always beneficial for government and country as a whole. Being a crucial element in currency market, exchange rate is pegged by country, if it is possible. In today's developing nations, a country may decide to peg its currency to create a stable atmosphere for foreign investment. In the world economy history, the global exchange rates used to be fixed under "gold standard" (between 1870 and 1914) and "Bretton Woods System" (from post War World II to 1971). Eventually, all attempts to move back to global exchange rate peg were abandoned in 1985. Krugman develops First Generation Speculative Attack Model in his work (1979) to analyse this issue, that is, the collapse of fixed exchange rate regime. The following essay consists of three sections, the first section illustrates the frame and main ideas of the first generation model; empirical examples are provided in part two and the limitations and possible extensions of this model are discussed in the last section of this essay.
This model offers formal description of speculative attacks in currency markets and analyses the timing of collapse of fixed exchange rate regime from the perspective of balance-of-payment. Nonetheless, the model has two theoretical limitations, which are caused by the assumptions imposed. The first one is that this model wipes out all uncertainty in government's policy. The government is assumed to abandon the fixed rate regime only if reserves are exhausted. This is the very reason why this model is inappropriate to explain the collapse of ERM in 1992, where, according to W. Aklia (1998), "the temptation to leave the ERM was high for the U.K. The same held true for many other struggling European economies like Italy, Spain and Portugal as well as for countries like Sweden and Finland to break off their fixed exchange rate system." This indication implies that by introducing uncertainty to government's and speculators' decision making, speculators are not 100% committing attack and the government is not certainly holding the regime.
The second limitation is that this model only focuses on circumstances with budget deficit and accordingly unable to explain those speculative attack cases without apparent problems in balance-of-payment. For example, countries involved in 1997-99 Asian Financial Crisis were not having large budget deficits and some of them even enjoyed surplus, but speculators still attacked their currencies. Based on this reason, Copeland (2000) also argues: "this model (the first generation model) seemed to be no help in explaining the Asian Crisis."
Essentially the extensions of this model are derived from the limitations, therefore introducing uncertainty is a sensible one. As claimed in foregoing paragraphs, neither of ERM Crisis nor Asian Financial Crisis can be explained by this model, as paradoxes exist in both cases according to the assumptions of the model. Another possible extension for this model could be the removal of those limitations on government's options of cutting budget deficit. Besides using foreign reserves, issuing Treasury bill to foreign banks is also a possible solution; even the emergency bonds could delay the timing of collapse and probably change the result. Therefore extensions can be introduced to such two aspects.
In conclusion, this essay outlines a version of the first generation speculative attack model. The target of this model is to find out the timing of collapse of fixed exchange rate regime in an economy. Based on several assumptions, this model offers formally describes concept of speculative attack and answers the timing question by numerical method. Empirical evidences of the devaluation of the pound in 1967 and the depreciated dollar in the end of Bretton Woods System are discussed in section 2. Because of the limitations inside, this model is not appropriate to analyse the ERM Crisis in 1992 and the Asian Financial Crisis in 1997-99. The final section not only discusses the limitations, but also the possible extension for this model. This paper argues that the introduction of uncertainty will enable this model to be more realistic and more effective.