The aim of this experiment was to examine the induction of -galactosidase in E. coli at different temperatures. This was done by assaying for enzyme activity by addition of toluene and oNPG to samples of E. coli. The results show that induction does not occur at 15C due to decreased enzyme activity. Induction occurs fully at 30C and 37C, as this is the optimum range for the enzyme, and translation and transcription occur.
The lac operon encodes three enzymes 1 required for lactose degradation: -galactosidase, lactose permease and thiogalactoside transacetylase 2. These genes are adjacent to each other in the operon. Before these genes there is a region which regulates the lactose metabolic genes: this region contains the regulator, promoter and operator. The regulator gene encodes a repressor protein which can bind to the operator site 3. This repressor is a tetrameric protein. The promoter contains a binding site for RNA polymerase, and directs the polymerase towards the correct transcription initiation site. In addition to this promoter in the operon, a second promoter is present in front of the regulator gene, which drives the synthesis of the regulator.
The primary carbon source of E. coli is glucose, but other carbon sources, such as lactose (a sugar present in milk) can be metabolised using the genes of the lac operon. In the absence of lactose, the transcription of the lac structural genes is blocked by the repressor. The lac repressor binds DNA by inserting an -helix into the major groove of DNA. The edges of the base pairs and the phosphodiester backbone also make contact with the repressor. Very little, if any, -galactosidase, permease or transacetylase is produced.
When lactose is present it is converted to allolactose, a combination of galactose and glucose with an -1,6 linkage, which is the correct inducer of the operon. Allolactose binds in the centre of the large domain in each monomer in the lac operon and the repressor's affinity for operator DNA is reduced. This is done by a conformational change being induced in the interface with the DNA-binding domains. The domains cannot easily contact DNA now, which leads to the DNA-binding affinity being reduced dramatically. The proteins encoded by the structural gene are transcribed, and lactose is utilised.
DNA-binding proteins can stimulate transcription. An example is the catabolite activator protein (CAP), or the cAMP response protein (CRP). When CAP is bound to cAMP, the transcription of lactose and arabinose catabolising genes is stimulated. The CAP-cAMP complex stimulates the initiation of transcription by a factor of 50.
Within the laboratory, induction can be achieved by adding iso-propylthiogalactoside (IPTG), as IPTG is not catabolised by the cell and does not act as a carbon source, so it is described as a 'gratuitous' inducer. This is because, within the laboratory, the cells can be grown in a defined medium with glycerol as the carbon source: the expression of the lac operon is neither induced nor repressed.
The aim of this experiment was:
To examine the induction of -galactosidase in E. coli at different temperatures
Refer to manual, pg 60-62, and reference section 30 for materials and methods
At 15C leaky repression occurs. No induction occurs at this temperature, so translation and transcription also do not occur. At this temperature a little oNP is released, although there is a slight increase between 40 and 60 minutes (see Figure 1), indicating that the induction of -galactosidase does not occur. This is due to the decreased enzyme activity as the enzyme and substrate has little kinetic energy. The release of a little oNP must therefore be due to leaky repression of the genes.
At 25C, little oNP is released (see Figure 1), indicating that the -galactosidase gene is not fully induced at this temperature. Due to the low temperature, translation and transcription occur at a low rate due to the low temperature, which allows product inhibition to occur very rapidly. The rate of -galactosidase synthesis equals the rate of destruction, so the activity remains at a constant rate. The plateau at this temperature, and also for 30C and 37C, is caused by product inhibition of -galactosidase, which creates the constant level.
The results from 30C and 37C are very similar: at these temperatures, induction of -galactosidase occurs, and this is the optimum temperature for the enzyme. The increase in the release of oNP (see Figure 1) indicates the translation and transcription are occurring at a high rate, and that -galactosidase synthesis is greater than the rate of destruction. The turnover number is high at these temperatures. The plateau, as explained above, is due to product inhibition.
The amount of oNP released at 37C is less at 25 minutes and onwards, than at 30C. This is because at 37C, the enzyme starts to thermally denature and becomes unstable. Therefore, fewer enzymes (-galactosidase) will be available, and transcription and translation will slow down.
The reason for the plateau at different levels of oNP may be due to a ratio between the amount of -galactosidase and product. When the amount of product reaches a certain level in relation to the enzyme, the product inhibits the enzyme and production plateaus. There is a more rapid rate of induction for 37C, due to the high temperature, which causes a rapid build up and a lower plateau. Therefore, product inhibition occurs more quickly.