The aim of this experiment was to establish the order of a number of genes important in amino acid metabolism and sugar catabolism. This was done by using E. coli and conjugation and recombination methods. The results show that the order of gene transfer was Threonine, Proline, Leucine, Arginine, Isoleucine and Valine, Xylose and finally Histidine. This suggests that threonine experienced a point mutation, as Proline is usually first in this gene transfer.
Bacterial DNA can undergo mutations, which can lead to the evolution of a new bacterial strain with an altered genotype. Bacteria that contain the normal gene are 'wild-type': the transfer of this gene to a bacterium with a mutation in that gene, followed by recombination leads to restoration of the gene.
Conjugation requires close contact between the recipient and the donor, which is obtained by the F pilus: this is synthesised by the donor, and is used to attach itself to the recipient to form a mating pair. Genetic material can then be transferred between the donor and the recipient through the pilus. Conjugative ability is a plasmid-encoded phenotype.
Escherichia coli is a Gram negative bacterium, and a member of the g-proteobacteria 1. They are straight rod shaped cells, approximately 2m long and 0.5m in diameter. Their primary habitat is the mammalian gut, hence the name 'enteric' bacteria.
The aim of this experiment was:
To establish the order of a number of genes important in amino acid metabolism and sugar catabolism by exchanging pieces of E. coli chromosome by conjugation.
Refer to manual for materials and method
For this experiment, donor E. coli HfrC was used.
From Table 2 (see Appendix 2) and Table 1 (which shows the media E. coli was growing on) it can be deduced that the order of gene transfer was the following: Threonine, Proline, Leucine, Arginine, Isoleucine Valine, Xylose, Histidine, from start to end.
These results were determined by comparing the colonies appearing at different times and observing which media the colonies were growing on. For example, in Pool 1, where Arginine is not included in the media, colony grow began after 30 minutes, which showed that the Arginine gene is transferred from the donor to the recipient after 30 minutes. The gene enabled the recipient to produce arginine, which was needed for protein synthesis, as arginine was not present in the media.
Isoleucine and Valine are transferred at the same time, as the production of these amino acids is encoded by the same gene (ilv)
The results show some unexpected results: Proline was expected to be transferred on the chromosome first, but Threonine was the first gene to be transferred. Threonine also grew at 0 minutes, which is unexpected, as there should be no growth at this time as the bacteria are not adjusted to the growth conditions and would have only just begun to transfer the chromosome. This may be because Threonine is prone to point mutations and reversions. This can explain why Threonine appeared first because the triplets encoding Threonine and Proline can be very similar, so a point mutation could have occurred.
The conjugation mix was incubated in the static water bath to ensure the F pilus remained intact and the mating pairs were still in contact to transfer the genes by conjugation.
Nalidixic acid was included in the selective plates and the sample preparation salts medium to prevent further gene transfer between the donor and recipient, and to prevent the growth of the donor.
If nalidixic acid was not included, there would be growth on all of the plates, as the donor strain would be able to grow on the media. Also, gene transfer would continue.