The Civil War in Russia is often considered as a fight between Reds and Whites. However, many recent historians, such as Radkey, consider the Bolsheviks versus the Greens, a popular movement led by the peasants, as the main Civil War in Russia. How valid is this claim?
The Whites were made up of conservatives, landowners, former generals and monarchists. However, because they had such a variety of members there was political disunity amongst them. Although White leaders themselves were strong, there was no one leader of the movement. 'In many ways, the Whites were doomed from the beginning." Nevertheless, they had the support of foreign countries and held land where there was much grain. However, the Allies support could never have won the Whites the war as 'the Whites...appeared as undignified puppets of Britain and France, while the Bolsheviks seemed independent Russian patriots defending the country against foreign intervention." The White Army reached a peak of 100,000, compared to the Red Army with over three and a half million members in 1920. It appears that throughout the Civil War the Reds had the upper hand over the Whites, thus the real struggle was not between the Reds and the Whites. Read argues that 'civil war against the Whites was virtually over by the end of 1919." However, in the south the White threat was especially strong. The Whites had the support of the Cossacks, who had four and a half million members, many of whom were professional soldiers. However, the Cossacks were returning from World War I and only wished to fight to protect their homeland, therefore were not a threat to the Reds across the whole of Russia.
Much of the Bolshevik strength lay in the land it held. The Reds held highly populated areas, including industrial Petrograd, which they could use for military equipment production and land where railways were already laid, making communication between troops easier. Conversely, the Whites were dispersed across Russia. However, the Reds relied on workers for production and railways, many of whom were members of the Greens. Therefore the Greens could pose a serious threat to the Bolsheviks if they revolted in these areas.
The Greens consisted of anarchists, peasants, workers and nationalists. Brovkin says the Greens were 'the most numerous of all parties and movements." However, the peasants made up eighty percent of the population so this is not surprising. Radkey argues that there were two Civil Wars in Russia. The first being the well-publicised Reds versus Whites and the second was a 'movement of the people itself - and particularly the peasantry - to shake off the tyranny imposed by victorious Red minority." Reasons for this Green movement were social, political, economic and personal. The peasants had just fought in World War I, they were tired of fighting for others. They wanted to fight for their own cause now. A peasant song from the Civil War illustrates this feeling.
In 1917 many soldiers who previously supported the Bolsheviks, returned to their villages and were reabsorbed into the countryside and joined with the other peasants in their quest for land. Also, Red Army deserters joined the peasants to fight against the Bolsheviks. Thus, the popular movement had support from soldiers who could threaten the Bolsheviks because of their war experiences. The peasants, workers, soldiers and sailors fought in self-defence against the crisis of War Communism occurring in Russia. Peasant food was requisitioned and given to soldiers. If the peasants refused to give up their food the Cheka would brutally intervene. Martyn Latsys, the head of the Cheka, claims there were two hundred and forty five peasant rebellions in 1918 against the intervention of the Cheka. The main areas of popular movements were Nestor Makhno in the Ukraine and Aleksandr Antonov in Tambov Province. Peasants destroyed railways, bridges, ambushed Red Army units and ransacked Soviet military depots. Although War Communism helped the Reds win the Civil War, it was at the cost of the rest of the population. Five million ordinary citizens died in Russia through War Communism. The Bolsheviks had gone against one of their main promises of bread when they ceased power in 1917. 'Some historians believe it was this mistake (of requisitioning) on Lenin's part that led to the civil war against the peasants." Lenin led a campaign called 'Peace with the Peasants' in 1919 and the Bolshevik - peasant relations looked as though they may improve. However, by 1920 the streets of Russia looked like they had been air raided. The people were starving and it was bitterly cold, they had nothing.
Sometimes the Greens would join the Reds to fight the Whites or vice-versa, but this was always for their own gain. Revisionist historians hold the view that
However, Figes argues that 'the defeat of the peasant rebellions was unavoidable' and he claims that the peasantry of central Russia generally remained loyal to the Bolsheviks. Not all the peasantry were united against the Bolsheviks, so the popular movement was not as strong as possible. However, Figes goes on to argue that by 1921, the peasants had been defeated by the Bolsheviks, but had made sufficient gains such as hospitals, a rise in the level of literacy, autonomous communes and elimination of extremes of poverty. These positive aspects surely illustrate that the Bolsheviks must have felt threatened enough by the peasants to fear more uprisings and thus make improvements in the countryside.
Relations between workers and the State were also dramatically deteriorating. The populations of Moscow fell by a half and Petrograd fell by two thirds between 1917 and 1921, because Lenin wanted one man management and their had been an economic collapse leading to lower bread rations, forcing workers to leave the cities in search of bread; those workers who remained in the cities were demoralised and unreliable. The workers were supposed to be the traditional supporters of the Bolsheviks; the political system was officially defined as a proletariat dictatorship. However the Bolsheviks were moving from being a mass organisation of workers to a body of officials. By 1922 two thirds of the Bolshevik party members were administrators. The Bolsheviks needed the workers support for military and economic reasons as well as a commitment to their original political ideology, meaning workers' discontent with the Bolsheviks was an important struggle for the Reds. Where there was worker unrest the Bolsheviks censored it. However, strikes and riots did take place, more radically in provinces than the capitals. For example, the Aleksandrovskii railway workshops' strike in February 1919. The immediate cause was forty percent of their wages not being paid on time. They also demanded food rations equal to the Red Army soldiers. The Bolsheviks agreed and it was thought that peace would be resumed and the workers would go back to work. This is similar to the 'Peace with the Peasants' campaign, showing that there was a constant struggle among the Bolsheviks and the popular movement. However, the Cheka arrested the leaders of the strike and the workers demanded their release. The economic protest had now turned into a political battle. In June, the Aleksandrovskii railway workers went on strike again and were joined by numerous other railways, who were protesting against the demand that some workers leave and fight for the Red Army. However, 'the growth of the Soviet state, the broadening scope of internal repression and the need for unity against the Whites' reduced the impact of the popular movement in Soviet held areas. 'Part of it (the popular movement) had been absorbed into the party and state, another...against centralisation, and....the largest part, had simply tried to get by in worsening conditions.'
The 1920 harvest was a mere sixty percent of the pre-War level, which added to a rise in city and countryside discontent against the Bolsheviks. For example, the Krondstadt Mutiny took place in March 1921. Although it was crushed by the Red Army, their views for free trade of grain, democracy and free speech for socialist parties had been heard. Lenin said that Kronstadt 'was the flash which lit up reality better than anything else." It lit up the fact that Bolshevism was not going to listen to the people of Russia, and would maintain political control in their own undemocratic way. Lenin thought that the series of peasant wars were 'far more dangerous' than other counter movements.
Propaganda in Russia constantly told the people that the Bolsheviks were in charge of Russia and life would improve. It is difficult to assess how successful the propaganda was because there were few object opinion polls, but the fact that rebellions existed shows that the Bolsheviks did not have control over the population in the way they imagined. However, propaganda may have reduced the threat that popular opinion posed. Although many rebellions posed strong threats it is unlikely that the popular movement would have defeated the Bolsheviks, because they had many spontaneous uprisings and the peasants and workers were spread across Russia with no one leader and the Bolsheviks, especially by the end of 1919, were very strong. 'The Bolsheviks must have been a tiny minority of the Russian population, which through superior organisation, ruthless determination and efficient propaganda snatched victory from an inefficient, divided and silent majority.'
After defeating the White Army, the Bolsheviks were forced to 'surrender before its own peasantry." The New Economic Policy was introduced because of the threat mass unpopularity caused to the Bolsheviks, illustrating that the greater struggle was with popular movement because the Bolsheviks were forced to make changes to please the Greens. Although the Whites did pose a threat to the Reds, they were divided, lacked morale and had weak communication lines. The Green and Red fight lasted longer, therefore there was more of a 'struggle'. Brovkin argues that 'military and strategic factors are far less important than popular attitudes in a civil war." The Red and White war was a far more military and strategic war, and the Green and Red a war of popular opinion. Brovkin concludes that 'the available evidence suggests...the magnitude of the Bolshevik war against the peasants on the internal front eclipsed by far the frontline civil war against the Whites.'