The aggregate picture of British Industry before 1914 is one of a long-standing stable productivity gap of around two to one with the US. The picture is somewhat different with Germany where there is little difference between the two nations. However, the broad picture conceals a great deal of variation within industry. In some parts Britain actually did better than the US. I shall attempt to display, using a variety of industries where Britain did both well and badly, that Britain responded in a positive manner to foreign competition. Contemporary literature has often seen that the relatively poor performance in Britain is due to so called 'entrepreneurial failure' whereby industrialists made conservative technology decisions. However I shall show that the use of different technology in the UK was not actually a sign of failure, it was in fact rational choice under different conditions.
The cotton industry continued to expand output and exports right up to the First World War as shown in table 1. British craft based flexible production techniques remained competitive despite the development of mass production techniques on the other side of the Atlantic with ring spinning in spinning and the power loom in weaving. However, since in Britain there were abundant supplies of cheap labour, wages were lower and this enabled Britain's cotton industry to remain profitable. Moreover, the fact that Britain's methods were more labour intensive was to some extent compensated by the dominant position of Britain in world export markets which allowed economies of specialisation. In Lancashire area there were a large number of small scale firms, each specialising in one particular area of the cotton textile manufacturing process and operating at the minimum efficient scale, enabling them to share collective knowledge and benefit from a concentration of work skills and such like. Therefore, while individually they may not have had economies of scale, collectively they did. Indeed, the Lancashire Cotton industry is a classic example of Marshallian external economies of scale. These companies were vertically specialised, as opposed to American vertical integration. This allowed the cotton industry to increase labour productivity, although in relative terms its position worsens slightly as shown in tables 2 and 3 but is still regarded as one of Britain's better performing industries.
In the shipbuilding industry, Britain emerged to dominate the world market in the second half of the nineteenth century. Furthermore, there was no productivity gap between the US and Britain. This is shown in tables 4 and 5. There was an underlying shift in comparative advantage towards Britain caused by the rise of iron and steam as well as a revolution in shipbuilding, with a shift from wooden sailing ships to iron steam ships. Since the US had an abundant supply of timber, it had previously been the dominant shipbuilding country. As in textiles, Pollard and Robertson (1979) emphasise the fact that the craft based flexible production system is important in explaining the achievement of the British shipbuilding industry. Here the large stock of skilled labour enabled Britain to economise on fixed capital by substituting machinery for labour. This was particularly important in shipbuilding since it was a highly cyclical industry, so it was important to economise on fixed capital, which became a serious burden during downturns. The dominance of world markets meant labour intensity was again offset by economies of specialisation with each shipyard concentrating on a small range of vessels. Moreover, shipbuilding is another good example of Marshallian economies of scale with a large number of specialised producers highly concentrated in the North East of England and Western Scotland. Shipbuilding therefore shows that the latest technology, which was developed on American and German shipyards, was not necessarily the most efficient. We must remember, however, that the absence of Anglo-American productivity gap reflects that mass production techniques had not been successfully applied to shipbuilding at the time.
The final area where Britain competed successfully against foreign competition was where demand factors allowed the early adoption of high throughput technology in Britain. Against an uncompromising background of free trade in Britain which allowed subsidised sugar beet in from other countries, two sugar companies enjoyed considerable success. Here demand was largely homogeneous and branding and packaging was successfully used to differentiate the product. Hugill points out that Henry Tate and Sons marketed sugar cubes as opposed to the traditional sugar loaves, while Abram Lyle and sons successfully marketed golden syrup, which successfully complemented its range of classical sugars at competitive prices. In fact by 1909/07, comparative labour productivity figures show Britain being close to the US level and double the level of Germany labour productivity figures as shown in table 5.
Conversely there are also sectors of industry where Britain did badly. These are where high throughput technologies were successfully developed in the US. Unfortunately in these industries there were demand conditions that prevented their uptake. These shall be looked at with the example of the automobile industry. The motor vehicle production industry was very small in Britain compared to the US with the leading vehicle producer in the US producing 202,667 cars in 1913 as opposed to just 3000 in Britain. Indeed labour productivity in the US was roughly double that of the Britain. This is shown in tables 6 and 4. The much smaller scale of production in Britain was shaped by the lack of a mass market. The US producers had an advantage in that they could reap economies of scale from a large homogenised market that reflected the demand conditions in the US. Conversely in Britain, per capita incomes were not only lower, but also income was more unequally distributed. This meant that automobiles were unaffordable to most of the population and also meant that those who could afford a car did not one that was the same as the rest. Lewchuck (1979) points out that in Britain car production is much more of a complete process where as in the US production consisted of assembling bought out components. This is largely explained by the differing production strategies based on the lack of a mass market and factor endowments in Britain, where there was an abundance of skilled labour experienced in the operation of metal working machines. This resulted in a rather more labour intensive process. US producers also faced difficulties in raising sufficient capital to buy metal working machines.
In the chemical industry there is a widespread perception of poor performance and a lag in technological change in Britain as well as the failure of British companies to compete with Germany in synthetic dyestuffs despite the fact that Britain had one of the largest textile industries and therefore needed the most dyestuffs. In the nineteenth century Britain had a comparative advantage based on mineral deposits. However, there was a belief that Britain was held up by not switching to the lower cost Solvay process from the previous method (which could also produce soda ash at a lower cost, as shown in table 7), the Le Blanc process. The comparison of the two processes is hampered by the fact that the Le Blanc process could produce other products more cheaply and also allowed the production of by-products such as bleach. Lindert and Trace allow for these complications in a quantifying the cost of retention, shown in diagram 1. They find before 1886 that there were no noticeable foregone profits due to royalty payments on the process that Bruner Mond had patented until 1886. However once most of the remaining Leblanc producers merged in 1890 to form the United Alkali Company, there was little excuse not to make the switch. Lindert and Trace calculate that as long as the cartel remained effective, the gains could be 200,000 per annum, which discounted back to 1890 at a discount rate of 3% had a capitalised value of 2.5 million (Broadberry 1997: 162). On the other hand, Sandberg (1971) argues that this figure is too large, since Leblanc producers had already paid for their capital like machinery whereas to install the Solvay process would require additional expenditure for new machinery on top of variable costs incorporated with running with either process. Hence we must compare variable with total costs. Allowing for this delays the optimal switching point to 1897, and again based on a 3% discount rate produces a capitalised gain of 1.9 million which compared to a Gross Domestic Product of 1,300 million in 1890 is not so big for such a huge 'failure' (Broadberry 1997:162). Indeed if the discount rate is increased further to 8%, the gains are in fact reduced to zero. As we can see, this failure occurred in an industry where competition did not operate at its most efficient level.
Pre-war cotton accounted for a quarter of British exports (Broadberry 1997:183). However, it collapsed between the wars and contemporary writers began to question the decline of the cotton industry, asking whether there had been any technological conservatism in this industry. There were allegations of conservatism in both spinning and weaving. Firstly the spinning process, here ring spinning is seen as the high throughput technique, as it was continuous, as opposed to mule spinning which was intermittent. Moreover, the principal gain from ring spinning was in terms of labour cost savings as ring spinning was carried out by mainly female unskilled labour. This compares with the mule spinning which required the strength and skill of a largely male workforce. However, the labour savings had to be balanced against extra cotton costs on high quality cotton as the ring spindle put extra pressure on the cotton. On the other hand, the extra cost was small for course yarns as low quality cotton could bear the strain. But, the extra costs became more significant on fine yarns, as high quality cotton had to be used. Sandberg (1974) found that in the US, the saving on labour was greater than extra cotton costs on all but the highest quality yarn, due to the higher wages and therefore higher labour costs in the US. On the other side of the Atlantic in Britain, there was an abundant supply of skilled labour, so wages were lower and labour costs correspondingly smaller. It was found that in Britain the mule was profitable on counts above 40 and ring below 40 (no extra cotton costs to set against the small labour cost savings). Generally therefore, Sandberg finds that British mill owners acted rationally when installing new machinery. He found that British mill owners installed mules except when specialising in sub-40 counts and US mill owners installed rings, except when specialising in very high counts. This point is emphasised when you consider that you must compare total and variable costs for the two choices, since like in the chemical industry, the mule spinning capital costs had already been paid.
There is a similar technological choice in weaving, between the power loom in Britain, invented in 1894 in the US and first used in Britain in 1900. The automatic loom automatically stopped for breakages and rethreaded the shuttle when they ran out. As a result each worker could watch over more looms, saving labour. Unfortunately, the automatic looms were more expensive. Ultimately therefore the choice of technology depended on the relative costs of labour and capital. In Britain, wages were lower, so any savings made from the automatic loom were lower, so again it was rational for British mill owners to rely on power loom. Furthermore Lazonick sees British mill owners as optimising within given constraints - in other words performing well as neo-classical cost minimisers. However, he sees them performing badly as Schumpeterian entrepreneurs since they did not try to actively overcome the given constraints such as vertical specialisation. Moreover, he thinks it would have helped in the interwar period decline, but Saxonhouse and Wright point out that for the New England cotton industry, even with its automatic looms and vertical specialisation, there was still an even more catastrophic decline in the interwar period. In fact for all its much-trumpeted technology, the US cotton industry was never competitive on world markets for a sustained period since higher productivity was always offset by higher wages.
In conclusion we find that in Britain most industries indeed adapted well to the rise of competition from abroad and that the differences we find in productivity can be explained by differences in demand, natural resources and factor endowments. Conservatism has often been levelled at British entrepreneurs as contemporary writers sought to explain Britain's relatively poor productivity performance in some sectors, but the work of writers such as Sandberg has shown that the so-called slow uptake of new technology was in fact rational profit maximising behaviour as the example of the cotton industry shows. In addition, it has been shown that where failure did take place in terms of technological lag, like in the chemical industry, it was due to the lack of competition, rather than conservatism on the behalf of entrepreneurs.