The outbreak of the First World War was a major disruption in the international arena after 1914. As a result, the major changes in the international economy are heavily linked to this since the World War created a huge amount of destruction both physical and human. One of the main immediate impacts of war was the abandonment of the Gold Standard as governments monetised debt by selling bonds to their central banks. This among other factors led to inflation, which created immense instability. Governments therefore wished to get back on the Gold Standard as it was seen as a symbol of prosperity; a tool to revive international trade and restore stability that the floating exchange rates had destroyed. However, there were a number of differences that meant the inter-war Gold Standard did not work as well as the pre war Gold Standard that shall be explained in this essay.
The war left a huge scar on the real economy, both on the supply and demand sides. It meant a huge increase in the productive efforts in war-related industries like shipbuilding and engineering. Once the war was over however, there was a huge excess capacity. There were huge difficulties in adjusting back to peace-time production particularly the re-allocation of physical assets and labour. This meant the closure of a number of plants and little capital to create new factories since it became difficult to borrow in the post war environment (see later).
In world markets there was also huge disruption. Competitors whose economic circumstances were not greatly affected by the war took the opportunity to invade the warring nations markets. Japan is a good example; she took the opportunity to increase sales to many Asian markets that used to rely on Britain for imports. The war also stimulated the domestic production of countries outside of Europe who would normally have looked to Europe for their secondary produce. This is shown in table 1, where UK and German manufacturing exports decreased after 1913. Trade barriers also increased as nations sought to protect their domestic industries. The redrawn political maps of Central and Eastern Europe (due to the peace treaties) also disrupted long-standing trade agreements and were the cause of widespread resource misallocation causing output to decrease and prices to increase
A further change in the international economy was the development of a more rigid economic environment. Firstly a greatly lengthened process of collective bargaining decreased wage flexibility. Underlying this lay an increase in working class militancy and a subsequent increase in trade union membership. This was mainly due to the mobilisation of mass protest groups following the war as well as the fact that to increase war time production required recognition of and concessions to trade unions. Price flexibility in the goods markets was also reduced considerably. The war was again a contributor to this as it caused an increase in government intervention with the formation or strengthening of cartels and controls. Moreover, the war accelerated the trend towards larger business units. Firms increasingly looked to collusion and monopolistic powers to try and escape competition in shrinking and more competitive markets. For instance, in the UK there was a major merger boom (Foreman Peck 1995:219).
The war and its aftermath exerted considerable financial constraint on governments. Obviously, there was a need for finance. In all countries there was an increase in note issues and bank credits through monetisation of deficits. Broadly speaking, the massive increase in monetary expansion also caused rapid inflation worldwide (although it was by no means the same everywhere), which was to have major problems for the gold standard. Some price changes using wholesale prices between 1913/14 and 1928 are shown in Table 2. Little attempt was made to finance expenditure through the public- in Britain only one third was covered by taxes (Eichengreen 1996:24). This created big problems following the war, as there was a need to finance these often short-term debts, which threatened monetary stability. There was an additional problem in reducing budget deficits in that the defeated powers had to pay unrealistic reparations. French retaliation for the terms that Germany had imposed following victory in 1870 was widely blamed for this. Also there was demand to provide for reconstruction, as well as demands for increased expenditure on social security and unemployment benefits. Unfortunately international co-operation had all but vanished from the system with the end of inter-allied loans, making the problem even worse as borrowing was therefore difficult. I leave the summing up of the fragile international monetary system to Lionel Robbins (Feinstein, Temin & Toniolo (1997:25))
The changes in the international economy would all have a large impact on the interwar gold standard and its subsequent failure. However, I now turn to the reasons why the Gold Standard had worked well before 1914.
The crucial factor in the well working of the pre-war Gold Standard, according to Eichengreen was credibility. Currencies central to the working of the Gold Standard were considered 'good as gold', particularly Sterling. Therefore investors would automatically lend to a country with short term imbalances, even before the Central Banks acted to correct these imbalances since investors did not care into which country they invested, so long as the discount rate was not lower. Hence the priority central banks attached to maintaining convertibility was rarely challenged before the war. Credibility was aided by a number of features such as the pressure 20 th century governments faced to sub-ordinate currency stability to other objectives was never a feature of the 19 th century world. Wages and prices were also relatively flexible, therefore any shock to the balance of payments that required a decrease in domestic spending could be accommodated by decreasing prices and costs, not an increase in unemployment further diminishing the pressures on authorities. Foreign investors rarely hedged against currencies since the currency risks were regarded as minimal and even when fluctuations did occur, investors reacted in stabilising ways with their money. As a result, central banks could delay intervening without suffering alarming reserve losses. This led to repeated violations of the 'rules of the game' in the short run since banks did not need to make all the necessary adjustments. In the long run however, banks were always committed to maintenance of convertibility, hence creating credibility.
The system also worked because of international co-operation and solidarity to maintain stability and co-operation. A follow the leader type convention developed, as Keynes put it, the Bank of England 'called the tune' as the 'conductor of the international orchestra' (Eichengreen 1996:33). Adjustments occurred in unison through discount rates in response to changes in global conditions. Banks co-operated as they saw it as in their interests to maintain stability and convertibility, as it would create problems for them if another central bank collapsed and the crisis then spread to them. Additionally, the system worked because the banks acted as a lender of last resort to prevent crises from spreading.
The interwar gold standard was different to its pre-war predecessor. In fact it was more commonly known as a 'gold-exchange standard' (GES) in reference to the common use of foreign exchange as reserves in addition to gold. The main reason for this was that not enough gold existed at the time to offer each country a 40% cover ratio. The shortage was because prices had increased world wide so gold needed to increase in supply and since the world economy was growing; money demand was increasing faster than gold was being discovered and mined.
However, the use of the GES considerably increased co-ordination problems since it needed all countries to hold some of their reserves in foreign exchange to prevent a speculator from selling a currency for one that was purely backed by gold. The Genoa conference (1922) was designed to promote international co-operation. There was one huge problem with this, the United States (US) refused to take part. US observers had long questioned the effectiveness of the GES and the need for central bank co-operation. Not having contributed to the pre-war success, the US therefore never appreciated the role of co-operation by central banks and foreign exchange reserves. Indeed a recommended meeting of central banks never happened because of the lack of US support, so efforts to encourage central bank co-operation and the use of foreign exchange as reserves were left to proceed on an ad-hoc basis. Fundamentally this meant the GES was more like a sum of individual national monetary arrangements, none of which had been selected for the well running of the international system. The end of inter-allied loans also signalled the end of international co-operation and unlike the pre-war system countries were not willing to help each other out in times of crisis to the same extent
Inflation ran higher in the UK than it did in the US after the war. This led ultimately to the overvaluation of the pound when it resumed the Gold Standard in 1925, since the currency appreciated before prices changed. Keynes estimated that Sterling was overvalued by ten to fifteen percent (Eichengreen 1996:59). The then chancellor, Churchill had feared that not returning at pre-war parity would have cost the policy its benefits. For Britain's commitment to be credible, it was said they had to do what they did, since if they devalued once, it would be thought that they would do it again. Unfortunately, some of those that followed indeed did so at a devalued rate since they feared to do so at pre-war parity would require massive redistribution. Hence their experience compared to Britain tests the proposition that restoring at pre-war parity enhanced credibility.
France was one of the countries that devalued its currency when it came back onto the Gold Standard. This led to a significant increase in its gold reserves since its exports increased significantly - between 1926 and 1929, their reserves more than doubled (Eichengreen 1996:64). France then neutralised its gold inflows by not expanding domestic money and credit growth meaning gold did not circulate and cancel out balance of payment deficits and surpluses, therefore violating the 'rules of the game'. The reason why the French imposed laws that restricted money growth was to create a barrier against a return to the destabilising period of inflation. The Americans also neutralised their gold flows. The US had 45% of the world's supply of Gold, with 25% of this exceeding the 40% needed as reserves (Eichengreen 1996:67). The rate of growth of US money supply is shown to decrease in figure 1 between 1925 and 1927.
As the US and France showed, there was persistent balance of payment deficits for some countries and the opposite for others, which depleted gold and foreign exchange reserves. For instance Britain had an overall payment deficit every year from 1927-1931 except 1928 (Eichengreen 1996:68), creating deflationary pressure in order to remain at a fixed parity. This reflects the lack of co-ordination in the post-war international system. The GES, therefore, just was not compatible with the huge deficits created by the war since the adjustment mechanism that was supposed to eliminate surpluses and deficits functioned inadequately. This was exaggerated by the inflexible interwar labour markets meaning prices and wages could not adjust as much to shocks. Since tariffs and cartels protected the domestic markets, international prices declined much more than domestic. Consequently downturns in economic activity were more severe and adjustments to overvalued exchange rates took longer, being accompanied by severe unemployment. Due to the rise in trade unionism, this additionally increased pressure on governments to subordinate currency stability to other objectives.
Finally, credibility was affected adversely by the lack of leadership in the world economy. The war had turned the UK into a major debtor rather than creditor, and the sale of assets during World War 1 greatly reduced the UK's international investments and therefore London's pre-eminence as a financial centre relative to New York and Paris. Unfortunately, New York in particular did not have the experience in international financial management as London nor did it hold quite such crucial role in the health of international commerce. This had a negative impact upon the credibility of sterling as a reserve currency. Indeed, the ratio of foreign exchange reserves to gold reserves shows that the GES was as widespread in 1910 as in 1924 and 1925 (Foreman-Peck 1995:216). Therefore the real difference was the lack of liquidity in sterling as a reserve currency, meaning it was no longer as 'good as gold' and could not be relied upon by central banks nor investors. Consequently private investment no longer flowed in stabilising directions.
In conclusion I have gone through the main changes in the international economy after 1914, particularly those relating to World War One, such as the disruption to international trade and the decreased flexibility of world markets. These changes contributed to an inter-war international economic system that was not conducive to the well running of the interwar gold standard. Co-operation had fallen to an all time low, as countries sought to protect themselves above the international system and the interwar system just was not as flexible meaning it could not respond as well to shocks. Ultimately, however, the interwar gold standard did not have the crucial credibility of its pre-war relative, and therefore did not run as well.