Europe's Stability and Growth Pact has been under intense scrutiny ever since it was conceived in 1997. There are a number of serious problems with the pact, not least the fact that a number of countries since 1997 have breached the 3% of Gross Domestic Product government deficit limit. Indeed, none less than the President of the European commission labelled the pact 'stupid' and 'rigid' in 2002 thus emphasising the above quote (Buiter 2003:1). In this essay I shall attempt to give a brief outline of the SGP and its problems before analysing how serious these problems are in today's context. In addition to this I shall give potential solutions to the problems as outlined by economists such as Buiter and De Grauwe.
The SGP has two main rules, which are as follows:
In the European Monetary Union (EMU), national fiscal policies must balance two concerns. Firstly, since there is no exchange rate to use as a policy instrument, and there is no centralised European budget, national government budgets are the only means of balancing asymmetric shocks. Secondly, they must restrict the spillover effects of unsustainable debt levels and deficits. The reason being is that they could harm other nation states because if a government has an increasing debt level, they will increasingly have to turn to capital markets in the European Union, thereby driving up the Union interest rate. As a result this increases the burden of debt for other countries, and should they want to decrease their debt, any fiscal policy will have to be more restrictive. Also any increase in the Union interest rate is likely to cause other nations to pressure the European Central Bank (ECB) to reduce their interest rates, causing interference in ECB decisions.
Consequently, at present the SGP has a big problem in that it emphasises its rules at the expense of flexibility, creating the risk that national budgets will be unable to function as automatic stabilisers during recessions. The functioning of stabilisers is shown in figure 1. This could lead to governments pressuring the ECB to relax interest rates if they cannot use these stabilisers. If the SGP had been in operation in the recession of the early 1990s, we can illustrate this fact. A number of countries would have violated the first rule in the early 1990s. In fact a total of 6 countries would have violated it. 3 countries, the UK, Sweden and Finland would have avoided fines, since GDP declined by more than 2% in one year (so-called 'exceptional' circumstances). The other 3 would have been subject to fines. These countries would have had to use restrictive fiscal policy at a cost of amplifying the recession. Therefore the EC would be seen as hitting a country in the midst of a crisis with a fine.
Conversely the European Economic Advisory Group (EEAG) have pointed out (2003:56), the SGP does not give enough incentive to restrain in upturns. Governments may see the next recession as being very far off or they might see restraining during an upturn as harmful to their election chances or such like. As has been seen in Hungary recently, fiscal expansion has occurred during growth in the run up to the election (FT, 16/11/2005). This increases volatility directly and also indirectly since it decreases the safety net from the 3% figure if you do not decrease deficits during an upturn. This is well illustrated by France, Germany, Italy and Portugal in 2002. These countries failed to restrain their fiscal spending in the late 1990s boom. It will be interesting to see if Europe restrains as it proclaims that it is beginning to show signs of growth (FT, 18/11/2005).
In a growing economy, the requirement of budget balance means that the debt GDP ratio tends to zero in the long run. This can be seen from the formula that determines the budget balance needed to keep the debt ratio constant i.e. d = g b . There is no sound economic reason for having zero debt, especially in a European Union that already has 'generous social safety nets and a rapidly ageing population' and where 'taxes are already high' (Economist, 24/09/05). Debt creation is also important for investments in infrastructure and human capital that will benefit future generations. However, the fact that some countries have huge debts at the moment is a cause for concern. Indeed table 1 shows the government debt to GDP ratios for a number of nations. This could create problems in the future such as debt default, as it is simply not sustainable to have such large debts.
The severity of the problems was shown by the downturn in Europe in 2002. Budget deficits increased in France, Germany, Portugal and Italy. If the pact was obeyed to its law, these countries should have been fined. Indeed the European Commission (EC) insisted that they were, despite the downturn. However, many of the countries refused, and this created a clash with the EC, who felt obliged to start procedures against these countries. Predictably, the EC had to back down and in November 2003 the council of ministers abrogated the procedure that the EC had started. This provoked uproar among countries that had actually abided by the rules- citing 'one rule for the rich and another for the poor' (Guardian, 30/1103). The stability and growth pact has effectively become a dead letter, with countries free to do as they please.
So how can we reform the SGP? According to William Buiter good fiscal rules should have 8 characteristics. It has been found that the SGP meets the first two, which are simplicity (although it could be said that the medium term rule is slightly subjective) and solvency, which we find is over ensured by the balanced budget rule. However, it falls short on the other characteristics, and this is where the SGP could look for reform.
At present the SGP allows but does not entail counter cyclical operations of automatic stabilisers through the balanced budget objective. If countries sensibly reduced deficits during booms, then they would have additional flexibility during downturns. De Grauwe (2005:241) points out that the SGP should use cyclically adjusted budget deficits, so that they base the decision on whether a country has an excessive deficit or not on the structural budget deficit, which should not be affected by cyclical increases (or decreases) in the budget deficit. However, this is difficult to measure.
The SGP should make sense in the long run and at present, by implying that debt should be zero in the long run, it does not. To overcome this, debt ratios should be used in the evaluation of country's sustainable debt situation. This will impact upon the 3% deficit norm. Using the 'd=gb' formula, if we look at table 2 which shows the required deficits (%GDP) to reach different target debt ratios, then any nation seeking to reduce its debt ratio to, for example, 50% (perhaps a target for the highly indebted 'sinners'), then they are likely to breach the 3% rule every time there is a recession since the required deficit is 2.5%. Thus proposed reforms would require a reform of the 3% rule.
Furthermore, any rule should allow for heterogeneity in economic structure and initial conditions. Growth rates and other indicators, like the stock of public capital, across Euroland vary substantially and persistently. This has been inflated by the entry of additional countries to the European Union, who in the majority are in the catch-up phase of economic growth and are thus exhibiting higher rates of growth than the rest of Europe. The present SGP shows no reference to this. If debt had been used as criteria to evaluate France and Germany's debt in 2002, it would have been found that given their low relative debt position, the risk of default was low, despite their deficits. The European Economic Advisory group (EEAG) goes further, saying that one possibility would be 'to condition the deficit ceiling explicitly on the debt level, allowing low debt countries to run larger deficits in down swings than high debt countries' (EEAG 2002:62). This entails many advantages, since it gives greater incentive for fiscal restraint in up turns if the returns in the form of greater scope for stabilisation policy in downturns become more visible and larger. This implies smaller risks of pro-cyclical policies in booms.
A fiscal rule must also make sense for individual countries as well as the whole of the Euro Area. At present the SGP only constrains each country's fiscal policy and does not take into account international fiscal spillovers, nor past or future developments. In addition it does not take into account monetary policy. A potential solution to this is 'tradeable deficit payments', as proposed by Basevi and Casella (Buiter 2003:13), which would be based on a decentralised market system, like the parallel with tradeable emissions permits. Buiter (2003:13) notes, 'If national public debts are perfect substitutes in producing EMU-wide aggregate public debt externalities, such a scheme would, if it could be enforced, distribute any given EMU-wide aggregate government financial deficit across the members states in an efficient, least-cost manner'. However, enforcement of this would be difficult and no easier than enforcing fines on those who violate the 3% rule. Moreover, unlike pollutants, which are all bad, Buiter argues that deficits can have good effects, therefore meaning the parallel does not go through.
Good rules must also be credible. It either needs to be self-enforcing or consistently enforced. Unfortunately, the SGP is not self-enforcing as it is not individually incentive compatible nor is it consistently enforced. With the success of the way that monetary policy has been delegated to independent central banks, it has been argued that fiscal policy could in a similar way be delegated to create credibility. After all they both affect aggregate demand, so in that sense they are similar. This policy would avoid politics coming into fiscal decisions, although independent policy makers would still have to follow a common rule. The problem is that even with this you still have problems with the arbitrariness of the rules.
Finally a good rule should be enforced impartially and consistently (with a competent enforcement mechanism). In the UK, there is the treasury. However, in Europe there is the European Commission, which has the competence but not necessarily the legitimacy as it consists of civil servants with varying political backgrounds, and the ECOFIN council, which has the legitimacy and may even have the competency. Unfortunately the Economic and Financial Affairs (ECOFIN) council does not have the collective capacity to commit to impartial, consistent enforcement of the rules. Furthermore the way fines are handed out is counterproductive as it exacerbates the problems they are supposed to cure, especially in downturns. Buiter (2003) suggests, that rather than fines, there should be 'naming and shaming' with suspension from voting in ECOFIN meetings, with the task of determining compliance or non-compliance given to an independent experts as nominated by say the National Academies of Science of European Monetary Union (EMU) members, rather than ECOFIN members who seem to be unable to operate in a neutral manner.
Fortunately it has been recognised that the SGP is in need of reform. In March 2005 the European Council agreed to a number of reforms to the SGP (De Grauwe 2005:243). More weight was given to debt level in evaluating the fiscal position of member nations with countries that have a low debt ratio and high growth potential being allowed to maintain a deficit of 1% over the business cycle. Countries that have a negative growth rate or a long period of very low growth relative to potential will be allowed to temporarily exceed the limit. Also countries are now allowed to invoke an increased number of special circumstances for exceeding the ceiling, such as investment programs that increase the debt today but increase future sustainability of government finances. This created a so-called 'elasti-pact' (FT 22/03/2005), which has made it easier to avoid fines, thereby arguably decreasing the credibility of the pact. The German BDI industry federation warned at the time that "The majority of the proposals . . . would leave the pact open to arbitrary interpretation and this would make it even more difficult to enforce" and "..would reduce the incentive for governments to conduct a sound fiscal policy" (FT, 08/03/2005). Indeed how much of a difference these will make is debateable since the problem of the arbitrary 3% deficit limit remains in tact and the issue of fines has not been addressed. It will be interesting to see what happens given that the average government deficit in the EU is 2.8% (FT, 18/11/2005).
In conclusion, we can see that the problems with the SGP are very severe, with there being a distinct lack of credibility in the system since the commission was forced to back down to some countries who had exceeded the deficit rule. I have outlined some possible ways to reform the SGP. The optimal rule must be 'credible, simple, transparent and consistent' (Buiter 2003:16). Fortunately, it has been recognised that the SGP is in need of reform by the European Commission. However, although small amendments have been made, it remains to be seen whether the SGP will ultimately succeed without wholesale changes. The problem with this is that it would require a change to the Maastricht treaty, which may be more costly than any benefits. Furthermore we must remember that it will always be difficult to create a rule that fits for all member nations that come under the SGP.