Since the 1970s, financial crises have undoubtedly increased in frequency. Apart from the incredibly unstable interwar period, the period since then has seen an unprecedented amount of crises. Financial liberalization has been widely blamed for the crises of recent times by popular commentators, but as will be shown, this is by no means the only factor. This essay shall explore financial crises in general and these factors using examples such as the East Asian Financial Crisis of the late 1990s. The International Monetary Fund has taken a lot of criticism for its role in financial crises, most notably by Joseph Stiglitz. I shall also look into the role of the IMF in this picture and whether it has played a part in the proliferation of financial crises since the 1970s.
Financial crises are defined as follows
There are three main types of financial crisis according to Bordo et al (2002:4-5), which are banking, currency and twin crises. Banking crises are where there is financial distress marked by the erosion of most if not all of the aggregate banking system capital whereas a currency crisis is where there is a forced change in exchange rate parity, an abandonment of an exchange rate peg or an international rescue. A twin crisis is a combination of the two.
Looking at figure 1, it is immediately obvious that in the period up to the 1970s from the Second World War that there were no banking crises in the sample of 21 countries. The reason for that was the tight regulation of domestic and international capital markets. This was a legacy of the interwar period as the authorities sought to prevent the banking crises of the late 1920s and early 1930s occurring once again. Since the 1970s however, banking crises have returned. The fact that more crises have occurred in the larger of the two samples of countries reveals the majority of banking crises have occurred in predominantly developing nations (since the larger sample contains developing as well as more industrialized nations). This is understandable given that their banking and financial systems are less developed and more susceptible to crisis in the rigors of financial markets. Literature on previous crises supports this negative relationship between banking crises and capital controls, which is emphasized in figure 2 where banking crises are more frequent in the presence of no capital controls. In the East Asian financial crisis for instance, the absence of controls permitted banks and companies to fund themselves offshore and hence increase their bets increasing the risk of problems later on since it was more likely that loans would go bad. The entities in question were encouraged to do so by the existence of government guarantees and implicit exchange rate guarantees (Goldstein 1988) safe in knowledge that they would get their money back.
Again looking at figure 1, although banking crises were suppressed in the interwar period, this came at a cost of an increasing likelihood of currency crises occurring. This idea is re-enforced by figure two which compares the incidence of crises with and without capital controls. This shows that currency crises are more likely with capital controls. Theoretical work by Bertolini and Drazen (1997) has found that controls incline governments to take riskier policies which may make market participants doubt whether governments will defend an exchange rate. Emperically this relationship has also been found to be true with studies by Glick and Hutchinson (2000) and Leblang (2000) 3. Currency crises did not occur in anywhere near the number they have in the post 1970 period compared to the pre-1914 period, when capital mobility reached high levels and capital controls were absent, implying that it cannot just be financial globalization on its own which has caused the proliferation of crises. Bordo et al (2000) entertain the idea that democratization is the other important factor. Essentially the rise of democracy in many places around the world has made it more difficult for governments to credibly sub-ordinate all other policies to the maintenance of a currency peg as well as credibly committing to exchange rate stabilization. A good example of this in recent times is in Thailand, where the government maintained an artificial peg. The government also had a high interest rate, which encouraged residents to fund themselves offshore, which increased the currency and liquidity risk that the country was exposed to. This risk confronted the authorities with a dilemma, which either meant allowing the currency to float or defend the peg at all costs, by maintaining high interest rates and buying up domestic currency by selling its foreign reserves. Maintaining high interest rates was not good for bank balance sheets however due to their maturity mismatch and their exposure to higher credit risk when the economy began to deteriorate. However, they were eventually forced to float the Baht as their foreign exchange reserves began to dwindle. The floating of the Baht had come far too late. If it had come earlier it would have avoided the impression of an implicit guarantee and would therefore discouraged Thai residents from simply funding themselves offshore without thinking of the currency risk. It would also have allowed the government to lower interest rates when the economy started to slow, easing the pressure on financial institutions' balance sheets. Therefore, with regard to currency crises, it is not just capital mobility on its own which affects the appearance of currency crises; it is the combination of this and the appearance of democracy.
As a note, which will come relevant with regard to the IMF, while crises have increased in frequency in the post 1970s period, it is also important to look to whether they have increased in depth as well. Interestingly, Bordo et al (2000) find that crises have neither become longer or more severe in terms of output loss in the period since 1971 against the previous period of globalization up to 1914. If anything crises were more severe and longer in the first period of globalization than since the 1970s.
So what role is there in all this for the IMF? Up to the 1970s its primary role had been to defend the Bretton Woods Adjustable Peg system and also as a financier of temporary current account deficits for advanced nations (Bordo and James 1999:1). Indeed it was more that the international monetary system was built around it. It was created as a response to the much disrupted interwar period to overcome the perceived market failures of the preceding period. However, following the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s its role has changed. The changeable pegs were gone, and therefore the IMF's role as guardian with it. A second development was the movement towards an increasingly integrated world economy. The dramatic opening up of capital markets was a particular development which aided this. This meant that private capital could substitute for IMF financing of payments imbalances. Additionally there has been a dramatic increase in membership from the original industrialized countries to include many developing nations.
The IMF is now multi-faceted. Since the 1970s it has been concerned with a number of issues from promoting world economic growth and stability to, more recently, global poverty. In this new free market world it is also seen as providing solutions and public goods to help solve the so called new externalities such as the problems of debt crises. Moreover, it has also been seen as a crisis manager, providing crisis lending when countries access to private capital has been stopped suddenly. If confidence was able to be maintained, countries should be able to gain sufficient liquidity from private sources. However, as less economically developed nations do not usually have a good track record of borrowing or a supply of contingent credit, funds are not available to them. It is therefore believed that the IMF should step in and supply this short term capital to finance imbalances and to restore expectations of stability. In other words, they should be a lender of last resort. At the moment the IMF is not able to fully carry out this role as its resources are simply too small in relation to the capital flows that we are dealing with. Loans in the last resort like these are also seen as endangering moral hazard for both policy makers, who may follow too lax tax policies in the knowledge that the IMF would intervene and also for the lenders who will lend without monitoring its use given that they know they will be bailed out. This creates an expansion of risky borrowing, which was so deadly in the Asian Crisis. The more an institution like the IMF steps into financial crises to help, the more countries and financial institutions will come to expect it. The IMF's role as crisis manager has certainly accentuated problems in the past such as in the Brazilian crisis of 1998/9 where a $50million loan was used to sustain an overvalued exchange rate, which rather than help anyone in the country simply went to speculators.
IMF programs are 3 pronged, combining financing, macroeconomic policy adjustment and structural reforms. In its role as crisis manager, the IMF program involves these 3 elements, and as with the first, it has again been criticized for its role in macroeconomic policy adjustment. Take the example of the East Asian Financial Crisis. It recommended a policy of fiscal austerity in the thought that countries involved should have a balanced budget. Not only was that misguided in the sense that the countries involved were going into a recession - "Not for 60 years have respectable economists believed that an economy going into a recession should have a balanced budget" (Stiglitz 2002:106) but also because it encouraged contagion of the crisis between the nations. This occurred because one country cutting back its imports means that another country's exports are cut thus spreading the downturn. While this policy helped the country's involved pay back its debts as their trade surplus improved, the real side of the economy was left devastated with a collapse in commodity prices. Furthermore, in the East Asian case it was also criticized for it structural reforms, which were supposed to restore confidence and prevent a recurrence as well as increase the economy's resilience and lay the foundations for long-term growth. However the results were not positive in Indonesia, Thailand and Korea, indeed capital continued to flow out of the country and the currencies continued to depreciate.
The final way the IMF is linked in with the increase in financial crises is through its ideology, pushing for free markets, specifically financial markets. Financial liberalization has been much debated over the past few years. Proponents have looked to neo-classical growth theory in that in a free market, capital will move to where it can be most productively used i.e. in less economically developed nations where the Marginal Product of capital is higher. According to Edison et al (2000) capital market liberalization has been shown to have a positive effect on growth in East Asia (of course notwithstanding the crisis) but the impact in other less economically developed nations has been small. This leads me to say that the ideology itself is generally based on a sound footing (although that itself is open to criticism); however the way they push the ideology, by attaching conditionality to loans made to countries, has created many a crisis, not least the Asian crisis. They have consistently pushed for capital market liberalization without considering that the underlying institutions must be sound first. This is crucial for the avoidance of asymmetric information problems.
In conclusion, the increase in number of financial crises since the 1970s has been caused by a number of factors including the increasing liberalization of financial markets. However, this factor does not operate in isolation, indeed it has been suggested by economists such as Bordo et al (2001) that the crisis problem has increased due to the combination of financial market liberalization and increase in democracy. The IMF's role in the global economic system has changed much since the end of the Bretton Woods system. Its widened agenda has undoubtedly had a role to play in the crisis problem, since it appears that it is almost too much for them to take on, particularly in its role as a crisis manager. The IMF has clearly made crises worse in some cases, although overall crises are no worse in terms of depth or severity in the period since the 1970s than the previous period of globalization before the First World War. Whether they have actually caused crises though is open to debate. However, the IMF as a truly global institution could do more to prevent crises in the future by attaching conditionality to loans which strengthen the underlying institutions in developing nations.