The economic climate of the interwar period was one of much disruption. Following the war the world economy was met with a slump of unprecedented severity. Coupled with the disruption to international relations and the economy in general caused by the First World War as well as the increasingly protectionist environment around the world, British services were faced with a completely changed climate within which to operate. Although British services began to fall behind their American counterparts, British Market Services kept pace with and even exceeded in part their German equivalents. To an extent this is to be expected, since the British economy was largely open compared to the domestically orientated American economy and more protectionist German economy. However, this general picture conceals the fact that performance in the face of the challenging conditions varied considerably across sectors within services and this shall be examined in this essay. The extent to which different sectors were exposed to international competition was one of the factors which affected the varying intra-sector performance although it was by no means the most important. Finally I shall attempt to show that performance was more down to whether flexible networks continued to be suitable for organization in Britain.
The railway industry, although still the most important purveyor of freight within Britain, hit decline in the interwar period. However, stagnation also hit the railway systems of the US and Germany. The industry went through one of the most difficult periods in its history, trying to cope with the rise of new alternative forms of transport such as aviation and more particularly road travel as well as the decline Britain's heavy industry. Freight traffic was hit particularly hard by the latter. Previously coal and coke had accounted for half of the ton-mileage of freight carried on the railways (Munby and Watson 1978:86). Indeed the situation would have been even worse had World War One not had the disastrous effects it did on the coastal shipping industry, which had provided the main competition to the railways before road. The period as a whole therefore was one of stagnation in output and low productivity growth. As shown in table 1, the US still took a labour productivity lead across the interwar period. Indeed even the German system had taken a productivity lead by 1935. Undoubtedly there is an element of geography in the US productivity lead, since there is a much smaller element of terminal handling associated with the long distance transport in the US. However, the existence of a German productivity lead brings the extent of this into question. The German lead was more due to heavy industry investment which helped lower the costs in setting up the railways.
Before the First World War, British shipping held a position in the market approaching hegemony. However, the war proved a major problem for the industry as it allowed other countries to build up their fleets while Britain pursued shipping policies geared to war. Towards the end of 1916, all ocean-going tonnage was brought under government control (Salter 1921:72) as shortages worsened in the battle. The war was followed by a period of speculative frenzy, where the reserves built up from the profits of war time were used to finance amalgamations and re-flotation, to buy up the old tonnage and also to order new ships at inflated prices. This created a severe problem of excess supply in shipping as world shipping tonnage increased way ahead of world seaborne trade during the 1920s. This is apparent in the total and active tonnage in table 2. United Kingdom freight rates in 1920 were still booming at over four times the 1913 level, but they crashed to 158% of the 1913 level in 1921, and continued to fall until 1933. The problem of excess supply was exacerbated by the rise of economic nationalism following the war, which was expressed in shipping through subsidies and such like.
Tramp shipping suffered more than liner shipping. This was partly due to liner shipping lines limiting the aforementioned decline in shipping rates through shipping 'conferences' on the established shipping routes (Deakin 1973:27-42). Coal exports, which had provided a major outward cargo for British tramp ships also collapsed putting an additional burden on the tramp shipping firms. This was because carrying ballast rather than coal on the outward voyage was not nearly as profitable, meaning British firms were no longer able to compete with the lower crew costs of the Norwegian and Greek shipping firms.
These problems created a picture of British shipping which had declining output throughout the period. Although employment grew across the First World War, it declined thereafter. Over the period 1914-1951 labour productivity grew less rapidly in shipping than in the rest of the transport and communications sector as a whole, although more rapidly than in the aggregate economy. This is shown by comparing labour productivity in tables 3, 4 and 5.
In the distribution sector as a whole, output stagnated in the interwar period. Between 1924 and 1937, output grew at 1.9% per year, compared to the 2.3% of the whole economy as shown in table 6. This also shows very rapid labour growth, therefore meaning labour productivity fell for the sector. However, there was no substantial decrease in the relative productivity position compared to the US and Germany. This is shown in table 7.
Financial services were hit by a number of setbacks during the interwar period. Not only was there the disruption of World War One, but also financial crises in a number of countries after the collapse of the inter-war Gold Standard in the early 1930s. Furthermore during the interwar period, financial leadership passed hands from London to New York. On first sight you would say that this would mean poor performance for the British financial services. However, this really reflected the growing importance of the American economy in the world economy as both the growth of population and per capita national income outstripped the British, along with the different effects of two world wars on national wealth. Comparing labour productivity in financial services, we find that the United States pulled ahead across the First World War, but after the crises in the United States Britain was able to pull into a lead. For Germany, there is combined data for both finance and distribution, but the data suggests a small British lead. This is shown in table 1.
I now move onto whether an industry being open or protected had an impact on the response of British industry. Aldcroft (1968) is particularly critical of the performance of railways in the interwar period. The basis of the argument is that the flow of traffic increased under Government control during the war, despite the loss of labour to the forces and the understandable cut in capital expenditure. Therefore following the war there should have been economies from nationalizing the system. Although this was possible, competing interest groups meant that the final result was amalgamation into four regional groups through the Railways act of 1921. The limited productivity growth that followed is the basis for his argument. Aldcroft criticises the railways in three areas, pricing, adoption of new technology and the continued use of small wagons. As an example of his criticisms, Aldcoft sees small wagons as "far too small for economical handling; 20 ton wagons, for example, represented less than 3% of the total mineral wagons" (Dyos and Aldcroft 1969:311). However, it seems likely that Aldcroft was being too harsh in his 3 main criticisms. With regard to small wagons, Bonavia (1981:134) points out the real reason for the continued use of small wagons was that it provided flexibility, which was a crucial factor for small retail consignments. Bonavia continues that the transformation of freight handling that occurred later in the 1960s and 1970s had followed a transfer to road transport of these small consignments. Hence any improvements that Aldcroft urges perhaps would have worsened their problems.
Even if parts of Aldcroft's criticisms of the railways are alleviated, we are still left with poor performance in the interwar period. The hierarchical form of management that was required and used successfully in the US ran into problems in the British conditions. This was largely due to the legacy of the past which became sanctified in the Railway Act of 1921. It was also embodied in the experience and human capital of the workforce and management, which had a vested interest in doing things in the 'traditional' manner. In normal conditions, continuity and tradition were seen as a source of strength. However, in the abnormal conditions of the interwar period they tended to be a handicap.
It could be argued that British ship-owners could have alleviated some of the problems they faced if they had been more willing to adapt to the changing conditions. An example of this is the rise of the motor ship. Henning and Trace (1975:372) found that net cash flow was always highest for motorship on routes to Australasia compared to other forms of ship. However, they point out firstly that the first commercial application of the motor ship was in 1919, just after the speculative frenzy, so the spread of the motor ship was limited by the rate of replacement. Although Britain was slower to adopt the motor ship than the Scandinavians, who were expanding their merchant marines, there was much less lag behind the Germans and countries that did not expand their merchant fleets as shown in table 8. Secondly Henning and Trace (1975:385) blame the slow adoption on the strength of the coal lobby and the general pro coal sentiment in Britain, as well as the over-optimistic claims made by the builders of steam turbines. Ultimately, the loss of financial reserves and the lack of competitive pressure created by the shipping conference system led to British firms not taking up the most efficient technology.
In the distribution sector large scale retailing continued to grow. If we include department stores and co-operative stores under the heading 'large scale retailing', we find that by 1939 they accounted for 36.5% of the total retail trade, from 18.5% in 1910. This is shown in table 9. Despite the growing importance of large scale retailing, which would later become suitable for American 'industrialisation', small scale retailing continued to remain important overall, hence the lack of an Atlantic productivity gap. There are a number of reasons for this. Firstly the small scale retailer was better able to cater for small local markets, as well as being more flexible. Secondly, there was a widening in essential goods which required frequent purchase close to home such as cigarettes. Thirdly, small scale retailers could offer a personalized service in trades that required a tailored service such as bakers and butchers. Here the personal qualities of the owner have a significant effect on trade, especially repeat purchase customers. Finally, with the growth of trends such as branding and advertising by the manufacturer in the interwar period together with the growing importance of resale price maintenance, the small scale retailer was able to compete effectively with the large scale retailer on equal standing. A report on the commission of RSPM (1949:1) estimated that in 1900, 3% of consumer expenditure was on RSPM goods. By 1938, this figure was 30%.
As shown in the first part of the question, financial services continued to prosper. This is shown in particular by the British overseas banks in international banking. The terms of trade moved against primary commodities and there was an increasing spread of tariffs and exchange controls. This made supplying trade finance and exchange operations to the primary producing colonies like South Africa difficult. Despite this, Britain's overseas banking network survived. Indeed the value of their total assets increased considerably across both world wars in both real and nominal terms as shown in table 10. However, table 10 also shows this declining in both terms in the 1930s at the same time as the geographical orientation became even more focused on the Empire which is shown in table 11. Ultimately though, their continuing reliance on networks meant that despite these asset figures, it coped well with war and depression and no major crisis occurred.
In conclusion, it is clear that the response of British industry to the immensely trying times of the interwar period was varied. The best way to explain differences in response to the interwar period between the US and Britain is not really by whether a sector was open to international competition but by whether flexible networks continued to be a solid base for organization. Where 'industrialization' occurred in the US such as in railways, there was a productivity gap, whereas where flexible networks continued to be suitable there was no such gap, such as in international banking and retailing. I must point out however that exposure to international competition does have an influence in some sectors such as shipping. The lack of a German lead apart from railways is due to the continued employment of around 30% of the labour force in agriculture, which prevented the growth of services in most sectors.