During the period 1700-1850, there were a number of major institutional changes. While the bulk of this essay shall be focussed on enclosure, which was the main institutional change of the period, I shall also discuss other changes such as those regarding the market, land tenure and the size of land as these also had a significant impact upon agriculture at the time. Some scholars for example, Overton (1996) argue that these institutional changes led to technological change like the introduction of new types of crops. However, we must first carefully define technological change, which "is a change in the set of feasible production possibilities". This must be differentiated from technical change which "is a change in the amount of output produced from the same inputs", which may or may not be technological in nature. Furthermore I shall then argue as to whether these institutional changes brought about technological change using evidence from various historians.
Enclosure, which is a process of changing property rights, was the most significant institutional change in agriculture of the time. By 1700, through piecemeal enclosure, only 29% of land was organised in the old system of 'open-field' at that date. On a national level, between 1700 and 1830 21% of total area of England was enclosed. This is emphasised by figures 1 and 2. The majority of this enclosure was achieved through the Parliamentary enclosure movement, which began in 1740, which required only that the owners of 75-80% of the land area in a village agree to enclose. It was widely employed to terminate common property rights, as a consequence of efforts by landlords and tenants alike to increase efficiency and output. Many contemporary writers, like Arthur Young regarded enclosure as a pre-requisite for innovation, Young himself referring to the 'Goths and Vandals of open fields' as opposed to the 'Civilisation of enclosures'.
With the dramatic increase in market activity from the sixteenth century onwards, there was a gradual change in the institutions of the time from a highly regulated ideology to a more free market ideology. This was in combination with an increasingly integrated national market due to the improvements in transport. Previously regulation on the open market and its associated tolls discouraged dealing with middlemen. However, by the Nineteenth century, middlemen were common, as farmers increasingly used samples to sell, so it was the exception rather than the rule to see produce sold straight to the consumer. Middlemen were particularly important as they were increasingly involved in financial activities such as the provision of credit. By 1800, self regulating markets gained increasing credibility and consumers were separated from the producer. This was due to market regulation being put under pressure by improved farming practices and the decrease in the frequency of scarcity of produce with the increasingly integrated national market. However this, as with enclosure, put the burden on the poor, as the rationing mechanism (prices) was not equitable, which was in contrast to interventionism which sought to protect the weakest consumers.
In the middle ages, the majority of farms were less than thirty acres in size. Following the decrease in population around 1445, the average size of farms increased and by 1700, the average farm was 65 acres in 1700 and by 1800 it was 150 acres in the South and 100 acres in the North according to estate surveys. The main economic reason for this was that the larger commercial farms had lower costs per acre than smaller farms, and also larger farms could practice division of labour and economies of scale, enabling them to have larger profits. While this would have mattered little to a subsistence farmer, a landlord would have been concerned provided rent was linked to profit. Hence there was an incentive to increase farm sizes from the landlord's perspective
The growth in farm size has also been associated with a change in land tenure as the rich sought to take advantage of the increases in rents after the onset of enclosure. According to Chambers, rents doubled on average after enclosure as the enclosed land was more efficient, but Clark claims that the increase was much less, perhaps around 40%. During and after enclosure the formerly 'yeoman' owned land passed into the hands of the gentry and aristocracy, when small farms were amalgamated into large and then leased to large-scale farmers. The result of this was the consolidation of the great estate, and effectively three-tiered social structure, of rich landlord, substantial tenant farmer and the poor landless labourer, known as the proletariat. This resulted in a redistribution of income in favour of the landowners, and adversely affected the poor. An outline of the changes in land ownership since the 15 th century can be seen in figure 3.
Technological change occurred in a number of different forms in the period and encompassed a number of 'technical functions within a complex set of agricultural processes' from cultivation implements to drainage equipment. While the majority of technological innovation occurred in crop types during the period, with the introduction of nitrogen fixing legumes such as clover which therefore raised fertility of the soil and fodder crops like sainfoin which increased the food base for pasture, technological change also occurred in the tools of agriculture. For instance, much innovation went into improving the particular farming tasks. The seed-drilling machine, as invented in 1701 by Jethro Tull, although it was not until the late 18 th century that its appearance was widespread. It must therefore be emphasised that technological change was by no means something that occurred overnight and took time to take place, responding to the environment and local opportunities. Clark (1998) goes as far as saying that the mechanisation in agriculture was minimal by 1850, hence we must therefore focus mainly on changes in seed innovation. Whether these changes were a response to institutional change is a question we shall now look at.
In medieval England, more than half of farm land was organised in open fields and commons. Traditionally, the open field system is seen as 'bad' as it lacked the incentives for the people in charge of the land to innovate. Common management of fields meant that it required a consensus to make a change; hence it gave the small less progressive farmers the power to hold back the initiative of the large-scale entrepreneur. Also, common management led to the 'tragedy of the commons', which is shown in the figure 4. Essentially it led to more than the efficient number of cattle being grazed, which was detrimental to soil quality, control of diseases and cattle breeding, because people did take account of negative externalities. Post enclosure, land was now under private control, so the owner could now do as they please without reference to society on large consolidated tracts of land, hence the private incentive was equal to the social incentive and the efficient amount of output was more often than not produced so that the negative externality was internalised. Hence incentives are corrected as the benefits of investment, say in technology, accrued to the individual not the society as a whole. Therefore, under private management, there should have been a distinct movement toward technological change. This is even with increased rents as it enabled farmers to search out the most profitable means of using land rather than being confined to the traditional rotation as specified under common land
The impact of enclosure upon technological change is documented by Overton (1996). Using a study of Rutland and Huntingdon based on surveys by the Board of Agriculture reporter, there was significantly more turnip and clover innovation in the enclosed villages than in open field villages. Enclosed villages had 23% under clover and 20% under turnips. Of the 15 open field villages, the 9 villages that grew turnips had only 14% under turnips. However, this is a cross-sectional rather than a time analysis, which is inappropriate as the nature of enclosure changed with the advent of parliamentary enclosure. Moreover, even when we look at time series data, as shown at Canwick, Lincolnshire in figure 5, we find similar results.
Surely therefore, we should see a distinct difference in technological change between enclosed and common farms. However, Clark (1998) claims that the common fields were relatively efficient, as the land rents were lower and common fields economised on fencing costs. They even took on changes in technology; Havinden found using a local study of Oxfordshire that open villages did indeed take up new crops, such as Sainfoin. In fact Clark (1998) goes as far as saying that enclosure had little impact upon agricultural efficiency, calculating the total gain in agricultural efficiency for English agriculture from the entire enclosure movement as 0.6% of output between 1730 and 1840. As a result, if enclosure had never taken place, the loss in output would scarcely have been noticed, implying a limited change in technology as a result of enclosure.
So if it was not enclosure, was it one of the other institutional changes that occurred that caused a change in technology? The link between tenure type and technology change is doubtful as there is little evidence to suggest that there was an increase in investment in agriculture as a result of the redistribution of income following enclosure. However, after 1800 there was a distinct increase in capital as shown in figure 6, particularly on the side of the landlord as they gained from the increases in rents. This perhaps reflects an increase in investment for innovation, and as a result technological change. However, it is difficult to say this had an effect before 1850, as capital only started to build up after 1800, although in the long term it may have done.
The link between farm size and technological change was first noted by Arthur Young claiming that it was only the large-scale farmers, with a 'greater proportional wealth...is able to work great improvements in his business...he also employs better cattle and uses better implements; he purchases more manures, and adopts more improvements'. Furthermore, according to Allen (2004), the growth in farm size has a positive impact on productivity. He claims larger farms caused a decrease in the total labour per acre because they allowed economies of scale to be utilised in the employment of men, as they could be better used in groups on tasks on a large farm than on their own on small farms, hence the amount of men employed increased but by less than the growth in farm size. Also it allowed fewer children to be used as they were difficult to supervise and fewer women as they were often tied to dairying which took place less on large mixed farms. As a result, large farms could afford to pay larger rents as their labour costs were lower. It is clear this is a technical change; hence it is unlikely that increased farm sizes alone led to technological change.
The widening of the market and its increasing integration nationally allowed for increasing regional specialisation within agricultural production. This allowed farmers to improve their practices and implement new crops and technology, as they benefited from increased economies of scale and scope as the market widened. However, the lack of direct evidence makes this conclusion uncertain.
Although it could be true that market expansion and development could have caused technological change, it may be instead that the change in technology did not take place directly through institutional change. Therefore they are due to a different type of change in the agricultural environment. For instance it is quite plausible that farmers innovated merely to be able to meet the additional demand from a growing population, which could then have facilitated market development rather than the other way round. This is put nicely by Overton, who claims that because prices failed to rise as fast as population in the late 18 th century, there must have been a significant rise in output to stop prices rising with demand as they had in previous centuries, indicating that there must have been some kind of technological change. However, Allen (2004) and Clark (1998) dispute this, claiming that it was only because of imports that demand was met and that output failed to match demand.
In conclusion, we find that while a number of major institutional changes occurred in the period 1700-1850, it is difficult to pin down whether it is these changes that led to changes in technology that I have outlined. The main institutional change, enclosure, facilitated technological change because it overcame constraints of common property rights, fragmented and scattered land and the difficulties of collective decision-making. However whether it made a really significant impact is questionable, as Clark (1998) claims. The other institutional changes may have had an impact, particularly those related to market development, although it is difficult to pick up any direct causality. Furthermore we can say that the main cause of technological change lies elsewhere, perhaps due to commercial pressures from increasing demand.