Between 1750 and 1860, the cost of transport in Britain was reduced strikingly due to a series of innovations. For example in road transport, the evolution of the turnpike trusts in the early part of the seventeenth century provides a large part of the reason for lower land transport charges in the 1750s than at the beginning of the century. These decreases in transport costs had a big impact on the British economy at the time, so much so that if these innovations had never taken place, the economy would have required a substantial grant of free resources to compensate for their absence. Hence to analyse the direct effects of cost reduction we must look to the Social Savings of transport. Consequently in this essay I will evaluate the actual economic significance of the reduction in transport costs, although it must be said that it is difficult to provide conclusions for all types of transport due to lack of empirical data. Following on from this I will discuss whether the railways were more important than the canals or the turnpike trusts, using social savings as the main basis for my argument as well as displaying the forward and backward linkages to exhibit the dynamic effects of each transport type.
Firstly, a reduction in transport costs has direct effects on the economy as it lessens resource requirements, which can then be used to expand production. The best way to display whether the reduction in transport costs had a discernable economic effect is through social savings, which effectively shows the opportunity cost of transport. Social savings is defined to be the difference between the actual cost of transportation services provided by say, railways, and the hypothetical cost of those same services in the absence of railways using the next best alternative (NBA) source of transport services. Hence if transport costs have been reduced say by the development railways, a social saving should be displayed. Social savings also allows for differences in seasonal reliability and such like.
Hawke calculated the Social Savings for railways as shown in table 1. He calculated it in both passenger terms and freight terms in 1865. In passenger terms, Hawke presents two estimates based on the differing comfort of journeys. Looking at the table we find the saving is 2.1 percent of UK national income or 5.8 percent of UK national income. In freight terms, the NBA was canal haulage where Hawke uses resource costs not canal charges, the distinction made due to monopoly pricing. Hawke makes allowances for additional savings such as supplementary wagon haulage. The final result is about 3 percent of national income. From these estimates Hawke finds that railway services represent in 1865 a total social saving of between 5.2 and 9.2 percent of national income (United Kingdom). Using these figures, Hawke thought that the innovation of the railways did have a considerable impact on the growth of the economy in 1965. The problem is, does social saving actually mean very much? Historical criticism of the technique has fallen on the methodical and empirical weaknesses that are intrinsic in the calculations. For instance, the fact that much of the data was formed using secondary sources such as Lardner adds further criticism to Hawke's work. Hence, social savings can only really be used to make rather limited points in the discussion of the relationship between railways and economic growth.
A figure for social savings of canals (ONLY for coal) has also been calculated. But this is a rough estimate based on unreliable information about the average distance of coal travelled. The final results are shown in table 3. This gives a social saving of between 1.4-6.9 percent of UK National income that is consistent with freight savings from railways (1.7% of UK national income) depending on distance travelled showing they had a similar saving.
On the other hand, according to Floud in his book, "The economic history of Britain since 1700" (Volume 1, 1700-1860), land transportation has never been more than ten percent of national income, for instance it was 6 percent 1780-1860. Due to its endowment of large rivers and coastal areas that were ideal for harbours, it could be said that Britain had been endowed with a low cost of transportation. Thus the lowering of transport costs through the onset of railways and canals would be say, 50 percent (justifiable looking at freight and price differentials) and on the half of traffic not carried on unimproved water, say another 50 percent. So putting it together, the cost reductions would only save a mere 2.5 percent of national income (10x0.5x0.5) and therefore not have a big impact on economic growth. Therefore, it is implied in this setting that the lowering of transport costs did not have a significant effect.
I have already analysed the direct impact of railways on the economy using the social savings technique. It has been argued that due to the fragile nature of Hawke's calculations, railways did not have a significant impact on Britain's economic growth. But any calculation like this should not lead us to minimise their impact on Britain in the mid-nineteenth century. Railways were the most technologically superior mode of transport that reduced costs and made possible the speedier, more reliable movement of freight and for the first time, large numbers of passengers as shown by the growth in freight carried and passenger numbers between 1842 and 1900 in table 2. They were the first example of large-scale industry in Britain and were a major industry in their own right. In the forty years following 1930, particularly the railway mania period, railways had significant dynamic effects, as Rostow put it, the forward and backward linkages. Recent economic theory associated with endogenous growth has emphasised the importance of these positive externalities which show that railways made an addition to the resources of the economy other than by the provision of cheaper transport, which is already captured in social saving. In railways for instance, Gourvish has shown that the development of railways had implications for the input industries particularly in the Mania period of 1844-51. Here he found that railways consumed approximately 39 percent of pig iron output thus creating economies of scale. However it can be argued that the increased economies of scale in the iron industry caused by railways could have been replaced by amalgamation of the small individual plants that were common, provided that the size of output was sufficient to cheapen iron. It is therefore thought that railways did not have significant backward linkages as there is little connection with railways and the development of the iron industry.
It must be added that railways were not central to the industrial revolution in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, and neither did they do much to extend the transport network already long established by road and canal, hence railways had limited forward linkages. However, there is no doubt that they reduced costs and substantially increased speed, particularly in long distance bulk transport. Historians agree that railway rates both for freight and passengers considerably undercut those for road and canal, for instance a second-class rail passenger fair in 1830 was about 2-2.5d (old pennies) per mile compared with 3.5-4.5d per mile on road (for similar comfort). This implies that railways directly reduce resource costs that can then be used to increase production.
We can also find out the social rate of return (SRR) on this capital investment as defined by Fishlow and then compare it to other rates of return in the economy to capture whether railways made good use of resources invested. Hawke found that the SRR on railways to be 15-20 percent for 1830-70. This figure allowed Hawke to conclude that although there was a distinct lack of rate of return data in other industries, "there can be little doubt that railways provided socially advantageous investment opportunities". Hawke also concluded that the figure would have been higher if one takes account of changes elsewhere that were not dependent on railways but facilitated by them. Therefore, the advance of railways had a significant impact on economic growth as it encouraged socially productive investment. It could be argued that this figure underestimates the true social rate of return because any external economies that should be added to social saving to obtain a measure of the effects of railways as an innovation should also be taken into account in assessing the returns to investment in railways. If there were benefits from these externalities, then surely the social rate of return is too low.
While there has been a large amount of information published about the impact of railways upon the industrial revolution, information about canals is less forthcoming, apart from the rough calculations made by Hawke as shown previously. Unfortunately, canals also had the problem of not being able to deliver to "the door" unlike railways, so faced additional costs. However, this is not to say canals did not have an impact. Between 1760 and 1830, canal mileage grew at a compound annual growth of 1.4 percent, as table 4 shows. Perhaps the most important implication of canals is that of the forward linkage, market integration. Quicker, more regular, more comprehensive and cheaper transport provides for the widening of markets, breakdown of local monopolies and other restrictions on competition, opening up of new areas to production and improved flows of information on which producers and markets rely. Wider markets create opportunity for larger-scale production and economies of scale. Greater regularity of transport services allows inventories to be reduced and therefore fixed capital can be turned into circular capital to finance expansion. This could lead to opportunities for geographical relocation, which may lead to a more flexible and efficient location of production. However, for canals, the impact was more localised. Turnbull emphasises this view for canals as most freight movement was over short distances and long hauls were restricted by the slow development of trunk routes. But it did enable the growth of regional manufacturing centres such as Leeds and Manchester. They also reduced transport costs, particularly on bulky items unsuited to fragile roads. Duckham estimates a saving of between 50 and 70 percent in the cost of transporting bulk goods. This fluctuated substantially according to distance travelled and the degree of transportation before and after the canal journey. Canals were also plagued by seasonal variation as they often froze in the winter creating further problems for their economic significance.
Moreover, Turnpike trusts (TPT), as the first transport system of the three, by definition had the greatest social savings as there was no substitute. However, due to lack of empirical evidence, we cannot calculate the social saving exactly. As turnpike trusts got rid of the free rider problem under the parish system whereby the people maintaining the roads (the parish residents) did not receive all the benefits, better roads were the result as externalities were internalised. This made it possible at the time for carriers to haul larger loads with less wear and tear on equipment and animals at a faster rate, thereby saving on variable costs so they could transport more intensively. Thus the TPT contributed to cheaper road transport as shown in Table 5. The fact that toll charges did not result in increased carriage charges shows that the levy imposed on average was more than compensated for by better facilities, which is a direct benefit of the TPT. This allowed a rising average rate of return from 3.74% in 1829 to 4.16% in 1837 which was always above the market rate of return of 3.3%. However, investors invested not so much for the direct benefits but the indirect benefits created by improved transport facilities which extended the market. Landowners benefited also from increased land values. The TPT also created other indirect benefits for the economy as a whole. They created more reliable linkages between towns as shown in maps 1 and 2; they created greater market integration (mainly on the local and regional scale) and created a larger market that thereby allowed greater specialisation and scale of production. This created savings due to things like reduced inventories and so freed capital for more productive uses as well as the breaking down of regional isolation.
In conclusion, we can say that in the period 1750-1860, the British economy clearly exploited a number of innovations that made transport much cheaper, which enabled the economy to lower its resource requirements and therefore expanded production possibilities. This is shown by Hawke's social savings calculations, which although flawed in some respects, are useful nonetheless. Furthermore, I believe that railways were not more important than canals or more significantly the turnpike trusts, as without the roads and canals, industrial towns like Manchester and Leeds could hardly have existed, as roads and canals were crucial for market integration, whereas the railway's main effect was to decrease costs. As Flinn observed, "the development of turnpike roads was preparatory to the subsequent industrial advance". Only when industry advanced in the period, the increased scale of transport requirements reduced the effectiveness of road transport and increased the importance of other forms of transport.