An efficient allocation of resources as defined by Pareto is an allocation such that the only way to make one individual better off is to make another worse off. A pure monopoly, which is a single supplier to a market, will not reach this outcome, unlike perfect competition that is synonymous with efficiency. This is because while they produce a level of output where marginal revenue equals marginal cost (provided they do not shut down), as a price maker they will introduce a wedge between marginal cost and the price. Hence the market will no longer convey accurate information about production costs and thus consumer decisions will no longer reflect true opportunity costs of production, as price no longer equals marginal cost, which leads to an inefficient allocation of resources. Essentially, the question we are asking is what are the factors affect the size of the wedge between marginal cost and price? In this essay I shall explore this question as well as explaining the theory behind why monopolies create inefficient resource allocations in greater depth in both a partial and general equilibrium setting using examples.
A monopolist, as a sole supplier, faces the market demand curve. Hence using their knowledge of the demand curve makes a decision of how much to produce. This then determines the price of the output. This is in stark contrast to the perfectly competitive firm's output decision, which has no effect on the good's output price. As the demand curve is therefore downward sloping, the marginal revenue curve no longer coincides with the demand curve. As a result of this a monopolist does not create an allocation efficient output. We can firstly see this in a partial equilibrium setting as shown in diagram 1. Under perfect competition, price will be equal to marginal cost and total surplus will be maximised, where total surplus is equal to consumer and producer surplus. Consequently it is efficient. However since the demand curve and marginal revenue curve no longer coincide the price will exceed marginal cost, as the amount of output produced will be restricted. Since consumers are induced to buy fewer than the efficient number of units, total surplus is reduced. However, to the monopolist, the income transfer from consumer to producer is improved, as they receive a higher price for goods the consumers still buy, hence capturing consumer surplus. However, there is also a deadweight loss, a loss for which there is no offsetting gain, as undoubtedly there are consumers who would willingly pay the marginal cost price, but the presence of the monopoly prevents this mutually beneficial transaction-taking place. As a result of the deadweight loss the monopoly is not 'Pareto efficient' as there could be a Pareto improvement, another allocation that would make both parties better off. However Harberger (1954) estimates that moving the economy back to the efficient level would be worth only 0.01% of national income (admittedly this was in the 1920s).
Building on the First Welfare theorem, 'As long as producers and consumers act as price takers and there is a Market for every commodity, the equilibrium allocation of resources is Pareto efficient." We can show that monopolies are Pareto inefficient in a general equilibrium setting. The main condition for Pareto efficiency is that consumers' common value of the marginal rate of substitution (MRS) of two goods will be equal to the marginal rate of transformation (MRT) of the same two goods. Equivalently, the rate at which one good can be transformed into another must equal the rate at which consumers are willing to trade one good for another. This is also known as allocative efficiency and encapsulates both productive and consumption efficiency. Moreover, it is possible to show that a necessary condition for allocation efficiency and therefore Pareto efficiency is that the ratio of prices of any two goods be equal to their marginal costs if we remember that the MRT is just the ratio of marginal cost and efficiency requires the MRT to equal the price ratio and assume that a firm is profit maximising and produces up to a point where price equals marginal cost. This is shown in the appendix. This means that the additional cost of commodity should be shown in its price. Hence if all other goods in the economy are sold in perfectly competitive markets where price equals marginal cost, then the monopolist violates this condition by setting price greater than marginal cost. The monopolist therefore violates the first welfare theorem by being a price maker. As a result, the marginal rate of substitution will no longer equal the marginal rate of transformation and the market will give consumers incorrect signals. We can now look at the factors that affect the degree to which price does not equal marginal cost in both a partial and general equilibrium.
By expressing the monopolist's marginal revenue curve in terms of elasticity, we can show that the monopolist's price mark-up, when marginal cost is equal to marginal revenue, is based on its marginal costs multiplied by a function of the price elasticity of demand curve that it faces in its market. This is shown in the appendix. Moreover we can say that this displays the degree of monopoly power, as it shows the extent to which price exceeds marginal cost. A monopolist will only produce where the price elasticity of the market demand curve is elastic. This is because where a product is inelastic, marginal revenue will be negative, and could therefore not be equated with marginal cost, which is always positive. This leads me to say that a monopolist will not produce a product that is infinitely price elastic. This is because it reduces the level of mark-up to nigh on zero, and therefore we are close to competitive equilibrium that is close to efficient. As a result, a monopolist will try and produce a product with price elasticity as close to but not 1, which maximises the mark up. These results are depicted in diagrams 2 and 3. Hence the mark-up and therefore monopoly power is inversely related to the elasticity of demand facing the firm. We must raise an important distinction here however. Seeing as there are few actual pure monopolies in the world today, one could think of only Cadbury's chocolate being available in the London Underground although examples in the past included public utilities, but these industries have since been privatised and opened to competition, we can look at monopolistic competition with a few competitors for examples. Hence we are looking at the firm specific demand curve.
The first factor that affects the firm's price elasticity of demand is the elasticity of market demand. If there is only one firm then its demand curve is the market demand curve and hence its market power depends completely on the elasticity of market demand. What affects this? Normally, the availability of close substitutes has an impact; however, one of the assumptions related to monopolies is that there are no close substitutes, seeing as there is only one firm in the market. In a wider scope, there may be competitors, for instance the post office may have a monopoly over posting, but it is unable to control the cost of email, so the price of postage may be price elastic. In a monopolistic market, where there are a few competitors, another factor is the size of the consumers' budget that the good takes up. The smaller the portion of the budget, the smaller the price elasticity, for instance a pin manufacturer is unlikely to see its sales fall if it increases prices. On the other hand, if there is more than one firm in the market, the market demand curve provides a lower bound to the firm's elasticity of demand. Therefore if a market is particularly elastic, with a large number of substitutes such as coffee or tin, producers will find it difficult to raise price above marginal cost. Conversely, inelastic products such as oil, have a larger potential for monopoly power, as the oil cartel OPEC showed in the 1970s and 80s where prices were raised far in excess of marginal cost.
The second factor that affects the monopoly power is the number of firms in the market. As the number of firms increases, the monopoly power of a firm falls ceteris peribus. However, what also matters is the number of 'major players' in a market. A market that has one firm which accounts for over 90 percent of sales, with another 20 accounting for the rest is said to be highly concentrated as the large firm will therefore still have monopoly power. This is the case in the computer operating systems market with Microsoft. Markets with few players will always fear competition, as this will increase elasticity and push the price toward marginal cost. Hence barriers to entry that prevent competition are important. There are two types of barriers to entry. Firstly there are legal barriers to entry. These are government granted monopoly positions and include legal protection of a product technology by patent or copyright. The basic technology is assigned to one firm uniquely and is protected from imitation creating an artificial monopoly. An example of this is Disney animated movies. A second example of a legal barrier to entry is the awarding of an exclusive franchise to serve a market. A good recent example of this is Virgin trains buying the franchise to cross country rail services after privatisation of the national rail network in Britain. The argument put forward for these is that the industry in question is a natural monopoly. This means that average cost is diminishing over a broad range of output levels and minimum average cost can be achieved only by organising the industry as a monopoly. Natural monopolies are also an example of the second type of barrier, technical barriers to entry. The technology of production will make a large scale firm a low cost producer. This will allow a firm to drive others out by cutting prices. It also deters entry, as any new producer producing small amounts of output will have relatively high average costs. Other technical barriers to entry include ownership of unique resources such as the De Beer diamond cartel in Africa or the knowledge of a low cost production technique.
Finally and possibly the most important factor in determining market power is the interaction between firms in a market. While this is irrelevant in a pure monopoly, in a monopolistic market this is very important. If firms compete aggressively, then often prices can be driven down to near competitive levels. Conversely, if the firms do not compete, or even collude (which is now illegal under anti-trust laws), the firms may limit output and therefore raise prices. Therefore when firms co-operate monopoly power is larger. Monopoly power can also change over time. OPEC enjoyed considerable short term but much less long run monopoly power as in the short run the demand was more inelastic than in the long run when more energy alternatives such as wind and tidal power were created. Moreover, short run monopoly power can make an industry more competitive and therefore more efficient in the long run as large short run profits can induce new firms to enter, thereby decreasing monopoly power and therefore inefficiency in the longer term.
We can also look at factors that affect the general equilibrium. While I said previously that a profit maximising monopolist is production efficient, it is possible that a monopolist may not face pressure to maximise profits and pursues other goals, perhaps because there is no competition in their market. Hence the management will have no incentive to use inputs in the most inefficient way, which could result in production inefficiency, as the management will not set equal the MRTS of any two inputs with their respective prices.
A monopolist can also violate Pareto efficiency if they discriminate between customers. This means that different consumers face different prices for the same good. As a single price for a good is not charged to all consumers, hence the equilibrium MRS will not be the same across all consumers. Under price discrimination, the monopolist will try to charge individuals according to their maximum willingness to pay. However under perfect (first degree) price discrimination each unit is sold at a price just equal to the consumer's maximum willingness to pay for that unit. As a result it is efficient as there is no deadweight loss, as diagram 2 shows (as the monopolist maximises total surplus, which is also producer surplus, since the monopolist captures all consumer surplus). However this is very rare since it is difficult for a firm to find an individual's exact maximum willingness to pay. In 2 nd degree price discrimination, the price per unit depends on quantity purchased, so the welfare effects are complex and depend on the particular scheme but usually lead to below efficient levels of output being produced. In 3 rd degree, the monopolist charges different prices to different groups of consumers according to their characteristics. This can lead to an increase or a decrease in total output. Since we know that a non-discriminating monopolist allocates inefficiently among consumers (which therefore lowers surplus), a decrease in output will always exacerbate inefficiency by lowering total surplus even more. However an increase, while still being consumption inefficient, may increase or decrease total surplus, as the output that is produced is allocated inefficiently but there is more of it. The result depends on the markets in question. Moreover, total output is less than the efficient amount. This is true since the firm restricts output in each market segment, and therefore as it has a monopolistic restriction in each individual market, collectively it sells too little output.
Government?
In conclusion, we can say that a market with a monopoly or monopolistic competition will be inefficient in both partial and general equilibrium due to the fact that price is set above marginal cost. However, if a firm perfectly price discriminates, then the monopoly is efficient. This is unlikely as it is difficult to work out consumers' maximum willingness to pay. Moreover, essentially the degree to which a monopoly is associated with inefficient resource allocation in a partial setting and to a lesser extent in a general setting depends on the degree to which the firm is able to make price exceed marginal cost, which equivalently depends on the price elasticity of demand. This is the market elasticity if it is a pure monopoly, and the firm specific elasticity if there is more than one firm. The elasticity of demand for the market depends on things like the amount of the household budget the good takes, while the firm specific elasticity depends on a number of factors such as the number of firms in the market and the interaction between firms. Monopolies may also cause an inefficient allocation of resources if a firm price discriminates or if the management of the firm do not pursue profit maximisation as an aim. However, the extent to which this is associated with inefficient allocations depends on the particular type of price discrimination.