Stabilisation policy is "short term intervention by the Government, either to counter balance some trend in an economic variable or to speed up (slow down) its natural time path". It is used because economic variables such as output and unemployment in the short term deviate from their long-term natural and potential rates, creating a so-called business cycle. The source of these deviations and therefore the way the Government responds to them leaves a lot to argue about. Keynesian economists, building on Keynes' General Theory in 1936 argue that the economy is naturally unstable and that the economy experiences frequent shocks to aggregate supply and demand. Thus policy makers should use fiscal and monetary policy to stabilise the economy to prevent unnecessary fluctuations in output, unemployment and inflation. On the other hand, classical economists and monetarists, such as Milton Friedman and Robert Lucas argue that the economy is inherently stable and blame bad economic policy for fluctuations. They imply that policy makers should not try and tweak the economy and instead be satisfied if they do no harm. Hence in this essay I shall argue why in theory policy should be used in the economy. I shall also outline the limitations and why it should not be used, before concluding as to the extent to which policy should be used to stabilise the economy drawing examples from the UK.
According to Keynesians, as output begins to deviate from potential output, you should use contractionary monetary or fiscal policy if it begins to rise above Y*, or expansionary monetary or fiscal policy if it begins to fall below Y*. We can use the IS-LM and AS-AD models to show how shocks affect the economy.
Keynesians work under a fixed price framework, which is true in the short term due wage and price rigidities such as menu costs. Keynes advocated the use of demand management policies to stabilise the economy and keep it at full employment and therefore close to potential output. Hence they believe that by increasing Government spending, decreasing taxes and by decreasing interest rates, recessions can be averted. Say for instance there was a demand shock, like a crisis in consumer confidence in a major trading partner like the United States in late 2001, due to the collapse in share valuations, the slump in the Information Communications Technology sector and the wider fall out after the events of September 2001. As a result demand for British exports fell and this had an adverse effect on aggregate demand, as shown in the IS-LM diagram (figure 2) and the AS-AD diagram (figure 1). It has been said that the effects of this depression in the US on the UK were mitigated by the decrease in interest rates in the UK using monetary expansion, from 5% in September 2001, to 4% in November 2001 and the whole of 2002, thus increasing output back to a higher amount (figure 3). This shows that stabilisation policy can be used to offset the effects of economic shocks.
Keynesians therefore claim that monetary and more specifically fiscal policy can be successfully used to stabilise the economy. This applies more where we have a flat LM and a steep IS. Fiscal policy is therefore much more effective than monetary policy as changes in the money supply generate only small changes in the interest rate, therefore exerting only a small impact on aggregate demand, as shown in figure 4. This was encapsulated in the UK's policy of stabilisation in the 1950s, which focused on fiscal policy, which produced limited success as outlined later. However, as monetarist theory began to increase in credibility, which applies more where the LM curve was steep and IS flat (figure 5), and as inflation took off and public debt increased in the 1970s, there was an increasing shift towards monetary policy in the 1980s as a tool for stabilisation, (changes in monetary supply have a strong influence on aggregate demand in this setting). Nevertheless, this did not produce widespread success. In 1984, the Governments macroeconomic policy, as outlined by the then chancellor Nigel Lawson, "was to keep inflation low by controlling the growth of the money supply". However, although this looked good in theory, in fact it failed to have the desired effect, as policy makers neglected the impact of institutional changes (e.g. financial deregulation in 1979 and 1986) on the relationship between money supply and prices. Consequently the policies created uncertainty rather than stabilisation. Hence moving on from monetarists, neo-classical economists claim that stabilisation policy should not be used, with the reasons being outlined below.
With regards to the drawbacks in using policy, there are many. Firstly, there are lags in the implementation and the resulting effects of policies. Lags are difficult to predict. There are two types of lag, inside which refers to the time between a shock and the policy action responding to it and outside which refers to the time between a policy action and its influence on an economy. In the UK, inside lags with fiscal policy tend to be shorter due to the parliamentary system in place which enables the ruling party to enact ruling changes quicker than say the US which requires the approval of both the president and both houses of congress. Nevertheless the fact that it has to go through a legislative process and also must go through the relevant department (for example the treasury) means that it could take a year to 18 months to go through in the UK. However, with regard to monetary policy, the independence of the Bank of England allows it to have a short inside lag as bonds can be sold and bought instantaneously, therefore influencing money supply and consequently interest rates quickly. However the outside lags tend to be longer as firms tend to make investment plans far in advance, although some effects can be felt quicker. Fiscal outside lags tend to be quicker, especially when automatic stabilisers are put into place. For example income tax systems automatically reduce taxes when the economy goes into recession, without having to change tax laws, as people pay less as their incomes fall into lower tax brackets, thereby giving them more disposable income to spend to increase demand.
As stabilisation policy can take a long time to be put into practise and take effect, stabilisation policy that will be successful requires accurate predictions of future economic performance. However this is very difficult, as the predictions of the 1991 UK recession show in figure 6. As you can see economists have frequently under or over predicted. Economists find it easy to predict a few weeks in advance or many years in advance, but in between it is difficult and also turning points in the economy are difficult to predict with accuracy. This means that any concretionary (or "cooling") policy when an economy is in a boom may make any subsequent depression worse or vice versa with a depression.
When using different models to evaluate the impacts of different policies, it is important to be cautious. This is because there is so much we do not know about the science of Economics, hence economists can never be completely confident when analysing the effects of different policies. However, although there is much we do not know, Robert Lucas, one of the chief critics of Keynesian demand management, emphasised the role of expectations in the economy. For instance, household spending depends on expectations of a number of factors, such as policy, economic conditions and such like. He argued that traditional methods of policy analysis, such as those which used standard macroeconomic models like the Philips curve, did not take into account the impact of policy on expectations. This is known as the Lucas critique. For example, take the policy of disinflation like that in the UK in the 1980s. The cost of disinflation is measured by the sacrifice ratio, which is the number of percentage points of GDP that must be forgone to reduce inflation by 1 percentage point. Traditionally estimates of the sacrifice ratio are based on adaptive expectations. Under adaptive expectations, the Phillips curve, which originally displayed the relationship between inflation and unemployment rates, predicts that to reduce inflation you must increase unemployment. However, although adaptive expectations may be useful under some circumstances, under rational expectations, if policy makers make a credible change in policy towards disinflation, workers and firms will downwardly adjust their inflation expectations without a large increase in unemployment and therefore high sacrifice ratio. This shows that policymaking and its analysis is hard and policy makers must take everything into account when making decisions.
Credibility is therefore extremely important in whether stabilisation policy should be used, as by making credible policy changes, will mean decision makers will adjust the expectations quicker and the cost of policy is lower. Hence political arguments come into play, as political cycles are shorter than business cycles, hence a politician may promise a policy that will deliver low inflation pre-election, but deliver high inflation hence creating credibility problems in the future and therefore stabilisation problems. The problem of credibility is illustrated in the late 1980s, where credibility was not established properly as policy makers failed to take account of the effects of the economic cycle on the fiscal position. Hence, fiscal policy became a destabilising influence, rather than a stabilising one. For example, in 1987, the Government lowered taxes even though the economy was already overheating.
Within the classical dichotomy, changes in monetary supply do not change real variables in the long run
. This is known as money neutrality, as it will change nominal variables like prices but not alter real variables. Lucas also hypothesised within his Misperceptions model that monetary policy could stabilise output only if policy makers have information that is not available to everyone else because otherwise people's expectations will alter immediately under the rational expectations hypothesis. In other words only unexpected policy changes will have "real" effects and change the level of output. This relies on the rational expectations theory above, which to an extent may be true, but how are we to know that economic agents will use all the information available in the best possible way. Also, monetary policy is ineffective where inflation is low or close to zero, as you cannot achieve the negative real interest rates needed to stimulate the economy. This is the so-called liquidity trap, of which Japan has fallen into. This is shown in figure 7.
Finally, we can look at the historical experience of stabilisation policy in the UK. In the 1950s and 60s, the UK's economic objective was to "maintain a high and stable level of employment", thereby meaning as close as possible to potential output. During much of this period, up until the end of fixed exchange rates in the early 70s, the main purpose of fiscal policy was to stimulate domestic demand during lulls in demand to meet the objective of full employment such as by increasing investment in public works and also restrain the economy when demand was too high to avoid balance of payments and currency crises as prices and wages started to rise. However this ran into problems, because as every upturn effectively caused prices and wages to rise, there was no downward flexibility in wages and prices in the downturn because it is difficult to persuade people to have lower wages. Consequently, there were balance of payments problems throughout the 1950s and 60s thus hampering the use of fiscal policy for stabilisation. To an extent the domestic aim of full employment conflicted with the aim of a fixed exchange rate. This illustrates the point that stabilisation policy is difficult and every aspect must be taken into consideration, while also showing that stabilisation policy is difficult to use in tandem with other objectives as it often conflicts with other objectives.
In conclusion, it is difficult to say which side is correct. On the one hand, we have the Keynesians who claim that, within their short-term fixed-price model that policy can be used to stabilise the economy. On the other we have the classical theorists, who say that policy has a negligible impact on output within a flexible price framework. I think stabilisation policy could have a role to play, but within certain rules, such as Gordon Brown's golden rule of 1997, which stipulates, "government may only borrow to invest over the course of an economic cycle", as otherwise aims and objectives within governments may conflict and hinder the ability of policy to stabilise the economy. It is important to take all factors into consideration when deciding on the extent to which policy can be used to stabilise the economy, such as the reaction of expectations and foreign economies to policy and the situation of the economy (like a liquidity trap, which would prevent the use of monetary policy). In reality, we are seeing that governments are increasingly looking towards discretionary fiscal policy within rules to help stabilise the economy (partly due to the improving budget situation), showing that there is a belief that policy to some extent can be used to stabilise the economy.