There are a number of suggested determinants of exam performance that have been put forward by economists and people in other fields of research over the years. For instance Romer suggests class attendance has a significant impact on exam performance, while Siegfried and Strand suggest sex has a significant impact. In this project I shall firstly analyse various factors that affect exam performance using statistical techniques such as means, medians, correlations and such like in question 1 using data from a survey of second year econometrics students. I shall then regress and analyse certain factors in subsequent questions before concluding in question 6 as to my preferred model of exam performance.
Table 1 indicates some descriptive statistics about exam performance. We can see that the mean mark is 64.93%. The range is from a minimum of 9% to a maximum of 95% and the standard deviation is 13.07%. We can also see from graph 1, that the data is slightly negatively skewed, with the median, 65%, above the mean, indicating that there are more higher marks than low ones. However it is approximately normally distributed. To make some comments about these results, we need to break this up into sub-samples. Firstly we can break it up according to sex, as Siegfried and Strand did. For males, table 2 shows that the mean score is 65.4%, which is higher than the corresponding score for females of 63.75%. This agrees with Siegfried and Strand's paper which claims males do better than females. However, the standard deviation for males is lower than for females, 12.64% compared to 14.02%. This indicates greater variation in the data, which may be due to the fact that there are more males than females. We can test whether this is significant difference using the difference in means test as shown in formula 1 appendix 1. Unfortunately, we cannot reject the null that there is no difference at the 10% level, indicating little difference between males and females. We can also break up the samples according to year. Here we find that the highest mean mark is in 2002, at 69.27%. The lowest is in 2001, at 61.71%, with 1999 at 66.85% and 2000 at 62.7%. This is not surprising, given that in 2002, an A level in maths became a prerequisite for straight economics. The standard deviations also vary, being 12.28%, 13.75%, 12.97% and 10.37% for the 1999 to 2002 respectively. This indicates that the variation has decreased over the past 3 years. The range has also changed (i.e. maximum-minimum) as shown in table 3. This may be due to fewer anomalies in certain years, or generally better performance over the four years, as the minimum is highest in 2002 at 45%.
The student's course should also have an impact. For instance a person doing Maths and Economics should in theory get a higher mark in a statistics exam as they are from a mathematical background. Table 4 shows that Maths and Economics students scored the highest on average, although the sample was only 3, so these could be anomalies. The lowest mean mark was for industrial economics, which is slightly surprising given the large amount of mathematical content in the course. However, this may be because the lowest mark in the survey, 9/100 is in this group and this is dragging the average down. Standard deviations also vary considerably across groups from 15.23 in industrial economics, to 9.44 in Economics and Politics.
We can also search for other factors that influence exam performance by looking at correlations, cross plots of data sets and correlation. Firstly, we can look at the impact of attendance. Looking at table 4, which shows the cross correlation between a number of variables, we can see that attendance of lectures and classes has a positive linear relationship with exam mark, albeit a small one, while attendance of revision lectures has a nigh on 0 linear relationship with exam score. It is also interesting that lecture and class attendance are positively correlated as well as a number of other explanatory variables; this may become important in the regression as multicollinearity may affect the results subsequently. These results are shown in the cross plots of the 3 explanatory variables with exam score in graphs two to four. The covariance between the variables also indicates the above as shown in table 5, but correlation is a better indicator because it is not affected by the units of variables. In all cases we can see that there is little linear correlation, the highest correlation is 0.65 between lecture and class attendance, perhaps indicating that other factors can explain exam performance better or that a non-linear model may be a better indicator of the relationship. Also looking at table 4, we can see other variables that have an impact upon exam performance, such as number of A-levels and A's at A-level. These two variables have correlations of 0.20 and 0.25 respectively. This is to be expected, since having more A-levels is a good proxy in my view for intelligence, therefore it should improve your mark. In fact the mean number of A-levels was 3.72 and mean number of A's was 3.06. The latter of these results may be an overestimate though; as for some reason someone has 87 As at A-level, which is impossible! However the correlations are only small. This is again shown in graphs 5 and 6, which show cross plots of the two variables with exam mark.
Alternative factors that I believe would affect a student's performance are variables such as expenditure on food and alcohol. The mean amount of food and alcohol purchased per week was 33.9 and 26.97, so nearly as much is spent on alcohol as food. Furthermore the minimum value is 0 for both (difficult to believe) and maximum 140 and 150 respectively. I would have thought would have a positive and negative effect respectively. However, according to tables 8 and 9, both have negative correlations and co variances. Perhaps eating less food and less alcohol would therefore lead to better marks. Again however, these correlations are low.
On average, the students in the survey spent 16.9, 3.62 and 15.2 hours studying all subjects per week, statistics per week and statistics in the week before the exam respectively. They have large standard deviations at 12.33, 3.46 and 14.54 hours respectively which reflect great variation in the amount of work students undertake. I would also believe that these would have a large positive correlation. In fact looking at table 8 we find that in all cases the linear correlation is small and positive, with the largest positive effect being on the amount of hours spent studying statistics per week at 0.086.
Other features of the data that I think are useful are the facts that 51% of the students have parents that work in a maths or economics related field and also the mean number of parents that went to university for a student is 1.04, reflecting that many students have a parent of an academic background. Furthermore, 40.6% of students surveyed went to a sixth form college, 72.2% went to a mixed school, while 52.2% went to a public or fee paying school Also 67% of students are from the UK as opposed to being foreign.
To investigate whether there are differences in performance between the sub-sample of 2002 students and previous year's students I have created intercept dummy variables and added them to the original equation, as shown by equations 1 and 2 in appendix 3. The first equation is known as the restricted equation, as opposed to the unrestricted model in equation 2, because it imposes the F-test null hypothesis (see hypothesis 4, appendix 3) on equation 2. Hence in equation 2, the intercept is allowed to vary whereas it is not allowed to equation 1 and is assumed to be constant in all years.
In question 3 we were testing that the intercepts are constant, while in question 4 we are testing that all the coefficients, both slope and intercept, are constant. Therefore to test the hypothesis that only the slope coefficients are constant we have to do the opposite of what we were doing in question 3 and in effect test the model we gave in question 3 against question 4. To do this we have to create slope dummy variables, to model the separate regressions for each year as in question 4. This creates the following restricted and unrestricted models. Effectively the restricted model of question 3 is just the unrestricted model of question 4 but with the interactive dummies being set to 0 so the slopes cannot vary.
Unrestricted
Restricted
Given my results from previous questions and previous research, I am now going to try and formulate a model of exam performance, firstly by trying different variables and then trying various functional forms. The best fitting model should balance off a low residual sum of squares, which is essentially the proportion of the exam mark not explained by the model and a high R, which is the proportion of the variance in exam mark explained by the model. Therefore as a result you should get high and significant t-tests on your individual coefficients and a significant f-test of the joint explanatory power of the model.
Romer (1993) claims that class attendance has a significant impact upon exam performance. Class attendance was also significant in this assignment in question 2b, hence I believe it should be included within the model. Another variable I shall include is lecture attendance, which should increase your grasp of the subject and therefore improve your mark, although this is not significant in question 2b (however it is significant in question 3). I shall also include the number of A's at Alevel as this is a good measure of intelligence as well as motivation, which Devadoss and Foltz claim are important. Also I have included how many of the parents attended university, as I think in theory if both parents have gone to university the environment within which the student has worked would be more helpful to develop the student, and will therefore be a more intelligent student. I also included a an intercept dummy to show whether the student has done maths A-level, as this shows aptitude for the subject seeing as the majority of maths A-levels contain some statistics.
Looking at table 1 of appendix 6, we find that 3 out of the 6 coefficients on the variables are significant at the 0.01% level, if we test each of them with a t-test. Lectures attendance and A's at Alevel are not even significant at the 10% level. Hence, I then tried the model with different functional forms, before coming across my final model of exam performance below.