'The German invasion, launched at dawn on Sunday 22 June 1941, caught the Red Army almost fatally unprepared and the Soviet Union suffered catastrophic defeats." How was it possible for Soviet Russia to survive and defeat Germany? Many historians argue it was the power and morale of the people that lead to the victory. For example, Chris Ward says 'to put it another way the Great Patriotic War should be characterised as a people's war." How valid is this claim?
When Germany attacked Moscow in 1941, it appeared that Stalin immediately gave up. In 1988 Aleksei Kosygin said that 'office doors swung open, papers blew around and rustled underfoot, everywhere phones were ringing...in the absence of clear information rumours and alarms swept through the city and people began to take matters into their own hands." Looting and rioting begun, order was collapsing. Stalin first addressed the nation after the attack on July 3 rd and order was regained. This illustrates that left to their own devises the Russian people could not defend the capital.
The government created an efficient wartime economy. 'The war years witnessed the greatest triumph of Soviet planning." Almost 1,500 factories were moved in two months and 3,500 big new factories were built from scratch during the war. Also, by 1945 Russia had more railway lines operating than at any time in their history. This required mass organisation and money. At its peak, more than half the national income was devoted to armaments. Workers had to be housed and fed in 'towns whose size tripled overnight." Work to complete the factories continued into the freezing night, requiring incredible endurance and therefore it is down to the Russian people that relocation and production were successful. 'In World War II the Soviet economy supplied the eastern front with tens of millions of soldiers and weapons. These soldiers and weapons destroyed Hitler's dream of a German empire in Europe." Rearmament was very fast. Munitions output doubled in 1942 and peaked in 1944. Soviet production, during the war, amounted to 100,000 tanks, 130,000 aircrafts, 800,000 field guns, half a billion artillery shells, 1.4 million machine guns, six million machine pistols and twelve million rifles. This meant the army had a much superior quantity of equipment to the Axis powers. 'What won the war for the Allies, in the end, was their ability to produce munitions in greater - much greater - quantity than Germany and Japan." According to some historians, although the quality was similar, the sheer volume of products won the war for Russia. The volume of products created can be attributed to the hard work of the Soviet people, but also the Soviet government for organising the production line so effectively.
As well as demands on the economy increasing, so did demands on the countryside. There was re-collectivisation and in 1942 new minimum work days and extended hours with mandatory three hours overtime were introduced. However, at the same time government relaxed many farming industry rules. People could take their own initiative, which they did, illustrating that the in some aspects the people's effort won the war.
However, it could be argued that the Russian people were a resource; it was up to the government to use them efficiently. Without the government the people had no central control and thus no chance of organising themselves effectively in defence of Russia. The Soviet regime disregarded morals, was ruthless and used harsh repression to keep order during the war. If a minority were seen as siding with Germany then the whole community where the minority lived would be deported. The state would punish any soldiers who abandoned their positions. Absenteeism and lateness in defence industry factories were seen as crimes and mass overtime was demanded from offenders. Offenders could also be imprisoned from five to eight years. 'Brute force was applied, and not only to the enemy." Another way in which the state controlled the Russian people was concealing information from the public.
Similarly, there obviously cannot be a state without people, the people make the government's policies happen. Thus although the government made new policies of production and had the ideas of creating new factories, the Russian people fulfilled these policies, which was the key to winning the war.
The motivation of the Russian people is important to consider. Many historians believe that the cult of Stalin's personality was vital in this. Some historians consider that the Soviet Union won against Germany because of Stalin. 'Some credit for the Soviet Union's ultimate victory undoubtedly belongs to Stalin. He learnt from his mistakes....he demoted incompetent cronies from the Civil War period....he gradually mastered complex areas of strategy and logic." Not only was he a great patriotic leader, but also his industrialisation and rearmament policies were seen as successful. However, others suggest that 'perhaps, if a different policy had been followed, the Germans would not have got as far as Stalingrad." However, Stalin's ability to raise morale and install nationalism should not be underestimated. He was always in propaganda in officer's uniform and was seen as the protector of Russia, a symbol of ultimate power. He was vital to winning the war because he raised patriotism and was seen as a father figure to the nation. In the Great Patriotic War, socialism and communism were forgotten. The state emphasised that it was a fight for Russia as a nation. 'It is necessary to give the party organs who carried out their ideological work their due. They reacted quickly to the mood of the people." Stalin appealed backwards to the great Princes, such as Alexander Nevsky and great leaders, such as Lenin to gain a sense of patriotism in Russia. Also, people genuinely wanted to believe that there was hope of victory; Stalin gave them this hope. 'During the war years, as the Soviet people were battered by unbelievable miseries, the name of Stalin and faith in him to some degree pulled the Soviet people together, giving them hope of victory." The cult of Stalin's personality may help to explain how the population survived the horrific invasion of Operation Barbarossa, then endured the hardships of war and come out victorious. Popular belief in Stalin would have made people work harder, more bravely and obey orders. Support for Stalin is believed to have been greater amongst the armed forces over the civilians. Propaganda in the army was more intense. Pictures of Stalin could be seen in army camps. However, naturally there were civilians and soldiers who remained hostile to Stalin and blamed him for the war. Another way the government tried to raise morale and nationalism was through the reintroduction of the Orthodox Church. Religion provided a sense of national pride. This is illustrated in The People's War, which talks about an SD's description of a Minsk clergyman as 'the best propagandist for the German issue." However, this clergyman changed to support Stalin when Stalin altered his strategy toward the church, meaning support for the Soviet Union was dramatically raised when linked with the church. This is again a combination of government and Soviet people securing war success.
Patriotism was not just forced upon the nation by the government. The role of spontaneous Soviet patriotism should not be underestimated; there is a clear capacity amongst the Russian people for self-sacrifice. For example, 'soldiers staying put in their trenches while the heavy German tanks were sweeping across them, and then firing them from behind.'
The effort of the individual soldier was also vital. Every soldier had a struggle for survival. Propaganda was successful in installing national pride and hatred of the Nazis, which gave people motivation to fight and people were prepared to work harder and longer hours. People believed they were fighting for a better future for Russia, they wanted to escape the Great Terror. The people were highly motivated to win.
Similarly, the role of Russian women is important when considering the Russian people's role in the war. 800,000 young girls and women mobilised in Russia after Operation Barbarossa. They fought hand-to-hand combat as well as the traditional role of cooks and nurses. John Erickson argues that 'there are countless accounts of women's courage and self-sacrifice in the early defeats of Soviet forces." Women also went down mines and worked in heavy industry, all for the war effort. 'The physical labour was demanding and exhausting." Women's industrial training expanded and so did the discipline. For example, in Leningrad 500 housewives began work in the Kirov Factory and in Moscow 374,000 housewives begun factory work in August 1941. There was a high demand for war materials, but the total 'manpower' fell by twenty six million. So 800,000 people, including housewives and pensioners, joined the war economy effort by joining a mass voluntary movement at the start of the war. People contributed more to the war victory than the government. Often miners' wives volunteered for work in the mines. However, the Soviet Manpower Committee soon set up compulsory labour forces moving people from light to heavy industries, which means maybe it was government intervention that led to the mass economic production.
Ward argues that the Great Patriotic War as a social event, rather than political, military or economic, is largely undiscovered. 'During and even after the war, virtually the entire Soviet population was united by the drive to expel the Germans." For example, town squares were used to grow vegetables to feed soldiers and factory workers. Anything was done to help the war effort. Also, in the towns under siege there was barely anything to eat. People ate anything edible such as wallpaper paste; people were highly motivated to survive. Food rations were later introduced to help people get by, therefore there was some government intervention. Acton argues that 'the supreme test of civilian morale and resilience was the 900 day siege of Leningrad. Although engulfed by hunger, cold, lice and death, the city refused to surrender.'
A way in which the government won the war was by using some previous experience to their advantage. After the attack on Finland in 1939, Semen Timoshenko became Defence Commissar. He implemented a new army training programme, however, the army leadership remained hopelessly disorientated and the strategic thinking remained largely unchanged, which is why the front line units were badly prepared in June 1941. The Red Army performed very badly in the Finnish War despite the fact that they well out numbered the Finnish soldiers. 'Still, individual Red Army soldiers and units displayed remarkable courage and determination. The Finns were deeply impressed with the Soviet soldier's spirit." The Red Army in 1941 to 1942 still lacked training and equipment, so as in 1939, the soldiers fighting at the front line simply put all their energy into their efforts to fight. This shows that it was the people that won the war.
However, even in the chaos of Operation Barbarossa the system had the ability to mobilise, which is a positive attribute of the government. The government had bred a society who could cope with chaos. The 1930s Five Year Plan had created industrial chaos, this meant that the country was able to cope with the chaos of war. This was known as a constant state of emergency. This means that the war was won by the government's policies, not the people, although the people are obviously involved in these policies.
The aid Russia received from Britain and America was vital in the Russian victory over Germany. The money they provided helped feed the Red Army and they provided raw material for military equipment. However, many historians argue that the Russian's victory 'must be attributed solely to the Soviet people and to the iron nerve of Stalin, Zhukov, Shaposhnikov, Vasievsky and their subordinates.'
In addition, the role of Hitler must not be ignored when evaluating how Russia won the war. Hitler aimed to defeat an enemy whose industrial output was already comparable to Germany and whose population was twice the size. Also, Hitler's armies were not ready for a winter campaign, thus they were ill-equipped to fight in Russian winter conditions. Germany had not defeated Britain when she attacked Russia and Hitler joined Japan against America before securing reciprocal support from the Japanese against Russia, showing that Germany got caught in a war on many fronts, lessening their chance of victory. In addition, Hitler had unforced errors of racial policy, which led to flaws in Hitler's war effort against Russia.
Overall, it appears that the morale of the people kept the war effort going. Although the government created the policies during the war and provided leadership, there is only so far that a government can go without the support of their people. Read discusses the movement of factories in Russia and says 'there was no way such tasks could have been achieved simply by pressing buttons at the centre. Immense hard work, dangerous and slow railway journeys (were required)." The Russian people seemed to truly believe they could win the war and thought they would have a better future if they won. Thus refused to give up through all the hardship they suffered. Garrard and Garrard conclude that 'this after all, was a "people's war" not a "Party war".'