Quality is defined as the
As has already been identified in the case study, the cost of not meeting customer expectations is very expensive. The cost of reworking and customer returns is estimated at 12,000. However this is just the pinnacle of quality costs when you consider, for instance the actual cost of excess materials allowances and such like. A good way of showing this is Harrison's (1992) non-conformance iceberg, which explains that things at the bottom of the iceberg, while being more difficult to measure, are in fact the most important. Financially, therefore quality is very important.
Should quality be up to sufficient standard, it could lead to increased margins, since costs can be visibly reduced. In fact, according to McKinsey and Company (1989), "the feasible improvement in gross margin on sales through improved quality performance was rated at an average of 17%" (Dale 2001:15). Not only this, but high quality products can also improve revenues. In this market it is clear that along with the design of the products, quality is one of the main variables that can help distinguish EHL from its competition, a unique selling point of sorts, therefore meaning it can gain competitive advantage. Moreover, according to the Strategic Planning Institute, high quality can lead to a higher market share.
The case study itself outlines a couple of factors that could be causing the quality problems at EHL, such as the switch over to batch production. It is understandable that such a major change in the manufacturing process would have a large affect on short-term quality. However, there are a number of other problems that I feel that EHL does not seem to have addressed.
According to Feigenbaum (1991), the quality of products is directly influenced in nine areas, in what he calls the 9Ms of 'Markets, Money, Management, Men, Motivation, Materials, Machines and Mechanization'. Using this basis I have constructed a fishbone diagram below which can be used to delve into the problems at EHL. I have used this to form my explanations below.
Firstly, there is the wage system that is in place at EHL, which is of the piece rate format (i.e. wages are paid per product produced rather than an hourly or weekly wage). I think that this type of system encourages workers to produce as much as they possibly can, rather than focusing on the quality of the product, which is so important to EHL. This may be contributing to workers not actually caring about their work. Furthermore, "research today has shown that in addition to monetary reward, today's workers require reinforcement of a sense of accomplishment in their jobs and the positive recognition that they are personally contributing to the achievement of company goals". There is clearly little empowerment within the firm. The new system of batch production is not helping this either, as this meant a more standardized production which reduces the skill required on the part of employee. Workers are unlikely to be happy with a move to a more unskilled type of labour as it reduces the amount of control they have on their output (as well as the satisfaction in producing output).
Moreover, there is no communication within the firm emphasizing the need for quality consciousness, which would also help motivation as the standard worker would see that everyone is involved. There seems to be a lack of a quality standard within the firm as indicated by the senior shop foreman pointing to the fact that there was no definition of a scratch.
The disagreements between the production director and the senior shop foreman seem to indicate a lack of cohesiveness within the firm. The organization as a whole is not pulling in the same direction in order to reach a common goal, that of quality and therefore profit maximization. Whether the apparent stand off between the two is caused by this or a deeper disagreement is open to question, but there is no-doubt that the lack of cohesiveness can lead to disagreements and therefore affect the quality of the work and hence cause further disagreements, a kind of vicious circle. I notice that the quality assurance department only has responsibility for work leaving the final polishing process which is right at the end of the production process. By doing this they ignore the fact that a company does not just have external customers, it has internal customers too. This compounds disagreements and the lack of cohesiveness as no one knows who to blame for problems in quality coming to them.
Finally, there is clearly an emphasis on checking things AFTER they have gone through the system. Therefore there is not enough emphasis on getting things right first time. Moreover, the whole point of this exercise is detection. From my view there is not enough emphasis on prevention, which would allow quality savings.
Looking at the problems identified in question two, it is clear that EHL has some serious underlying problems, particularly the whole company's attitude towards quality in general.
I would recommend a move to a Total Quality Management approach to quality to improve quality performance at EHL. It is one of the dominant modes of organizing operations performance. I must stress the TOTAL in TQM as everyone has to be involved in the overhaul. TQM involves seeing things from a customer's point of view. Customers are seen as the most important part of the organization rather than external to the organization. One of the most important aspects of TQM is the concept of internal customer and supplier, as everyone is a supplier and consumer within the organization. To ensure that external customers are happy, it is important to push the idea that every part of the firm and therefore every internal supplier contributes to this by ensuring the satisfaction of internal customers. EHL could do this by making each part of the manufacturing process stipulate what their and their customer's requirements are.
Building on the problems EHL have experienced, TQM is 'sometimes referred to as quality at source'. This emphasizes the fact that everyone from top to bottom has an impact on quality. Manufacturing staff have a direct influence on quality, but other members of the firm, such as administrative staff also have an indirect influence. Since everyone has the ability to blight quality, it follows that everyone can improve quality, even if it is just not making mistakes. However, under TQM individuals are expected to bring more than this and make a positive contribution to the way their job is performed. With the use of quality teams in EHL, it would be possible for employees to share ideas on how to improve quality at EHL and these could span the whole organization, as well as provide a window for training employees in the mantra of improving quality. This comes under the umbrella of empowerment, which is thought to improve employee motivation as well as allowing a medium of communicating quality throughout the firm, which I noted as a particular problem. Workers should be questioned as to how things could be improved in quality teams which involve both managers and those actually carrying out manufacturing as there seems to be a bit of a 'them and us' atmosphere at the moment. This could be done on an ongoing basis to make sure improvements are being made and suggestions carried out.
Another solution, which could be combined with TQM, is Kaizen, which essentially means continuous improvement. Kaizen charges everyone in the organization with improving everything in the company, not just quality. It is therefore a way of empowering workers, as well as focusing minds. Additionally continuous improvement will help ensure that EHL is not overtaken by the competition.
Furthermore I think the firm really needs to look at getting things right first time, rather than reacting to problems after they have happened. TQM stresses the relative balance between the four costs of quality (internal and external costs of quality and costs of appraisal and prevention), and as is clear TQM looks to prevent rather than react. Of the four, the latter two can be affected by management, while the former are direct consequences of the latter. What should happen is that when effort into prevention increases, this will reduce internal failure costs, which reduces external failure costs which then eventually reduces appraisal costs. Finally, even prevention costs could be decreased, although in relative terms they will remain important. While appraisal should not be completely eradicated, since checks do need to be made, a greater emphasis on prevention would allow this to be decreased. Appraisal could then be used to monitor improvement teams and such like.
Finally I think the pay scheme should also be changed to a weekly or hourly wage, so everyone is paid the same amount regardless of output, since this would discourage working for quantity rather than quality. Furthermore, bonuses could be awarded for quality of work, or alternatively they could be given to the quality teams if improvement is shown.