There are a number of different views of employment relations. I shall look at the pluralist, unitarist and the radical views which have all been used in this field to frame and understand employment related issues. These three contrasting views all have differing views on the role of conflict, as defined above, in managing employment relations. I shall give a brief overview of the role of conflict in each, which varies from seeing conflict as an irrational activity in the unitarist perspective to understanding that it does exist and that it needs to be managed in the pluralist perspective. In the British working environment there have been a number of changes in the past few decades. The sectoral make up of Britain's work force, has moved away from industry to a more service orientated outlook. When looking at labour force issues, I shall look at the changes that have gone on within the organisation such as the increase in part time labour. Sectoral and labour force issues have both had an impact on unionisation, "the act of forming labour unions" which has decreased over the last few decades. This essay, while embellishing on these issues, shall also outline the impact on the consideration of conflict in employment relations created by them. Moreover it shall show that while conflict is most definitely a consideration in the management of employment relations, the way it is involved and managed has changed, particularly due to the rise of individual rather than collective action.
The unitarist view sees the organisation as an integrated group of people and having a simply authority or loyalty structure and a set of common values, interests and objectives. The management's right to make decisions is seen as legitimate, rational and accepted. Therefore their perspective of the employment relationship is fundamentally based on the assumption that "the organisation exists in perfect harmony and all conflict...is both unnecessary and exceptional" (Salamon 1992:31). This assumption implies that when employees are either unhappy or have differences with the management, conflict as an expression of this is seen as irrational by the uniatrist. Conflict is therefore unneccesary and should be suppressed through coercive means. While conflict can exist, therefore, its origin should not be with management, rather it is the employees who are to blame and this helps to reassure management.
The pluralist perspective is more in line with modern society. It sees the organisation as being groups of individuals and that these groups have their own interests and aims, as well as leadership. It is this which gives rise to conflict as these aims and interests often differ, giving rise to tension, much like which occurs between dissenting groups outside the walls of the organisation in society. Furthermore, unlike the unitarist which sees there being only one source of authority and loyalty (that being the management), the pluralist perspective sees a multitude of sources of loyalty and authority in different groups like trade unions. Hence there is a 'constant state of dynamic tension arising from conflicts of interest and loyalty which need to be managed' (Rose, E 2004:27). Therefore, conflict is both rational and inevitable, meaning it is always a consideration in MER. The pluralist manager will recognise that these conflicts can only be solved by the establishment of procedures which lead to compromise. They need the consent of different groups rather than just exercising managerial prerogative like under the unitarist perspective.
The radical perspective is somewhat different to the other two in that it is much broader in scope. Radical analysis embraces the social, political and economic structures of society, of which the organisation is just one small part. It very much owes itself to Marxist theory which criticizes capitalist society. The radical perspective emphasises the fact that economic inequalities reveal themselves in wider social conflict as well as industrial conflict. The basic economic inequality is between those who own capital (for example businesses) and those who supply labour (the employees), which creates tension between the two. Due to this, conflict is both continuous, and unavoidable and is one and the same as political and social conflict. In a similar vein to pluralism therefore, conflict must always be considered, although it does seem to be even more unavoidable in radical perspectives, seeing as it stems from something deep in society.
Moving on to sectoral issues, it is clear much has changed since the 1960s. There has been a decisive move away from the primary and secondary sectors in Britain towards the tertiary sector. Delving deeper, agriculture declined steadily up to the 1960s where it has remained constant at around 1% since (Nolan and Slater 2003:61). Manufacturing has seen a large decrease, a feature which is common to many economically developed nations. However, its decrease in Britain is most pronounced and has fallen by more than 50% (Nolan and Slater 2003:61). Services on the other hand have increased in both absolute terms and in the share of total civilian employment since the mid 1950s. This is depicted in figure 1 which shows workforce jobs by industry. While it is difficult to state the direct impact of the changing sectoral make up of employment upon the role of conflict, it has certainly impacted upon industrial action and therefore indirectly upon conflict. The move away from industries which were previously known for high numbers of strikes and collective militancy has contributed to a decrease in the number of strikes as shown by the number of days lost in the UK in figure 2 (Hollinshead 2003:564). Furthermore, some have suggested that this sectoral trend has accounted for more than 50% of union membership decline since 1980 (Visser 1992:26).
There are many different issues in the labour force, however I shall try and look at those related to conflict. Consequent upon changes in the sectoral make up of the work force, white-collar work and workers have become dominant over their blue-collar colleagues who used to make up the large part of union movements. White-collared workers foster different work-place dynamics as they have different norms and are employed under different terms. Allied with the rapid diffusion of information-communications technology, this perspective is rapidly growing. Rather than physical work, service based employers particularly are increasing relying on employees' knowledge. These skills are more difficult to define and hence are less amenable to control, giving employees more control and less workplaces displaying management authority over the workforce - "the knowledge carried by the employee becomes a real and controlling resource, perhaps a decisive factor in production, but it remains with the employee and in no real sense is it ever of the firm" (Depres and Hiltrop 1995:11). Traditional bases of collectivism, stemming from the hard and difficult work practices and the experience of managerial direction are thus eroded. Furthermore, male labour participation has been eroded as older and younger men drop out of the labour market. Conversely womens employment has increased along with an increase in part-time work since the 1970s from one sixth of those in employment in 1971 to a quarter in 1999 (Nolan and Slater 2003:64-65). Furthermore from 1979 to 1999, the number in full-time employment has decreased by 2 million from 18.5 million (Nolan and Slater 2003:64-65). Again these have served to undermine assumptions governing traditional employment relations in manufacturing settings revolving round predominantly male work forces in full-time employment.
Taking union membership density, the percentage of employees who are union members as a signal of unionisation, it is clear that unionisation has fallen. In 1980, approximately 65% were union members, while in 1998 it was down to 36% (Cully et al 1998:235). This figure has fallen further since to 34% (Kersley 2004:12), although measurement is slightly different and includes more workplaces, so you would be inclined to think it has fallen even further. Associated with this is the decrease in collective action. For instance the strike has decreased markedly, as shown by figure 2. Furthermore, industrial action as whole tumbled from 13 to just 2% of workplaces between 1990 and 1998 (Cully 1998:325). Only a small portion of the drop can be attributed to the drop in trade union representation as since 1980 union recognition has dropped by a third; industrial action by nine tenths (Cully 1998:325). Reasons for this include as suggested earlier the changing sectoral make up of Britain's employment. However this does not mean conflict has disappeared, indeed it has re-emerged in different forms such as absenteeism. In 1996, 187 million working days were lost to sickness which is 100 times more than the amount lost to strike action in that year (Hollinshead 2004:566). Individual action in the form of industrial tribunals has also increased. Whereas in 1990 9% of workplaces were the object of tribunals, 13% were in 1998 (Cully 1998:325).
In conclusion, theory reminds us that there are different views of the consideration of conflict in MER, with at one end the unitarist perspective seeing conflict as "irrational and frictional", while at the other the pluralist which sees it as "inevitable and rational" (Salamon 1998:7). Finally, the radical perspective, which takes a somewhat wider view, sees it as a reflection of the divisions in society. However, the fact that conflict is not immediately obvious in the employment relationship does not mean there is consensus among the workforce. Just looking beyond the workplace reminds us that there are different views everywhere. Moreover, in reality, traditional forms of collective conflict have been superseded by different forms of conflict such as industrial tribunals and absenteeism. This reflects changes in the sectoral make up of employment and in the workforce such as the increasing power of knowledge in the workforce, which has made it more difficult for collective action to take place.