Broadly speaking, group processes can be defined as the way people interact in groups. They can encompass a number of different aspects such as group norms, patterns of communications between members, co-ordination of efforts and how conflict is handled. Group processes are the way the inputs, such as the qualities of individual members, are converted into outputs. I shall look at how group processes as well as other factors can influence individual behaviour and group processes. Moreover I will look at the arguments for and against group processes having a large impact upon individual behaviour and group performance using a variety of theories and examples.
Group norms are the expected modes of behaviour of a group. They guide the behaviour of group members and the way they interact by specifying the expected type of reaction in a particular situation. For example, Elton Mayo noted that during the Bank Wiring Observation Room studies at the Hawthorne works, workers restricted their output to conform to the group norm.
Intertwined with this are the group sanctions that punish deviations from the group norm. An example of such sanctions can be shown again from the Bank Wiring studies of Mayo, where researchers discovered that deviants from the group norm were punished by being 'binged' - flicked on the ear or tapped on the arm to show that other members disapproved of the deviant member's actions. These were designed to change individuals' behaviour.
However, it has been found that conformity with group norms will tend to increase under certain conditions. Where groups are small and highly observable, conformity will tend to increase, since it is more difficult to avoid being punished for deviation from norms. In addition, where members perceive that they have low status within a group, they will tend to conform more, in the hope of earning the respect of other group members.
Ultimately however, the power a group has to influence its members behaviour depends on three main factors. First the sanctions it can impose (both positively and negatively), which may affect the individual in a variety of ways, from financially to psychologically. Secondly the member's view of these sanctions as if they do not see them as threatening then they will have no desire to listen. The final factor is the extent to which individual members value their membership and the accompanying rewards such as social status (this is known as group cohesion), since if they do not value their membership then they are unlikely to care if they have to leave the group.
Conflict and the way it is handled can also influence individual behaviour. Research on conflict has found it can be both beneficial and problematic depending on its type. Substantive conflict is where there are differences of opinion about a task and how it should be carried out. This is good as it encourages team members to seek new ideas, examine issues in greater depth and exchange more task-related information. It can also encourage team members to become more involved in the group. The Ajax football team of the early 1970s shows an example of this where the manager, Rinus Michels, deliberately created conflict within his group to make his players change their game mentality during matches. On the other hand, affective conflict, where there are personal clashes due to personality or perceived differences in style, background or values, is bad. This is because it can create hostility between members and strain communications. In my opinion it can be shown in groups that are arbitrarily thrown together without thought as to the personality clashes that may occur.
There is a lot of evidence to suggest group processes have a large impact upon individual behaviour. Solomon Asch conducted experiments on the conformity to group norms. Subjects were asked to judge which of three lines was the same as the one they saw earlier within a group of Asch's accomplices who had been asked to lie about which line was correct. Most subjects conformed to the group norm at least once, although a majority resisted the group pressure most of the time. Overall his research showed how difficult it could be for individuals to express opinions when they are not in accordance with other group members.
Another example of the impact of group processes, which shows the force of the way conflict is solved, is the theory of 'group think', as proposed by Janis in 1972. Essentially he proposed that in highly cohesive groups, the desire to come to a unanimous agreement overrides the individual motivation to adopt proper rational decision-making procedures. A good example of this was during the 1941 Pearl Harbour defence where the wrong decision was eventually taken10. Individual behaviour is changed ultimately in favour of the group norm, which often leads to the wrong decision being taken.
On the other hand individual behaviour within a group is not just affected by group processes. It is also affected by a number of other factors. There is the structure of the group, which defines the roles within which each individual member must play in the group. An individual's role will set out their responsibilities and their expected typical behaviour. The ability of the members could also affect behaviour since a member of low ability may feel excluded from the group or worse still, they may feel as though they cannot complete the task and hence do not complete it. Company culture and also its rules and regulations can influence individual behaviour, as it can help regulate behaviour. An example of this is in Disneyland, where there is a culture of cleanliness and orderliness. This culture is embedded in the rules for employees and is a crucial part of controlling employees' behaviour.
I now move onto how group processes affect group performance. Steiner (1972) believes (in general) that actual group performance falls short of the group's potential, which is based on the potential of the human resources available. The shortfall is mainly due to group processes like the co-ordination of individual member's activities. A good analogy of this is in a football team of highly skilled players, which fail to succeed because of a lack of co-ordination, cohesiveness and other such factors.
In addition there is another factor, known as social loafing that decreases group performance. This is a reduction in individual effort when working on a collective group task (where one's output is pooled with that of other group members) compared to working on your own individually. Latane et al. have showed this (1979). They used clapping to display the effect. When clapping in groups of four the noise produced by each person was reduced by 49% and in groups of six, 60% compared to when performing individually. The reduction in individual effort is a 'free-rider' problem, since people expect others to contribute and therefore do not think they have to contribute as much themselves. In my view it could also be because people want to maintain social equity as they expect others to loaf. Interestingly, it has been found in laboratory studies that social loafing occurs most where group members thought their individual output was unidentifiable. This indicates that people will withhold effort where they feel they cannot be reprimanded for substandard performance.
Like individual behaviour, group performance is also affected by other factors. The nature of the task can have an affect. Steiner (1972, 1976), using his 'task taxonomy' classifies tasks according to whether a task can be divided up, whether there is a predetermined standard and how an individual's inputs are related to the group's product. Steiner's taxonomy helps predict that for additive tasks (adding up all individual output, like a group of people planting trees) the group's performance is better than that of the best individual15. Conversely, on a conjunctive task (where the group's product is determined by the level of performance of the slowest member like a group on a production line), the group's performance is equal to that of the worst individual15. Although I have not covered all types of task, you can see how different types of task affect group performance.
The goals a group has (although not all groups are dedicated to the achievement of goals), are also important. The mere setting of goals has been shown to improve performance, provided that they are concrete and challenging yet attainable16. Unattainable goals can lead to dissatisfaction and therefore non-performance. Groups with concrete and challenging goals have been shown to have a higher work rate and work harder.
Overall, it is clear that group processes do have some affect on individual behaviour and group performance, as the experiments of Asch, Mayo and such like display. The work of these people makes me believe that there is a recognisable relationship between group processes and individual behaviour. However, since there are so many other factors that could influence individual behaviour, such as group structure and the ability of individual members, this is arguable. Furthermore these other factors have an even larger role to play in group performance, and as such the extent of any relationship between group processes and group performance is difficult to calculate exactly. Indeed Hackman and Morris (1975) find that the connection between group processes and group performance is much weaker than the connection between the inputs (like ability) and group processes.