This quote essentially opens up the debate between the two main proponents of the planning school and learning school, Ansoff and Mintzberg. More specifically it looks at the deliberate and the emergent types of strategy. In this I essay shall discuss the above quote with reference to the two schools using examples such as Honda's realised and intended strategy in the American motorbike market to analyse the main advantages and disadvantages of the two approaches. I shall then conclude with which approach I think is the most important.
Long-term strategic plans in an organisation provide clarity and focus for executives and staff alike. They display to staff where the organisation is going and therefore give them direction and something to strive for, thereby helping departments move in the same direction - creating something of a team goal. They also reduce uncertainty in that they force managers to look ahead, to anticipate change and develop contingency plans in addition to considering risks. Furthermore they facilitate control, since setting out objectives provides a base for measuring actual performance. In addition they provide a link between the strategic objectives of a firm and its operational activities.
The first half of the quote focuses on the work of Ansoff in the 1960s, which pushed the thought that everything should be planned in advance, under the assumption that these plans are to be achieved as set out. Strategies result from the process of formal planning and are decomposed into distinct steps, delineated by checklists and supported by techniques. They are implemented through detailed attention to objectives, budgets, programs and operating plans, being formulated by central leadership.
The deliberate or planned strategy therefore requires discipline and control to make sure that managerial intentions are realised in action by keeping everyone on track and committed to the common cause in the long term. A loss of focus in the organisation, for example people beginning to want meet personal rather than the organisations goals, can lead to not only poor performance but also customers not understanding what the organisation stands for and what its aims are. This can have a negative impact upon sales, since customers may become concerned that it is not putting enough effort into its core activity. However, the key point is that the organisation is must not be prevented from meeting change, since this would lead to the firm falling behind even if they are disciplined in their approach. This is what has happened at Coca-Cola. They have recently fallen behind in the soft-drinks market as they failed to recognise society's trend towards healthy living soon enough because they continued to stick to their core market and once they had they made a huge mistake- who can forget the infamous Dasani water in 2004. The so-called natural water that came from a tap!
An important point is that it assumes a stable environment; therefore the future can be predicted which helps to create plans. It is very much a funnelled view of strategy when it is left on its own. The planning school seemed to suit the time that it was brought into management thought- the 1960s, one of the most stable times of recent history and indeed one of major success in terms of international production. Furthermore, 'To engage in strategic planning, an organisation must be able to predict the course of its environment, to control it, or simply to assume its stability...otherwise, it makes no sense to set the inflexible course of action that constitutes a strategic plan'. (1998 2001:67). Mintzberg calls this the 'fallacy of predetermination'. Predicting discontinuities like technological breakthroughs and economic change is difficult. Indeed, in the context of the above quote, it makes no sense to demand discipline in a strict sense if your environment is not stable, since a firm would be unable to react to change. On the other hand, even a flexible approach to management would have difficulty dealing with unexpected change that affects everyone in society like the Asian Tsunami of Boxing Day 2004.
Ultimately, the planning literature grew dramatically during the 1970s. However, while proponents were busy preaching about the 'one best way to develop strategy that...was believed almost to guarantee corporate success' (Boddy 2002:184), they never really tested the theory in practice. This led to the learning approach that came to the fore during the instability of the 1980s, when firms began to move away from planning. Consequently, Mintzberg focuses on the complex and unpredictable nature of an organisation's environment that precludes deliberate control. Hence strategy making must take the form of a process of learning over time in order that a business can incorporate 'emergent changes' and then build on them. Emergent strategy therefore emphasises learning - 'coming to understand through the taking of actions what those intentions should be in the first place' Mintzberg et al (1998:189). In fact, the deliberate strategy emphasises control almost to the exclusion of learning. On the other hand, the emergent strategy acknowledges the organisation's capacity to experiment.
Effective strategies will inevitably exhibit emergent qualities. Above all learning, in the form of fits and starts, and recognition of unexpected patterns plays a key role in the development of novel strategies. To go with this, the process requires insight, creativity and synthesis, all the things which formulisation of planning discourages. Efforts to turn a loose process into a tight one can effectively kill it. Equally, discipline, and a subsequent tunnel vision could prevent crucial flexibility to create new, more successful strategies if there is an emergent situation. Discipline should therefore be used in a creative way, not so much to prevent the flexibility to react to emergent events, but to guide ideas that will help further business strategies.
Organisations can lose focus as a result of being too flexible, since it may be pulled in various directions by new strategies, perhaps just championing initiatives just because they are new. This problem is known as 'strategic drift' as shown by Johnson in 1987 (Mintzberg 1998:226). Gradually the organisation drifts away from established strategies, perhaps to everyone's regret. To solve this, organisations need a clear strategic perspective to channel ideas, but not necessarily in a strict disciplinary sense that would restrict flexibility. It should balance change with continuity. Furthermore 'an organisation can have loads of venturing and thousands of flowers blooming all over the place, yet have no coherence- no strategy' (Mintzberg 1998:225). However, in these situations a combination of disciplined adherence to strategy and flexibility may be the best approach. A good example of this is foreign policy. Without discipline and strategic direction, people can manoeuvre at will, appeasing different interest groups at will. However, perfect coherence would fail repeatedly since it would allow no one to get the message that times are changing.
The ultimate example of realised versus intended strategy is Honda's entry into the US motorcycle market. When Honda came into the US motorcycle market, their intended strategy was to sell their larger machines rather than the smaller 50cc machines that had proved to be successful in their home market of Japan. However, much to their disappointment, these machines proved to be unsuccessful, unfortunately suffering from mechanical failure. At the same time, Japanese executives were using the smaller bikes to run jobs around Los Angeles, which attracted interest from local buyers. They then received a call from a Sears Roebuck buyer who wanted to sell to a broad market, not just the motorcycling enthusiast. Fearing alienation of serious bikers, who were more into their larger machines, Honda was initially reluctant to indulge in selling the so-called 'cubs'. In the end, however, Honda was pushed into selling them because of the failure of their larger machines. The rest, as they say, is history - by 1964, nearly 1 in every 2 motorcycles sold was a Honda (Boddy 2002:185). The important point about this is that managers and strategists should not expect complete adherence to the plan, but should anticipate that some departure is inevitable due to the emergence of new opportunities and unanticipated events.
In conclusion, the example of Honda shows us that flexibility to adjust to emergent changes are important, but equally the main proponents of flexibility do accept that discipline and a more structured approach to strategy has its place. Mintzberg points out 'too much planning may lead us to chaos, but so too would too little, more directly' (Boddy 2002:187). Thus I personally think that business strategies need a little of both features to be successful. I see what Mintzberg terms as 'umbrella strategies' (Mintzberg 1998:191) as the best of both worlds. Here strategies emerge under constraints and leadership defines the boundaries in which other actors are free to respond to their own experiences or preferences. Hence this strategy is deliberately emergent. This allows response to emergent situations, while still giving the firm direction. The Virgin Group is a good example of this, since it is not afraid to try new ideas, such as Virgin Galactic, which hopes to bring space travel to the wider audience, while being constrained by the key values that Virgin aspires to like good customer service.