Management is frequently defined as 'the process of planning, organizing, leading and controlling the efforts of organization members and of using all organizational resources to achieve stated organizational goals' (Albert, Khedouri and Mescon: 1985) Although this definition has remained fairly static over the years, the roles of managers, their responsibilities and approaches to the subject have changed tremendously.
Management as a set of social practices and as an occupational group developed particularly in the 20 th century (see table below), and is very much a dynamic concept, adaptive to the times and social condition. Therefore, the arrival of new theories and changes in the perceptions of management must be grounded on historical and socio-political reasoning. This essay will attempt to associate some significant changes in management practices with particular developments in history, critically evaluating management's rise in significance in today's society.
Management is still a topic of great interest, and seems to have acquired an almost ideological status, with self-professed gurus and fads that come about from time to time. These will probably continue to emerge as society continuously evolves and organizations and management practices adapt to these changes, striving to find the best way in which to function.
Although the study of management only received due attention in the start of the 20 th century, it has been present for centuries in our society. Evidence of managerial behaviour can be traced back through times, to as early as 500BC when Sun-Tzu wrote "The Art of War" on his strategic management in battles.
There are two opposing views on the reasoning behind the emergence of the managerial class in the early 1920s, after the Industrial Revolution in the 18 th/19 th centuries changed the way organizations functioned. The functionalist approach maintains that the managerial class emerged due to the rapid growth of industry and the many changes in the organization of capitalist production, particularly with the development of a more bureaucratic structure. During the last third of the 19 th century, the average plant in the US more than doubled its size (Nelson: 1975). As organizations grew in scale, production became increasingly complex, with greater concentrations of capital, labour and raw materials in the work spaces. At the same time, technological progress was being made, which allowed for massive productivity increases, thus accelerating the growth of industry.
This growth was greatly financed through the public's growing acceptance of equity investments, signalling the emergence of an increasingly market oriented economy. In 1901, the annual turnover of shares in the NYSE reached an all time high of 319%, encouraging people to take advantage of the profitability of equity investments. The large capital accumulation in firms and the public trading of stock required a further separation of management and control; this further contributed to the need for managers, to be accountable to shareholders and be responsible for maximizing their returns. A systematic approach to management became crucial, as opposed to the previous organizational set-up were the owner would oversee much of the production, and work directly with craftsmen and employees.
The second view on the causes of the development of a managerial class is a critical approach, which asserts that management was merely a control system for the monopolization of knowledge and a tactic to weaken professional/craft skills, used to extract greater value out of labour. Owners had limited control over their employees and craftsmen, as they possessed production knowledge that the management relied on heavily. By creating a managerial class, fines could be applied, and obedience, punctuality and performance required, through closer monitoring of workers.
This view has its basis on Marxist notions of the skill of a worker being a source of power. Scientific management attempted to reduce this power, by 'deskilling' the workforce, as argued by Braverman.
As firms continued to grow, they searched for ways to maximize profits and obtain maximum output from labour, capital and resources, focusing heavily on productivity and efficiency. Though the notion of job systematization and job division began to be examined earlier by Charles Babbage (1791-1871) and other early engineers, Taylor was responsible for its popularization. In fact, engineers were greatly responsible for the initial studies of systematization in production and management, with about 2/3 of engineering graduates going on to pursue management careers.
Taylor, an American engineer and one of the founding fathers of Scientific Management, believed that by carefully studying the processes undertaken in production, and by breaking them down into minute, individual actions, the firms could enjoy efficiency gains. The manager's role was described by Taylor as "...gathering together all of the traditional knowledge which in the past has been possessed by workmen and then classifying, tabulating, and reducing this knowledge to rules, laws and formulae" (1947) . Taylor initially developed his studies to prevent workers' control of output or 'soldiering', claiming benefits for the firm in the separation of conception and execution, hence emphasizing the need for managers.
Some argue, however, that the efficiency gain and cost reduction Scientific Management brought about, was only made possible by the large body of immigrants arriving in America at the time. These immigrants provided cheap labour, and the simplification of tasks allowed them to work without possessing great skill or knowledge.
One may even view Taylorism as part of a wider efficiency movement, linking it to the development of household appliances and the efficiency gains in household chores.
Evidence of the increasing attention paid to management can be encountered even in more subtle contexts; for example, the New York library did not have one single item on management in 1881, but by 1990 it carried more than 200 (Shenhav: 1999), exposing the budding interest on the subject. Similarly, professionalizing courses for managers began to develop, also demonstrating society's increasing interest in management and its study.
A new type of organization, adapting to the needs of firms and managers, began to develop, much more bureaucratic in structure. Weber viewed this bureaucratization of work as unavoidable in the growth of industrial societies, with the mounting presence of rules, hierarchy and centralisation within an organization, and emphasized the rational virtues of this new structure. He attempted to rationalize the social environment in a manner similar to technology's rationalizing influence on the physical environment, and through bureaucratization, confirmed the need of a managerial class.
Fayol, a less know contemporary, signalled the development of management theories and studies in Europe. He viewed management as a set of 5 activities and 14 principles, to be applied by the managers. Fayol's principles also required a bureaucratic structure in which to operate, and though he acknowledged some need to manage the human component, this was not sufficient for the changes that organizations were about to undergo.
The large deskilling of the workforce and loss of control that was rampant at the time led to an alienation of the employees, according to Braverman. Although Taylorism and Scientific Management allowed for great productivity increases, because of its heavy dependence one man-power, large concentrations of people developed around the factory setting. This gave workers power in bargaining as group to demand better conditions and to call for a different type of management. Marx notes that workers were generating surplus value, which was 'unpaid' and represented 'overwork', and was perceived by them deceitful on the firms' part, generating a great level of dissatisfaction. Resistance increased as work intensified and wages diminished, and work became increasingly 'dehumanized'. The dissatisfaction of workers frequently manifested itself in the form of sabotage and group resistance.
This dissatisfaction was also reflected in the arts and a good example can be found in Charlie Chaplin's 'The Modern Times' (1936). Here he takes a comical approach in portraying Tayloristic methods, depicting the mind-numbing, repetitive tasks in an assembly line. All of the spoken words in the film, except for the tramp's singing performance, come from the various machines. This illustrates the growing fear of machines supplanting man and of the world becoming more dispassionate and mechanized.
Many theorists continued to refine the notion of scientific management, making use of technological improvements, like the Gilbreths' use of cameras to record time movements. Taylorism still remains alive today, in the form of Ford's highly productive assembly line, and in the work of theorists that furthered his studies, like the Gantt charts that are still used today for the organization of production processes.
The 1930s sees the emergence of the Human Relation School, a group of theorists who argue that there is more to human motivation than financial incentives. Elton Mayo and the Hawthorne studies (1924 - 1933) looked at changes in the work environment and how these affected the workers, concluding that employees were more motivated and more productive when they believed that management was genuinely concerned with their welfare. This, along with the vast developments in psychology in the period with the work of Freud and others, opened a path to more specific studies on human motivating factors (like Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs in the 1940s; Herzberg's two factor theorem; and McGregor's theory X and Y in the 1950s, amongst others). Although nothing was concretely concluded from the Hawthorne studies, it raised awareness of areas management could further their impact in. It also looked at the social environment and informal work groups, and noted that these were beneficial to productivity, emphasizing the importance of managing people and not just processes. Barnard puts this succinctly, by viewing people as a strategic factor of organizations and expanding on Durkheim's concept of the existence of informal and formal work structures within the organization. He emphasized the need to manage these informal structures as one of management's key functions, to create an open and trusting environment, placing greater emphasis on groups and participative support.
The development of large industrial centres in the beginning of the 20 th century sparked the move of many workers from the country side, creating a labour surplus, which made the working classes increasingly dependent on their employers. To offset this dependency and to help workers gain some control over their economic lives, unions began to develop. These grew increasingly strong after the period of economic recession triggered by the stock market crash in the US, as workers came to understand the little control and safety they had in their jobs, many having been laid-off or having had pay cuts in the previous years. All of this induced this more human-oriented approach to management, and although some contributions had already been made very early on by Mary Parker Follett (1868-1933), these had gone relatively unnoticed.
Economic developments allowed organizations to keep growing; securities played a large role in restoring investor confidence after the period of depression, together with increases in accounting disclosure requirements and the development of the auditing profession. Management once again had to adapt to the changing times. The effectiveness of the Human Relations approach to management is hard to measure or quantify, and many were and still are sceptical of the extent of its impact in organizations.
Operations Management and the Systems Approach to management emerged from the need to solve complex technical problems in World War II. It consisted of a groups of specialist from an array of specialities working together to solve a problem, which resulted in many technological and tactical breakthroughs, which were quickly applied to management. It placed a particular emphasis on decision making and on the use of quantitative models in planning and evaluating the effectiveness of decisions, which was further encouraged in the 2 nd half of the 20 th century with the advent of computers.
Focus then switched from activities and social relations to objectives, as Drucker developed his famous concept of Management by Objectives (1954), advocating the need for management to have objectives in mind rather than day to day activities. He was also a pioneer in the conception of the idea of knowledge workers and knowledge intensive organizations in the 1960s, and continues to write until today on this very relevant notion.
A particular characteristic of organizations in this period was the growing scope of their operations, as global market access was made easier by the blending of trade barriers and in Europe, the development of the EU (initially as the European Coal and Steel Community, created in 1952). Companies adapted to the growing international markets in many different ways, generating the need for managerial approaches to also evolve. Decentralization required firms to be more independent, and the entering of firms into different cultures forced firms to be increasingly adaptive to the local environments. This called for leaner, flatter organizations, and for managers to take a position as strategists, as argued by Drucker and later developed by Michael Porter.
The contingency approach to management takes a pragmatic stance and acknowledges that separate situation and scenarios need to be addressed differently, as a result of the growing complexity of firms' operations. It asserts that no approach is universally applicable and therefore management must be flexible, and at times, even combine different methods. The task of management became to study the situation at hand, analyzing technological, task and human constraints, to strategically decide on the best approach. There has also been a tendency to push decision making to as close to the point of action as possible, so as allow for greater flexibility and quicker adaptations.
Knowledge Management is probably one of the most relevant topics in organizational behaviour today. With the advent of globalisation and the improvements in communication systems, work and organizational structures have taken new forms. Teleworking and virtual organizations emerged out of these developments, and also helped force the development of more flexible work organizations and the changes in management practices.
Management is an evolving concept, and everyday new approaches are studied and developed. It responds to social-political changes and is culturally sensitive. Many of the better ideas observed in a different culture's approach to management are 'recycled' and adapted, as happened with the Japanese style of management and its focus on quality management and group development. Management practices are dynamic and must therefore be studied as so.