The Front National has shocked and awed France and the rest of the world with their bold statements and somewhat unorthodox policies. Created in 1972 and still led by Jean Marie Le Pen, many attribute the party's success single-handedly to his personality and powerful oratory skills. While both Left-wing and Right-wing parties hover closer and closer to middle-ground, the FN takes radical stances on sensitive yet pertinent issues, which politicians frequently steer clear off to avoid controversy. However, the party's success can't be individually credited to its influential leader, its radical policies or to a failure from previous Left and Right-Wing governments; an amalgamation of factors combined with the right timing and social context created the right setting for the Front National's emergence. Hainsworth (1992) puts this succinctly in his study:
Despite having been created in 1972, the FN's first sign of success was the promising result obtained in the 1984 European Elections. By strategically portraying themselves as the 'alternative' party to a dissatisfied electorate, the FN amassed support from those frustrated with the current government. Much of this discontent was due to Mitterrand's numerous failed policies and the ever-thinning dividing line between Left and Right-wing parties.
Mitterrand entered the presidential office replete with ideas for social reforms, however, these proved very costly and placed a heavy burden on the national economy. Although under Mitterrand's government the average national salary rose, purchasing power plunged and worsened living conditions for the average person. The taxation policies imposed by the Socialist leader had a further detrimental effect in the economy. The income and wealth taxation increases triggered a great deal of capital flight, putting yet another damper on economic activity. Roussel (1985) is particularly keen on attributing the arrival of the FN on the political scene to this exasperation with the Socialist government, and to the system of proportional representation imposed by it, which allowed smaller and new parties to gain access to the National Assembly.
However, the extent of the Socialists' failure in implementing their policies was greatly magnified by external factors, like the inopportune recession which struck the whole of Europe. Europe entered a period of economic stagnation, pushing unemployment to very high levels, causing a stalling of export demand, and shrinking the domestic demand - all consequently leading to a slow down of the economy. Plenel and Rollat (1984) argue that this recession, largely driven by the 1970s oil shocks, is greatly responsible for the public's frustration with the government and for the expansion of the support for the FN.
Whether this initial success was a direct result of government incompetence or of the economic climate at the time, Le Pen undoubtedly knew how to best promote his party. He is considered by Lorien, Citron and Dumont (1986) to have had a central role in the growth in prominence of the party, due to his strong personality, his eloquence and persuasive public speaking ability. Le Pen was also well aware of the French people's affinity to their past, the historic notion of French grandeur and the urge to restore France's position as a powerful nation on the world stage. The FN appealed to this national pride, calling for the restoration of "France's unique place in Europe and in the world".
Le Pen was competent in recognizing what people wanted and delivering this to them in the form of electoral promises, both in populist and intellectual terms. Other parties, on the other side, have frequently been criticized for their failure to speak the language of the masses, resulting in a disinterest in politics and in the political class.
Many also claim that the immense coverage given to Le Pen by the media also worked to the benefit of the FN. Through it, Le Pen exposed the party's vision nation-wide, capturing the audience with his intense and compelling speeches, many of which played on the current fears of the French. Clever promotional videos overflowing with subtleties and symbolism were created, making full use of the media to extend the FN's reach. These types of political devices were not swiftly adopted by the other parties, who failed to perceive the impact of these developments in modern politics and their persuasive power over the popular vote. The FN delighted in this coverage, allowing its every move to be covered by the national press, and received more than enough exposure. However, this raises the question of whether all press coverage, both positive and negative, was in fact beneficial to the party. And furthermore, it is important to question the extent to which the specific policies publicized contributed to the FN's electoral success.
There is an undeniable correlation between the timing of the strong stances on controversial issues taken by the FN, and the party's popularity; this is clearly reflected in people' voting intentions, shown in Table 1. This begins to answer the question set out above, of whether the ample press coverage was advantageous to the FN. It appears that in fact, this has caused as much damage as healing to the party's image. One can draw from this voting volatility that perhaps FN votes aren't representative of a full or consistent support for the party's set of policies, or of a particular wish to see the party in power. Many argue that a great part of the FN votes are in fact impulsive 'protest votes', tending to be more against the incumbent government than in favor of the FN. This view credits the other mainstream parties and previous governments with a great deal of responsibility for the rise of the FN. It discards the notion of the 1984 European Election results as being representative of a widespread support for the FN, defending that people voted free of party affiliation. The argument is that this was a result of people's perception of the European Election as being unimportant in the determination of domestic policies, which affect their lives more directly, leaving people free to express their dissatisfaction by casting their anti-government vote.
There are convincing arguments for both attributing these oscillations in voting intentions to a dissatisfaction with the government and to an actual identification with the FN's positions; and because these two arguments are not mutually exclusive, it can be suggested that they may have contributed jointly to the swaying of the voting intentions portrayed above. The FN's strong stance on the Islamic headscarf issue in November 1989, is a good example of this. Such results can be interpreted as a strong identification with the concerns raised by the FN leader and also a disapproval of Mitterrand's Socialist government, which failed to take a decisive position on the issue. Le Pen openly criticized mainstream parties for not assuming a clear position on the issue and for favoring the growing immigrant population, relying greatly on the media frenzy to spread his word. The importance of the media is validated when we observe that in truth, the immigrant percentage of the French population has been somewhat stable since the 1960s. However, as a result of the media hype, the issue quickly escalated into one of basic values, immigration acceptance and the need to preserve French culture and tradition.
A central and rather successful part of Le Pen's campaign was to openly blame the nation's economic difficulties on this large immigrant inflow in the country. He brashly announced that immigrants, who benefited greatly from some of Mitterrand's foreigner-friendly policies, were taking over French jobs, social security benefits and health services. The FN's slogan "A million people out of work are a million immigrants too many" propagated the fear and apprehension towards the immigrants. A sample poll conducted in Grenole in 1985 showed that 55% of average voters thought that that were "far too many North Africans in France" against the 90% of FN voters who shared this same opinion. Similarly, among the FN electorate, 63% believed immigration to be the main case of unemployment, compared to 26% for the sample of the entire French electorate.
By also cunningly associating immigration with crime, violence and problem-packed suburbs, Le Pen created a 'fear of the foreigner' and amassed a strong voter base in some problem areas. In fact, 90% of FN voters admitted to feeling "insecure " an unprotected by the government in a sample poll, compared to 75% of RPR voters, 64% of UDF voters, 24% of Socialist voters and 8% of Communist voters.
Le Pen's nationalistic stance received substantial support, as he promised to work in the interest of a "French France" and stated in a TV broadcast:
People felt deserted, as the incumbent Socialist government took mild stances and other left wing parties were divided on issues that preoccupied the French population. Le Pen continued on this nationalistic path, when in 1992, the Maastricht Treaty was signed. He claimed the political class was undermining the sovereignty of the state and that this would have a negative impact on local producers who would lose business to competitors, as protectionist measures were deemed illegal. People felt 'protected' by Le Pen, and believed he, unlike the incumbent government, would have their best interest at heart.
Le Pen fended off his opponents on the political Left much in the same manner - through fear and defamation. He developed strong anti-communist policies, making people apprehensive of the political Left and of Communism, claiming that "...le dbut de marxisation de ce pays a commenc par la grande vague de nationalisation de 1946... ce qui se prpare dans le pays actuellement sous vous yeux, c'est la mise en place de la rvolution marxiste qui conduit au Goulag,  l'esclavage et  la mort."
These scare-tactics impacted the various departments differently and many authors suggest that a large reason for the FN's success was their specific targeting of the correct audience for support. This national variation in voting preference is also rooted in the individual social and economic history of each region, and in how this has affected their lifestyles, culture and views.
Despite these oscillations in their voter numbers, the FN developed support groups in specific areas in France; areas which interestingly share many characteristics. As observed in the map below, these are mainly in the Mediterranean coast, the Rhne region, a sizable part of the region around Paris, Alsace and Moselle. Mainly old industrial zones, with high immigrant populations (many attracted during the years of the 1950-60 expansion) and high criminality rates, these areas have proved to be more consistent in their support in the FN, than other regions.
There have been suggestions that part of the FN's success is due to their distinctive 'targeting' of these particular audiences. As a whole, these areas have lower literacy and schooling numbers, as well as lower average salaries, possibly being more susceptible to scare-tactics. Furthermore, people with a more rural upbringing have more difficulty with dealing with economic modernity and feel greatly the loss of national identity that this brings about. By correctly identifying this, and by campaigning heavily around these areas, the FN managed to develop this somewhat loyal support base.
The town of Dreux, an industrial suburb north of Paris, is frequently taken as an example of an FN support 'hotspot', as shown in the table below (Table 2) which compares general voting results in various elections with those in Dreux. We can observe that general voting patterns don't apply as strongly in Dreux, whose voting preference is much less responsive to national changes. The FN campaigned heavily in this city, particularly through Jean-Pierre Stirbois and his wife Marie-France Stirbois, two prominent members of the party who developed a strong following in Dreux.
Husbands (1992) depicted in his bivariate study this positive correlation between people's area of residence and political preference, in particular with the FN. However, various other authors expanded on his work and interestingly pointed out in their study that the highest immigrant populations aren't in fact found in these 'hotspots'. The correlation between percentage of immigrants and FN support seems to disappear below the 'departmental' level. Brchon and Mitra (1992) suggest that it is perhaps "not the mere presence of immigrants as such which is the cause of support for the extreme right but rather fear of the immigrant population". This highlights the success of the FN's scare-tactics, attributing some of its success to its political strategy.
Arguably the FN's largest and most recent success, the 2002 elections were the closest Le Pen ever came to acquiring presidential powers, despite there being no real threat of an FN victory. The most widely accepted reason for Le Pen's unsuspected success, and passage to the 2 nd round, was a lack of interest and general suspicion with politics and politicians on the part of the French population. After two cohabitations
, it seemed to the French that politicians were far more interested in holding on to power (and the extremely powerful French presidential post) rather than with working in the best interest of the nation. These governments were rendered ineffective due to the conflicting political interests of the rulers, causing this great disenchantment with the political scene in France. Laurence Parisot, of the Paris-based IFOP polling institute argues that "...the French seem to have absorbed the idea that the presidency just isn't as important as it used to be, and as a result they are not as interested as they once were." Corruption charges ran rampant, and Chirac was under suspicion - and therefore keen to earn the presidential immunity from prosecution. The other candidate, Jospin, failed to arouse people's support, and therefore suffered a real blow in the voting ballots of the first round. He lacked Le Pen's charisma and relied on highly technical economic language in his speeches, by-passing a large proportion of the French population who was virtually illiterate when it came to complex economic jargon.
All this perhaps explains the sizable number of abstentions in the first round of the 2002 elections by reflecting the causes for the indifference on the part of the French population. This indifference is also undeniably witnessed in the 16 candidate qualified for the first round, three of which were from the hard left and two from the far right; a sure sign of the population's call for change in the political establishment. A further display of popular dissatisfaction with the political class was given after Le Pen received enough voted to pass through to the second round, and Jospin's supporters mobilized to keep him out of power - and despite this, the number of abstentions remained significantly large, at 20.29%. All this disillusionment arising from France's part experiences with the mainstream political parties paint a bleak picture and attribute a great deal of responsibility to them for the rise of the FN.
Nonetheless, some observers also point out that external events helped strengthen Le Pen's policies and thus his 2002 campaign. Le Pen focused greatly on the eradication of violence and crime, and again, the media came to his rescue. A violent attack on an elderly man in Orlans was televised and shocked French spectators. The significance of this campaign focus is confirmed when we observe the shift in Chirac's own campaign, redirecting his attention to violence. Chirac surfaced soon after these images were released claiming that France was "sinking under urban violence", correctly identifying the concerns of the French and of his voters. Despite the FN's initial success, in the end, Chirac was the chosen candidate. However, he was elected not so much as a majority favourite, and more like the lesser of two evils. A popular slogan captured the essence of the French voters' spirit in the 2002 elections, which asked people to "choose between the crook and the fascist".
Winock (1992, pg 301) praises the FN's ability to adapt, describing the party as a 'hard political tendency but a soft concept'. This ability to transform and re-invent has helped the FN to detangle themselves from past mistakes of the extreme right, and to modernize. Recent examples include Le Pen's quasi-partnership with the national media, and his clever use of these means to reach a large population, leaving the traditional mainstream parties behind.
No doubt a large opportunity was left for the FN to enter the political realm by past failures of the mainstream parties, but the FN undoubtedly recognized what the French population wanted and used this to their favour. These policies were then clearly and persuasively voiced by Le Pen. His strong leadership, charisma, impressive oratory skills, appealed to people and amassed support in various areas throughout France. Despite the many failures of the mainstream political parties in France, and the obvious conclusion that would be to attribute all the blame to their shortcomings, this would paint an incomplete picture. It appears as if though the FN's success might have been possible without the failure to some extent of the mainstream political parties, this certainly would have been on a much smaller scale. In order to understand the reasoning behind the FN's uprising, we must accept that their success was a result of a complex interaction between many factors, and that these reacted together as catalysts to bring about the unexpected success that the FN has had in the past decades.