Upon concluding a study on the three options, recommendations are as follows:
It is advisable that the firm reduce the Hotel contract to 8,000 units of Detergent C. Not only will this maximize profit (generating 3800 per week), given the current constraints and available resources, but will also guarantee a certain level of sales. Sales are susceptible to changes in consumer demand, changes in competitor pricing and an array of other external factors, meaning production may not always equal sale levels. The contract provides steady and guaranteed revenue for the firm, which may not be the case for the other scenarios where many other market factors may affect sales.
It is important that management implements and employs a clear weekly production schedule, in order to have constant revenue figures and resolve problems with suppliers. This will allow a fixed re-ordering scheme to be set-up, were Chemimix may even earn bargaining power to negotiate for lower prices from the suppliers. Furthermore, this will permit a better management of the firm's assets, possibly even enabling it to benefit from future investment opportunities, as they will have some constancy in their revenue figures, and to make long-run plans.
A possibly worthwhile investment which should be studied further is the expansion of the firm's facilities, particularly the acquisition of larger storage tanks. Even a small increase in these would be significant to revenue changes, as at the suggested profit maximising production level, both of the ingredient constraints are being used to their full capacity and are inhibiting further production (see notes 1 and 2 in Appendix B).
This report aims to evaluate the current production level and study the viability and advantages of undertaking two different options, namely reducing the hotel's contract from 9,000 to 8,000 units of Commercial Detergent and cancelling it altogether.
Chemimix's production is currently restricted by multiple constraints. For this study, we will assume that the production facilities available are permanent, meaning the tanks holding Ingredients A and B have a set capacity. Similarly, the bottle supply for the detergents will be considered fixed and at full stock, though this may need confirming, due to possible re-ordering problems left behind from the previous management.
By committing to this contract, Chemimix guarantees the supply of 9,000 units of Commercial Detergent to the Hotel. As may be observed in Appendix A, the profit generated from this production schedule, consisting of producing 9,000 units of Commercial Detergent (Detergent C) and 3000 units of Household Detergent (Detergent H), is of 3150. This leaves the production of Detergent C at full capacity levels, as the bottle availability constraint forbids it from increasing. It is important to note that limited resources (namely Ingredients A and B) are here being allocated to the less profitable Detergent C, thus suppressing the production of the more profitable Detergent H.
Assuming the firm has a profit maximizing objective, other opportunities may prove more profitable and should be therefore studied.
Similarly, there is a significant slack quantity of Ingredient A (10,000 litres, as verified in the Answer Report in Appendix B) left over when undertaking this option, where the firm may not be making full use of its producing capacity.
Upon examining the advantages of reducing the current contract, we find that indeed, more financial benefits are available to the firm. A small reduction in the production levels of Detergent C from 9,000 to 8,000 units allows us to double the production of Detergent H (from 3,000 to 6,000 units), a more profitable product, yielding additional financial benefits of 650 (see Appendix B). Furthermore, no slack is left from the ingredient constraints, meaning the firm is making full use of these resources.
The profit maximising production mix given by the cancelling of the hotel contract, remains the same as that of reducing the hotel contract to 8,000 units. Further details confirm this in Note 1 of Appendix C. However, Option B presents additional non-financial benefits to the firm, offering extra certainty of the sale of 8,000 units of Detergent C weekly, and is therefore preferred.
Having decided on the most profitable product mix, it is important that the firm now develops a clear production schedule in order for to benefit from more constant revenues and resolve past problems regarding the irregularity of production and ordering.
Firstly, weekly bottle demand for both types of detergent can be reduced, to 6000 bottles for Detergent H and 8,000 bottles for Detergent C. Secondly, an order for labels will need to be placed in two weeks time, as though not yet a binding constraint currently impacting on production levels, it will soon become one as stock is depleted. The weekly re-ordering schedule for labels should be of 14,000 labels (8,000 units of Detergent C + 6,000 units of Detergent H). Find below a summary of the recommended re-ordering schedule for the production resources for this implementation period and for the future (given the initial assumption about the firm's resources being at fully-stocked levels):