Initially aiming to instil peace, stability and prosperity in the continent, the European Union as we know it today has come a long way from the initial agreement made post-WWII on coal and steel trade between five war-torn nations. Since then, the original agreement has evolved, and expanded to include 25 nations, an array of institutions and a common currency.
This essay will attempt to explore the benefits and opportunities, as well as the costs and potential threats of the most recent expansion, the largest yet, in a social and economic light. Furthermore, the essay will look at whether additional benefits are yielded by entry of these Central and Eastern European members into the Single Market, as opposed to the establishment of a simpler Free Trade Area (FTA) or perhaps the adhesion to the already existing European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
The economic impact of the Single Market appears to be at the forefront of the for/against enlargement arguments, as the Union's focus shifts from the early purpose of keeping Europe peaceful to ensuring its prominence in the global market.
In the mid-1990s, Europe and particularly the EU member states, needed desperately to regain some economic dynamism and competitiveness, as growth prospects were small and unemployment remained obstinately high. The EU began to liberalize trade relations with certain non-member nations who had expressed their interest in joining the Union (particularly nations in Central and Eastern Europe after the disintegration of the Soviet Bloc), in an attempt to delay their entry. The resulting boost to GDP growth rates (with the exception of a few, yet still significant when comparing it to EU15 GDP growth) served as an indication of the potential benefits of further abolishing trade restrictions with these nations
Access to these markets would further demand for products, enterprise, investments and employment, adding some 75 million consumers to the Single Market. It would also allow the EU to compete with the economic giant and dominant trading bloc that is the US on a more equal plane.
There is little doubt about the potential benefits that this expansion can yield. However, some question the extent of the change to a Single Market from previous trade agreements given that a substantial amount of trade barriers had already been lifted prior to the accession dates, arguably much like a FTA. Similarly, a lot of the prospective benefits of labour mobility have been curbed due to the restrictions imposed by most of member states (with the exception of the UK, Sweden and Denmark). Labour mobility is only one of the examples of non-tariff barriers and other impediments to free movement of goods, capital and services that still remain after the new entrants' arrival. This highlights the fact that perhaps not all of the Single Market's benefits are being fully reaped, thus deteriorating the advantages it offers in comparison to a FTA (this is particularly visible in the automobile and services industries, specially in financial services).
Supporters of this view would belittle the advantages of the Single Market, claiming the costs of its establishment and the financial commitments to the entering countries would outweigh the benefits. This seems to some authors, like Kok (2003), to be somewhat of myopic view of the enlargement's impact. The predicted increase in investment levels in new member states (due to the stability brought by their EU membership) is expected to bring out a high level of future economic growth in the Union, particularly if managed appropriately and if given the right conditions in which to thrive, such as a good system of national governance. The Single Market creates a much more appealing and investment environment due to the inherited political stability, which is not offered by a FTA.
Possibly some of the greatest benefits of Single Market entry, as opposed to a FTA, are those yielded by the common currency, an almost natural complement to the Single Market. The eagerness of the new members to adhere to it serves as illustration to this. In fact, all 10 nations are currently involved in negotiations and most have drawn up agreements to prepare for future common currency implementation. Once the requirements for adhering to the common currency are fulfilled, growth prospects are extremely favourable, through the lowering of uncertainty, elimination of transaction costs and increased price transparency brought by the common currency.
Gains brought by the Single Market specifically to new entrants seem more obvious and appear to outweigh those in a FTA, as it involves bringing structural funds to these economically less advanced nations, allowing them to get up to speed with the rest of the member states. For the E15 members however, these benefits only emerge in the long run, but appear amply supported by estimations and studies of the economic outlook of Europe. Grabbe (2001) estimates that EU members would a gain approximately 10 billion euros over the long run, increasing their GDP by around 0.2% and possibly leading to the creation of 300,000 jobs (on the assumption of a constant labour-output ratio).
Nonetheless, in the short-run, sacrifices will surely have to be made by the current members to ensure economic and social convergence of all EU members (see graph below for the extent of the current split, as demonstrated in the GDP per capita inequality).
These sacrifices, like the allocation of structural funds and infrastructure aid (amounting to over 3 billion euro a year since 2000 (Kok 2003)), are very important to avoid migratory pressures and ensure economic convergence before the labour market is fully deregulated. It is therefore true to say that economic convergence will be a long term achievement and the costs and benefits of it will not be perfectly timed - costs associated with competition and adjustment may come sooner but benefits can be huge if properly managed.
The benefits of social integration play a large part in the Single Market vs. FTA argument. However, these benefits are somewhat hard to quantify and are thus many times underrated.
The prospect of EU membership has encouraged the entering nations to return to pluralist democracies and free market economies. This is beneficial to the EU15 in that it promotes political stability and social development in the rest of Europe.
However, many argue that the social and institutional convergence intended for the Single Market is too difficult of a task given the array of different cultures and national interests present in the Union, making the conciliation of these virtually impossible. This idea of convergence also endorses some fears of national sovereignty loss. This convergence/integration will depend heavily on the acceptance of new members by the people of the EU15. Popular discontent however seems to dominate newspaper headlines, marked particularly by resurgence of nationalistic far right in Western Europe. The focal concern and main source of anxiety appear to be prospect of heavy migratory pressures and accompanying uncertainty in the labour market.
Much of the concerns however, are more based on popular belief than on hard facts. Although the economics benefits are easily verifiable in numbers (it is widely accepted that market driven labour migration through the free movement of labour is extremely positive for growth), the social response has been somewhat negative in most countries, where many fear the possible ensuing job losses and 'social dumping'.
Enlargement will certainly increase the pressure for labour reallocation between industries and countries, particularly for countries like Germany, very close to the new members. The focus of the EU and its members' governments however, should be on helping the adjustment into new employment rather than the protection of old jobs. The additional benefits brought by labour mobility are significant and would be lost in the case of a simple FTA as they are only present in a Single Market scenario. None the less, the simplicity of the FTA would send the difficult and costly task of social integration to the background, perhaps allowing its economic benefits to take prominence.
Another important benefit brought by the integration into a Single Market is that of the coordination between countries of some important institutions and regulations, which a FTA would be unable to provide. For example, enlargement can have a positive impact on internal security, seeing that it facilitates police, border and judicial cooperation, to combat problems like illegal immigration and crime.
Enlargement also requires from new members a great deal of advances on areas like environmental regulation, health and safety requirement for food and public health, safety standards for nuclear power plants (which 5 of 10 new members possess) by matching those of the new member states, whose policies are typically less developed, to those of current members.
Although the political issues of the expansion have not been addressed, it is inevitable to recognize the need for restructuring and its additional costs. Although this will constitute further expenses and efforts for the creation of a successful Single Market, its benefits seem to surpass these disadvantages.
In conclusion, the economic and social costs of non-implementation of Single Market (and the establishment of a simple FTA) seem to be higher than its implementation costs.