It has long been recognised that emotions exert powerful effects on memory, and that what we feel can strongly influence what we remember. The types of effects that emotion can have on memory differ markedly, depending on the precise conditions of encoding and retrieval (Eich, Kihlstrom, Bower, Forgas & Miedenthal, 2000). Differences in emphasis during encoding, for example, can have a profound effect on how, or indeed whether, information is remembered later (Gleitman, 1999) and similarly, the emotional state of a person at the time of retrieval may influence what they remember. Two central questions have arisen out of the study of the impact of emotion on memory; firstly, whether emotion increases or decreases the strength of memory for an event, and secondly, whether special mechanisms are required to account for the effects of emotion on memory (Eich et al, 2000). This essay will examine ways in which people's memories are affected by their feelings, and will also investigate models put forward as explanations as to why emotion has such an influence on memory.
Of particular significance with respect to emotional impact at the encoding stage of memory formation are the concepts of flashbulb memory and repression. It is proposed that if an event arouses an intense emotion in someone, this may influence the likelihood that they will remember the event. The direction of such influence on encoding may be either positive, so that it creates a strong memory trace, or negative, such that powerful negative emotions may induce forgetting or repression.
Flashbulb memories can be used to illustrate how emotion is often alleged to enhance memory (Eich et al, 2000). The term 'flashbulb memory' was first introduced by Brown and Kulik (1977) and is used to depict the vivid, accurate and detailed memories that people have for major news events; such as the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. Flashbulb memories concern events that are highly distinctive, unexpected and strongly emotional, and they are characterised by a personalised focus; people remember exactly what they were doing when they heard the news (Gleitman, 1999). Brown and Kulik proposed that sudden news which produces a strong emotional reaction can fix permanently in a person's memory many details of their immediate circumstances at that point. Whilst they argued that the level of detail and longevity of these memories suggests there may be a special neural mechanism for the creation of flashbulb memories (Brown and Kulik, 1977, as cited in Gleitman, 1999), this view is controversial and it is generally argued that the high retention and characteristic longevity of such memories is created by the emotional impact of the event on the individual, and increased rehearsal in subsequent conversations with others, rather than a specific encoding mechanism.
Repression, as proposed by Freud, provides a direct contrast to flashbulb memories, concerning memories that, due to their unpleasant, negative emotional associations (Baddeley, 1997), are 'forgotten', or pushed out of conscious awareness, thus becoming inaccessible. Certainly, on considering the occurrence of psychogenic amnesia, there is no doubt that powerful negative emotions can induce disturbances of memory, but this does not necessarily imply that repression forms a part of normal forgetting (Baddeley, 1997), and there is little experimental evidence to support this claim, primarily because it is difficult to carry out laboratory experiments that manipulate the level of emotion due to limits of what is ethically acceptable. In everyday life, there does appear to be a bias towards recalling pleasant memories rather than preserving unpleasant ones, but this does not infer repression, since people simply tend to rehearse pleasant things that happen to them, whereas embarrassing and painful things are not pleasant to recount (Baddeley, 1997). It therefore seems unlikely that a significant role in everyday forgetting can be attributed to repression.
In addition to encoding, a further effect on memory may be observed with respect to retrieval, in terms of mood-congruent retrieval, and mood-state-dependent learning. The concept of mood congruity refers to the idea that "emotionally toned information is learned best when there is correspondence between its affective value and the learner's current mood state" (Eysenck & Keane, 2000). Thus people are sensitised to absorb information that agrees with their prevailing emotional state (Eich et al, 2000); people in a good mood learn and remember emotionally positive material better than those in a bad mood, whereas the opposite is true for emotionally negative material. Mood congruent retrieval suggests that emotional state influences the later retrieval of affectively congruent material from memory (Eich et al, 2000). Lloyd and Lishman (1975) originally demonstrated mood congruent retrieval, testing clinically depressed and non-depressed subjects for retrieval speed of a pleasant or unpleasant memory linked to a given neutral cue word (Eich et al ,2000). It was found that depressed subjects retrieved unpleasant memories faster than pleasant ones, with the most depressed patients having the fastest retrieval times, whereas non-depressed patients were quicker at retrieving pleasant memories. A similar result was found in the non-clinical population by Teasdale and Forgarty (1979, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) who induced elated or depressed moods artificially and found that when depressed recall of positive material was slowed whilst recall of negative material was accelerated. Furthermore, Teasdale and Russell (1983, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) had subjects in a neutral mood study a mixed list of positive, neutral and negative words. A happy or sad mood was then induced in subjects, who subsequently attempted to recall the word list. It was reported that although the groups recalled neutral words at similar rates, sad subjects remembered more negative than positive words, and happy subjects vice versa. Since no specific mood was induced during original learning of the word list this effect is claimed to be solely due to mood at retrieval (Eich et al, 2000). There therefore appears to be strong evidence for the phenomenon of mood-congruent retrieval.
In contrast, evidence for mood-state dependent learning and memory is somewhat more equivocal. This suggests that a person's emotional context affects their memory for events, and that if people learn something in a given mood or emotional state, they can best remember it later, at the time of recall, if they return to the same mood (Eysenck & Keane, 2000). Bower, Monteiro and Gilligan originally investigated this, using hypnosis to induce happy or sad mood states, and reporting that items experienced in a sad mood were much more likely to be subsequently retrieved when sad than items experienced in a happy mood (Baddeley, 1997). However, many of their findings have since been attributed to mood congruence (Baddeley, 1997) since they used emotionally toned material, and it has subsequently proved difficult to show mood dependency in terms of the effect of mood on learning and subsequent recall of neutral material (Baddeley, 1999). On the other hand, mood dependent memory has been more successfully demonstrated in the recall of autobiographic memories, , with Bower (1981, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) reporting that when subjects are hypnotically induced to experience happy or sad moods and asked to recall incidents from their childhood, their memories were predominantly consistent with their mood. In addition, recollections of emotional events recorded in diaries have been found to be significantly biased in the direction of the subject's current mood state (Bower, 1981, as cited in Eich et al, 2000).
Bower's associative network theory is one model which explains why emotions may affect memory and thus how mood-state-dependent learning and mood congruent retrieval occur. This theory proposes that emotions are represented by nodes in a semantic network, with numerous connections to related ideas, physiological systems, to events and to muscular and expressive patterns (Eysenck & Keane, 2000). Nodes can be activated by internal or external stimuli, and activation from an activated node spreads to related nodes; thus activation of an emotion node results in activation of emotion related nodes or concepts in the semantic network. When an emotion is aroused, the emotion node spreads excitation to indicators with which it is connected; for example, a set of memories of events that had become associated with, and causally evoked, that emotion in the past (Eich et al, 2000). Retrieval occurs by activation spreading along the network from one node to another; so, for example, activation of depression facilitates remembering of an event linked to that emotion. This theory initially suggested that if a subject studies a list of words in a sad mood, those words should be better recalled later when the same emotion is induced for recall - however, this was often not found to be the case. Thus Bower's original model was later revised to include the causal belonging hypothesis. This suggests that subjects will only associate an emotion with a stimulus or situation if they see the event as causing their mood; thus laboratory studies produce only weak mood dependence because the experiment only induces temporal contiguity; thus subjects do not attribute emotional feelings to the words studied (Eich et al, 2000). In contrast, autobiographical memories show mood dependence because the emotions causally belonged originally to the events being recalled, and the event-to-emotion situation is established strongly at the initial experience (Eich et al, 2000).
In addition, a further principle which explains the impact of emotion on memory is Tulving's encoding specificity principle, which states that the recollection of an event depends on the interaction between the properties of an encoded event and the retrieval information. Thus, if a mood is encoded as part of the learning experience, providing this cue and reinstating the mood during retrieval enhances memory performance (Eysenck & Keane, 2000).
It is therefore clear that our memories are influenced by our feelings in numerous different ways. Memories with strong emotional associations can be either encoded strongly and in much detail, or repressed, whilst both the emotional tone of material and a person's mood state can affect what is later remembered. For this reason there is much evidence to support the idea that emotion and cognition are closely connected