Anti-social behaviour has increased, with 24% of people experiencing problems, especially since 1992. In response, Government created ASBO's under the Crime and Disorder Act 1998. Their function and targets were revolutionary: combining criminal sanctions with civil procedures. The system was civil based aiming to achieve fast, efficient and economical hearings, whilst hearsay admissibility protected witnesses made evidence collection less problematic, as well as being reinforced with criminal sanctions. However, theoretical criticism has been huge: concerning human rights (e.g. ASBO's avoid Article 6 ECHR as it is not a criminal procedure), opportunities for the defendant to defend themselves (e.g. question hearsay evidence) and the very concept of blurring criminal and civil boundaries. In practice, many procedural problems have been found. I will consider ASBO implementation specifically through Babergh District Council (BDC) Housing Department and nationally, evaluating if Government aims are met.
Government publications outline that ASBO's should "protect the public from behaviour that causes or is likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress," protecting "against anti-social behaviour," e.g. "loutish and unruly conduct...verbal abuse, harassment, assault, graffiti, and excessive noise." They aim to remove problems at grass roots level, "encouraging communities to become actively involved in reporting crime," inviting them into the justice system so they feel served. Their purpose is to empower local authorities and police to bring prosecutions and tackle the issues directly, creating a rapid and time-saving remedy, avoiding delay through the civil system, being economically efficient, and "accessible" by being issued by civil courts or "if the defendant is convicted of an offence in the criminal courts." Government wanted witnesses protected from intimidation, and civil administration allows hearsay to be admissible, permitting professional witnesses to be used: protecting witness and encouraging evidence to be more forthcoming. ASBO's should be bespoke to a situations needs, applying to anyone older than ten, directly targeting youth problems and neighbour disputes. Co-operation and communication between local authorities, police, courts and the communities was fundamental, with a structured system using county protocols and regional officers, but has this been realised?
BDC's experiences illustrate a disturbing picture of disorganisation. Initially very little information was received on application procedures, evidence collection and processes to bring ASBO's to court. Government materials raised initial awareness, but thereafter it has been through their own initiative that implementation of ASBO's has occurred. BDC uses ASBO's to control council tenants breaking the tenancy agreement, as an intermediate sanction before applying for a possession order (evicting the tenant), or using an intermediate ASBO to provide protection between a possession order being granted and eviction. Helen Shackleton explains that three applications have been made with two successes. She suggests the process fails government's aims of being an efficient and swift remedy, being "tiresome," and requiring 18 months of preparation. It was also "confusing" and "uncertain," not because of unfamiliarity, but poor communication with the courts and inadequate Government instruction. Colleague, Tony Morris estimated the process normally takes 5-6 months, adding 4-6 weeks for defendants using representation, illustrating that ASBO's are not the fast solution government suggests. The cost (5000-8000) was large and disproportionate, making it unfavourable and not the economically practical proposition government claims. Morris suggests the application procedure is not widely documented and authorities (including police) are uncertain, relying on costly legal advice. He made criticism after receiving initial information, the department were left to their own initiative to investigate, and were still "unfamiliar" with the requirements, particularly concerning as they are expected to function like to the CPS, bringing applications to court. Government's information for internal use is, according to Caroline Davis contrary to Government guidelines, creating a judicially reviewable situation and explaining current perplexity. The findings could explain the erratic inconsistencies of application and success statistics between counties and boroughs that has emerged (Fig.1), and poor initial response e.g. by December 2002 only 177 ASBO's were made. Government aims on speed, ease of application, and costs have failed.
Poor awareness is largely a reflection of the system. Davis, who has considerable experience with ASBO's commented on the failures of the system. BDC's experience indicates the police have been unwilling to co-operate, providing only one incident statement in relation to many incidents. She found no police-council partnership (an aim), with the police unwilling and "uninterested" in ASBO's, regarding it as a "civil matter." The government's aims for authority co-operation have failed. Furthermore, the regional protocol for anti-social behaviour has not been created, and area does not have an appointed Anti-Social Behaviour coordinator, something she blames on "poor education and initiation by government," illustrating that none of the proposed support systems have been created. She also acknowledged ASBO's were sluggish and expensive.
More disturbing was BDC's experiences in court. During the first application the Clerk was unaware of the procedure to create an ASBO and the ASBO system, and produced a "technicality," which when later challenged was false. The courts appear like the police: unacquainted, and alarmingly reluctant to use ASBO's. The Magistrates stated they were "nothing but a sideshow," unwilling to grant what was later considered a valid application. Davis suggests this relatively commonplace, with judiciary despondent with the civil-criminal implications, and suggests more "internal regulation and education." Davis and Morris also comment that with CASBO applications there has been no CPS co-operation, rendering the criminally based ASBO very difficult to obtain.
BDC's second application was successful, issued against a noisy, aggressive and intimidating tenant. The advantages of hearsay admissibility were clear: previously tenants illustrated reluctance to provide evidence owing to the defendant's violent history, but here more evidence was forthcoming, illustrating the government success. Yet, Shackleton stated that despite ASBO enforcement residents felt they were "alone and open to abuse," and unprotected after providing evidence, indicating the protection the government had hoped is not completely realised. Shackleton also stressed how "pressurising," "difficult" and "unpleasant" providing professional evidence was, this presenting an unconsidered issue. Should largely inexperienced local authority workers be subject to the rigors of court work?
Shackleton considers that once enforced ASBO's are a useful tool: all defendants behaved with "no problems," believing the success is in having "very real criminal sanctions." Initial national success was poor, but Manchester Council is at the forefront, obtaining 160. Basil Curley states "...evidence shows that work to curtail harmful behaviour is working," with only 30% breaching, they are acting well as deterrents. In the region residents have noticed a "real improvement." Curley welcomes the ASB Act 2003, where procedural reform, particularly to interim orders "is a huge step forward," hinting experience of problems akin to BDC. The successes are becoming more commonplace, example 1 (appendix) reveals how 70 youths "terrorised" a community but following an ASBO incidents reduced from 24 to 5 per month. Example 2 illustrates improvement in a community enduring prostitution related offences and 62% of authorities reported an improvement. Manchester also held 300 warning meetings, reporting deterrence effects. ASBO's have encouraged community participation, particularly as BDC has an Anti-social behaviour surgery, this aim of government is clearly successful and frequently leads to "early resolution without need for ASBO's."
The very concept of ASBO's, once enforced works with tangible benefits, particularly considering Manchester's low breach rate of 30%, illustrating a deterrent effect, as intended. However, whilst the mechanism itself appears to work, it is the procedure which has failed to meet government criteria. It is slow, inefficient and unregulated. Information and communication is not uniform, confusion and contradiction rife, with magistrates and clerks unaware of procedures, and lacking faith in the system. The government needs to be work with the authorities to encourage partnerships. ASBO's will be successful, but government needs to support the system.