At present the cars that we see on the road are limited to having one or two tones of colour. Modifying the colour is a complicated process and hence, most of us would not like to go through such trouble pertaining to the change in colour of our car.
However this current mind-set could be completely eradicated in the future if a car with a colour changing mechanism is designed and manufactured. Currently we only have cars that vary in colour when sunlight reflects on it, and even this is only limited to two or three colours. Also, this change is impermanent and is done by applying paint of, at most, three tones of colour; one on top of the other.
This situation could be changed if we could alter the chemical composition of the paint of the vehicle at anytime after it is applied and dry. Any object is visible only if light hits on it. Therefore the composition could be varied in numerous ways to absorb different wavelengths of light, in the visible range at different times. Ultimately the vehicle would appear in different colours at different times and, this method could be further enhanced to give different colours to various parts of the vehicle simultaneously.
One of the primary factors when designing a car would be car aerodynamics and we could expect to have further sleek bodies with better aerodynamic designs in future cars. The cars will be lengthened with a much more streamlined body and would have an ultra smooth exterior body surface with lot less abrupt changes with respect to the exterior. This design would help reduce the air drag greatly and will add a new image to the car. The ultra smooth surfaces could be created using laser beams and a form of lithography.
The shape of the body of the concept cars will be extremely different to the present cars and will not have the ordinary conventional look. These cars will perform at high speeds leading to handling problems. A car with spherical wheels would be one solution for this issue since the spherical wheels could give greater control and the car would be able to move in any given direction. This not only increases the capabilities and controlling features of the car, it creates an untapped privilege to the car. These kinds of wheels could be controlled by electromagnets which allow the car to reach, even the most unattainable speeds, and could have a much more comfortable ride with 100% air suspension since there is no physical contact with the car and the wheels.
The future cars could possess a capability to change its shape at any given time; this could enable the driver to make a limited change to the shape of the car to add a new look. This feature combined with the colour diversifying technique could result in a state-of-the-art vehicle, whilst making the driver the 'centre of attention'.
Today, most cars we see on the roads do have very elegant and comfortable interiors but what could we expect in the future?
In the future we could expect to see and feel the most comfortable and elegant interiors that man have ever seen. These interiors will comply with a 100% touch screen dash-board with all the controls embedded in a dislay screen. This would enable the driver to have 100% control of the car and wold increase its interior looks greatly.
The steering wheels would include very sensitive buttons to control many options of the cars (this kind of designs already exist) and would have keys on the steering wheels to steer the cars without using the steering wheels. These keys will wil comply with an option to enable them or disable them for safety reasons. The cars would consist of seats with a very sleek design for the passengers and the driver which wold adjust themselves according to the weight distribution of the passenger or the driver. Therefore these cars would offer the very best comfort.
These cars could comply with trqansparent floor-boards and other body parts made of strong featherweight fibres. This could add a new look to the car and will be a 'brand new experience' for the passengers.