The paper covers the design, implementation and testing of a reaction game involving two keypads, an LCD screen, SWET box and computer terminal. The team's decision about how to create a reaction game from the equipment, and the reasons behind this are also discussed. Previous knowledge of the team is outlined to put the accomplishments, targets and solutions to problems into a better perspective. The paper covers issues relating to problems that were encountered and action taken towards their solution. Pen ultimately, a discussion on the performance of the system is outlined before the conclusions of the project
The chosen project was the Reaction Game. It involved using two keypads, and LCD screen and a SWET box to create a game whereby the reactions of two players were pitted against one another. The basic idea of the game was to display something on the LCD screen. The speed at which a correct key was pressed determined who won. From this starting point a more detailed specification was developed (see Analysis of System Specification, Design Details).
It was decided that rather than split up responsibilities to each team member it would be more time efficient to work on a single problem collectively. Approximately half way through each of the three lab sessions the role of programmer would switch so as to distribute the work load fairly.
Previous experience of using the SWET box was limited to a total of three, three hour lab sessions within the course. LCD screens and the Keypads had never been encountered prior to the project.
The project outline given to the team was:
To fulfil this we first decided on how communicating the required response from the user was to be achieved, it was decided that the goal was to display a random number of lines on the LCD screen as this was an easily understandable task for the user. The second consideration was to then how to check which player pressed the corresponding number on the keypad. E.g. if 7 lines were displayed on the LCD screen a player would have to press "7" on their respective keypad and the system would have to differentiate this from an undesired response. The first player to press the correct key then would win the round.
The final consideration was to have some sort of scoring system to add a competitive element to the game, as such it was decided that the game would include 10 rounds which constituted one match.
The system was developed using a modular approach. Three phases...
These three phases were broken down into a number of separate methods detailed below
The final solution worked well and met our specification. It allowed two players to pit themselves against each other and would reward the faster player.
However, there were a handful of minor issues that arose.
During the time between two rounds of a match being played the LCD screen did not completely clear instantly. We are unsure of the cause of this but it does not hamper gameplay in any way so we did not actively seek to change it.
When inputting the ten random numbers before the match began, for the system to work, there had to be a slight delay between the pressings of the ten numbers. This was only a fraction of a second, approximately 0.4 seconds this was due to the delay procedure necessary to stop the same number being read in ten times in quick succession.
Loading time into the SWET box was quite long mainly owing to the number of print statements used. It took approximately twenty seconds for loading to complete.
Finally, when trying to play two matches one after the other the scores for each player carried over from the previous round. This ability to play multiple matches was an extension of our original specification. Due to time constraints it wasn't possible to fix this issue but we believe the solution lays in the fact that the scores were stored in global variables and these were not reset at the correct time i.e. the commencement of a new match.
The project has shown that high end graphics and intricate rules aren't a necessity when it comes to developing an enjoyable and stimulating game.
The project has been a great success, in nine hours a working system has been produced in an unfamiliar language, integrating hardware that had not been used by the team before. Furthermore by distancing ourselves from the traditional square lighting approach to solving this problem we feel we have taken the project to another more enjoyable level. Similarly the system fulfils the specification and the competitive element is exciting for the user.