This critique is based on an article titled "Fair Cop" by Eugenie Samuel Rich. The article is written from a scientific point of view as it was published in New Scientist magazine. The brief title itself hints towards the common bad cop good cop idea but doesn't really relate either side to anything tangible
The general overview of the article is related to how a popular online auction site, eBay, is growing in strength but the problems associated with this. The article discusses issues about security within the eBay system. Examples of fraudulent users and counter-steps taken are lengthy and detailed. Such schemes of reduction include combining forces with copyright owners to decrease the frequency of items being sold online which contravene copyright laws.
Upon reading the article I don't feel I've been outwardly persuaded to believe a particular thinking/case. This is perhaps because the article has been published in a notorious scientific magazine. My personal belief on the argument is that the eBay has conducted itself admirably while trying to install a system to counter the use of fraudsters. The needs of the user have been taken into consideration and a legal agreement has been setup between both the user and eBay. Meanwhile eBay has also associated itself with powerful law enforcement agencies to counter any actions of fraudsters. I believe that to stay competitive any company must protect its root of success, in the case of eBay this is trust.
The major issue of the article concerns how eBay has combined forces with local security authorities and companies who own copyrights to try and lessen the selling of illegal items on the website. It uses interviews from eBay employees to inform the reader that eBay stands by all of its decisions in giving out individual customers' information and de-listing items from the website before ensuring they are indeed illegal. The argument presented on behalf of the author is never stated in an outright fashion. During the article the idea of privacy and the way in which eBay conducts itself is hinted towards but never condemned. However, with the length of the article combined with the number of hints the reader can be left confused as to what the main argument is. Is it the fact that eBay de-lists illegal items or is it that privacy is almost compromised on a regular basis?
The article begins by depicting the online auction site of eBay as a "colossal phenomenon" which is growing at a blistering rate every year. Following on from this the article explains the success behind eBay (trust) and how this feature of the company is so strange in the world of today.
After explaining the apparent nirvana that is eBay the article begins to explore the main argument of eBay and its security. The next two paragraphs outline how eBay has teamed up with security experts to reduce fraudulent activities and how eBayers may be surprised to find out what they have agreed to in terms of private data being given out.
Surprisingly, the article then details how the FBI used a common fraudulent trick to lure an apparent fraudulent user into selling an item illegally "But eventually the agent talked him into it". This undermining of eBay by its own partner is quite a shock and compels the reader to continue. It is suggested by the author that perhaps eBay acts like any other big business and its unwavering opinion on security further enhances this image.
Continuing on from this, the article outlines how eBay's partners were involved with lawsuits with small time sellers on eBay due to apparent copyright infringements. The lawsuits finish both times with the seller winning the case adding further negative criticism. This section of the article concludes with detailing how so many users of eBay make a living from it hints towards the apparent flaws in the security system of eBay needing to be addressed for their needs especially.
The article concludes with outlining problems with the Millennium Copyright Act and how eBay uses it to its advantage. This subsection of the article is critical in enforcing the ideas that main argument of the article concerns privacy and not illegality of items sold on eBay.
The organisation of the article is evident and so allows the reader to separate the article more clearly in their mind. Opposed to manipulating the text to influence the readers' opinion the author analyses the information and uses chronologically ordered evidence to support this.
Throughout the article claims that are made are supported by only a handful of evidence which don't support the claims made sufficiently. Indeed the evidence given is remarkable. Figures such as profits of $1.75 billion begin to establish an image of multinational company.
The "high profile" scams are not supported by any figures, again a technique used by the author to hint to the reader the opinion of the author. It's inconclusive but still effective
The article isn't heavily opinionated although the opinion of the author is clear: eBay needs to reconsider its positions on security and privacy. It prefers to highlight key problems with security and privacy issues and allows the reader to make up his/her own mind .With examples of unwavering stances on critical issues and acting more and more like a typical business (e.g. VERO and the selling of medals), the reader is encouraged to believe that eBay is perhaps taking liberties with personal data and its system needs to be reviewed at the very least. To conclude and justify the main body of the article the author adds a sub-article based upon the US Digital Millennium Copyright Act which appears to heap further pressure on eBay's stance of private data. The conclusions at the end of the article are interchangeable with the introduction of eBay. This gives the reader a "full circle" feeling. The article was introduced, examined, concluded and then related back to the introduction finishing the article in a driven manor
The reason why the author decided to publish an article based on eBay is clear. eBay has been growing rapidly for a number of years likewise, so has its popularity. eBays increased presence in the home can bring issues related to fraud and personal details closer to home for the reader. By using the case of eBay the ideas put forth by the author can be easily applied to other businesses by the reader.