The issue of getting people to work hard has been problematic for many businesses for a large proportion of the 20 th Century. Many theories have been put forward as to why individuals will not only work hard but, crucially, have the will to work hard for something or someone. The paper explores the varying reasons as to why people will work hard but also how these reasons can be interpreted negatively resulting in a weakened will to work hard.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution in the Great Britain the world of work was rather more subsistent and consequently relaxed. Scientific management was non existent and the only reason for working was to support ones self or family. However, during the Industrial Revolution the reason for working, the view of work and the very will of people was dramatically influenced and ultimately changed. From 1920-1970 the view of employees changed from the draconian "factor of production" to trying to "Make employees feel that they are important". The elements of early behavioural management eventually evolved into Human Resource Management. Today businesses are investigating deeper and deeper into the world of Human Resource Management as a way to increase productivity and profit. However, not all companies employ strong human resources management teams but still have a high turnover rate. Alternatively some employ this form of management and see no benefit.
The common perception of the average person is there is only one reason to do any work: Money. This view has been around since the Industrial Revolution of the 1800's. Today businesses are still using salary as a will influencing factor on their employees. During the 80's and early 90's pay linked to performance had become increasingly popular. The identification of money has lead to elaborate salary, bonus and payment schemes such as that used at the Santa Fe Railroad. At a time of struggling to compete the business decided to cut salaries to 2400 of its employees and instead introduce an incentive scheme. Within one year incentives pay rose from practically nothing to $35 million. The employees of the company at the time, having had their salaries cut decided it was in their interest to work hard to re-coup their money. As their willingness to work hard increased so did the company's profits. Santa Fe Railroad successfully implemented a financial incentives scheme 3.
To simplify money as an incentive to "more money equals more labour and higher productivity" however, is flawed. As detailed by Fincham and Rhodes (1999) Marx suggested, "the exchange between capital and labour is not a simple exchange of wages for work". Many of today's businesses' are re-structuring incentive schemes to make them more relevant to employees. Some businesses that do no evolve their incentive schemes eventually cause their workforce to become alienated resulting in a weakened will to work hard. "Money being a notoriously ineffective motivator over time for the majority of people" Initially, people will be enthused to work hard as there is the possibility of earning extra money. However, if the system isn't structured correctly or is unfair to employees they will soon resent it and the will to work hard will reduce. Additionally, the incentive scheme could become a hygiene factor. Without it being in place the will to work hard will fall.
Although, money is one of the basic needs for any person it can also be argued that to improve ones self and to become more of a rounded person is equally important, if not more so. Some companies believe that this desire to improve ones self can be harnessed to increase the willingness to work hard. Motorola realised this potential early on "Concerned about the low comprehension level of its work teams, the company began a skill-based compensation program that rewarded them for improving their math and reading skills."
Detailed by Fincham and Rhodes (1999) Maslow wrote self actualization is the need to realise one's full potential. Self actualization isn't simply a tool to make ones self more employable. "Self-actualizing people enjoy life in general and in practically all its aspects". Self actualization is rooted deeper in the psyche of an employee. The need for self actualization connects the world of work to the life world as a person feels that to enjoy their life more wholly one needs to obtain certain "Need Levels".
The scheme introduced by Motorola can increase the will to work hard but it could also lead to a higher employee turnover "Resentment soon built among team members who had to pick up the slack when their fellow members went off for six months of training at full pay" The end result would be that (if not properly managed) some peoples' will to work hard will increase so as to gain extra training. Running parallel to this would be employees whose will to work hard also increased but only because they have to take on an extra work load. A possible drop in morale would be detrimental to both the company and the employees. The only way people will work hard towards the incentives of gaining extra skills would be if the system was correctly managed and structured or if they have a say in what incentives they would prefer
Benefiting from the success of a company will obviously increase the will to work hard among any employees. If an employee holds a share in the business they are taking a risk like with any shares in business, but the crucial difference is that they have a roll in how well the company does "They've benefited handsomely from the soaring stock." The case of Genentech can be seen as supporting the scheme of shareholding. During this survey it was also voted at the best Fortune 100 Best Company to Work For in 2006.
Of course this scheme does have the possibility of increasing the will to work hard but the success of the company and therefore the profit of each of the employees does depend on management too. If the company begins to lose money it will be compounded by the fact that the employees will also lose faith in the company and not work hard.
In menial and repetitive jobs such as factory work the will to work hard can be very low. The speed at which work is carried out can also be determined by the speed of the machinery involved meaning the amount of work an employee can do is capped. Employees can feel as though they are being dominated by the machinery and therefore the management. A re-structuring of a hierarchy from a pyramidal (i.e. one boss and a number of sub ordinates) to a flatter hierarchy can prove to be successful. The case of Boart Longyear, who opted for self managed teams, is one such case. After introducing the self managed teams "Individual team members really pulled their weight" Instead of being given goals to achieve, the employees within the self managed team were in charge of their own proceedings. The case of Boart Longyear gives evidence to the findings that employees tend to work harder in pursuing goals that they have helped set than those that have been assigned to them
Employees felt that to some extent at least they were able to express their own opinions and, crucially, be heard. According to Maslows Hierarchy of Needs this ability to express, be recognised and in due course be praised fulfils two of the five levels.
Another reason as to why people will work hard follows on from this idea of expressionism. Although not possible in all types and places of work creativity is still at the heart of the reason as to why some people will work hard. "People have an enormous need for art and poetry that industry does not yet understand"  Today the service industry dominates the economy but there still remain craftsmen and women, artists and architects. These people cannot be trained to do what they pursue as their profession. Rather their mind sets goals and their creativity drives them towards it. Crucially, their involvement in any project is tied closely to the end product and their end mind set is to be satisfied with their own being. As Fincham and Rhodes (1999) detail, Marx implies that the proximity of the worker to that of the labour is crucial in the morale and mental state of the worker. The drive of someone within a creative industry needs no encouraging as it may do in the service industry; they work hard because they love their profession.
Trying to instil this feeling of love towards a business and labour is a difficult thing to do in the service industry. Human Resources Management is playing a defining role in trying to unlock the secret towards getting people to change their wills; to become hard workers. The case of egg is an excellent example of the employer trying to incorporate the company into the employees' lifestyle. Terms such as egg people and organised sports teams after work encourage this ethic. Even if the employees realise what is happening, in the footage it is obvious that they don't seem to mind as they see themselves as abusing the company, i.e. using the after work socials excessively
Making an employee feel part of a family isn't a new idea. Paternalistic employers have been around since the 19 th Century with pioneers such as Cadbury. By taking control of both the life world and working environment an employee can feel looked after. "The workers put forth extra effort because they saw the research as a sign of management's interest in them". Famously, The Hawthorne Studies clearly showed that despite not being offered anything new or innovative the employees felt they were being looked after and so their willingness to work hard also increased. This sense of being looked after can be likened to a family which will (theoretically) stem into love for the business. The need for "Safety, belongingness, love relations and for respect" can only be found from "Outside the person" meaning social interaction with others is highly valued by people and can only be found from other people. As a person is surrounded by others at work, it is one of a handful (if not the only) place(s) where these needs can be met. The increase in morale in the work place again increases willingness to work hard.
Additionally, an employee can feel they are being watched over and scrutinised continually leading to an increase in stress In an increase in stress coupled with the fact that both the life world and work environment are dominated by the employer could lead to an increase in the willingness to work hard on behalf of the employee. In most paternalistic cases the intention is usually not to emotionally force the employee to work. What if the employee was forced to work?
Generally speaking the choice as to whether to work hard can be laid at the feet of an individual. Motivation can help towards this but nevertheless the will of an individual is their own. However, in some institutions such as the army or prisons people have another will thrust upon them and are expected to accept it as their own. In the case of Benthams Panopticon the "Inspector wants to control prisoner, to force him to conform." Of course this can lead to conflict as the enforcer may be seen as trying to totally control a person and not just their will. Situations such as these can lead to questions of morality within an organisation.
Volunteer work is closely intertwined with a rarely seen side of business, morality. Rousseau (1762) believed that people are naturally generous but that this side of human nature has been distorted by the state. "Everything is good in leaving the hands of the creator of things; everything degenerates in the hands of man." People will work hard because it is in their human nature to do so for the common good. Although apparently seeming totally selfless it can also encourage a sense of pride and self-confidence leading to a further increase in the will to work hard.
To most people their will is there own and the only person capable of changing it is themselves. The key to being a successful manager, some might argue, is to change the will of the employee such that their key goal during working hours is to work as hard as possible. So far the paper has outlined why people work hard from the perspective of the employee, however, the person employing some of the techniques used is the manager. Any motivation techniques used by a manager is always orientated towards the employee. This includes the incentive of extra pay or additional skills. Following on from this there are explanations which can be attributed to both the employee and the manager. If employees become shareholders of the company they work for it is in their interest and the managers that they work hard. However, the majority of reasons why people work hard are down to the individual. Pride, morality and need to be creative cannot be instilled by the managers. A proverbial carrot can be dangled in front of each employee but the choice as to whether they want to work hard can only be made by the individual. It can be argued that by manipulating the workforce it is actually the managerial influence and not the individuals' personality that is the determining factor behind the will to work hard. This can be countered by the fact that if managers had no employees there would be no will to work hard on behalf of the employees. If the employees had no manager there could still be a will to work hard.
During the paper I have outlined a multitude of reasons why a person will decide to work hard for themselves, their company or for the good of mankind. A key feature with all of the reasons is that they are all trying to explain the needs of a universal human being. Each explanation assumes that human nature can be calculated and defined to fit a non-existent perfect model. The needs of people will vary constantly and so there cannot be solely one reason for people to work hard. These issues were also addressed by Schein(1980) who first presented the idea of the "complex model" . In this model he indicates that he believes that the needs of people from day to day will be continually changing. One of the needs incorporated in his thinking is the will to work hard just like any other natural human feeling or emotion. Humans are not naturally rationally-economic. With Motorola, despite everyone being offered an equal incentive people reacted differently .Herein lays the answer. The greatest factor which influences ones willingness to work hard can be located at the root of all the reasons detailed throughout the paper: Human Nature