Parmenides' contribution to the philosophical canon is in the form of a poem which, for ease of reference, is divided into three parts. The introduction presents Parmenides as a shaman of sorts, and is sometimes considered the more literary prelude to the philosophical thoughts which occur in the following parts. The Way of Truth follows on from the introduction, and in it the goddess reveals that the world is unchanging, in spite of what evidence our senses might provide to the contrary. The goddess is able to see past our sensory picture of the world because she is speaking as one who has a viewpoint completely detached from the world of mortals. After communicating this divine revelation, repeatedly stressing that it is the only true way, she then takes what appears an odd step in her reasoning, describing the world as mortals perceive it. This is the Way of Seeming, which the goddess has condemned as being entirely erroneous.
The central question, then, is this: why reveal the truth about reality and then follow it with a description of what mortals wrongly believe to be true? As Waterfield comments, "after this astonishing tour de force it is strange, and even somewhat disappointing, to be taken abruptly into the domain of Pre-Socratic cosmogony." Much of the difficulty here stems from the fact that so little of the second half of his poem remains. The introduction is preserved intact and the Way of Truth can be almost entirely reconstructed, whereas only fragments of the Way of Seeming have survived. With so much of the text missing, the attempts to reconcile the two halves of Parmenides' poem have been many and varied.
The most widely accepted approach has been to claim that the purpose of describing the Way of Seeming is so that no subsequent philosopher will be able to produce a theory which could trump the Way of Truth. If someone else were to produce a better explanation of how the world works, it is conceivable that everyone would accept that as the true description of reality. In order to avoid this, Parmenides provides the most complete account of cosmology he possibly can, so that no rival philosopher or school of thought can do better. By rejecting even this most comprehensive mortal account of how the world works, the goddess is emphasising that the Way of Truth is the only true interpretation of the world. No other mortal, sensory description of how the world works can possibly surpass that provided in the Way of Seeming, and because even the Way of Seeming has been rejected by the goddess, no other account of how the world works can possibly beat Parmenides' Way of Truth. This idea is succinctly summarised by McKirahan in the following manner: "if Parmenides can show that the Way of Mortal Opinion, which he knows to be false, is superior to all possible rival theories, then no such theory can threaten the Way of Truth."
Nevertheless, this seems like a rather convoluted explanation for the inclusion of the Way of Seeming in Parmenides' poem. W. K. C. Guthrie considers this interpretation to be nonsensical, querying why Parmenides argues a case so convincingly for Ancient Greek cosmology when he knows it to be false. After all, if Parmenides truly wishes to prove the mortal way of viewing the world wrong, "then it seems an unlikely and unwise procedure to construct the most persuasive account possible." The 'traditional' interpretation also fails to address the possible reason why Parmenides arranged his Ways in that particular order. Why, after revealing the ultimate truth about the world, should he choose to follow it by discussing what mortals erroneously believe to be true? The impact of the brilliant logic of the goddess' argument in the Way of Truth appears somewhat lessened when followed by the patently false Way of Seeming.
In his 1989 essay, Karl Popper suggests that the reason for Parmenides' arrangement of the Ways is that he wished to break from the traditional model of presenting one's theories. In Ancient Greece, as now, the usual method is to systematically refute an accepted belief before presenting the reader, or listener, with the new one, which avoids all those obstacles which proved to be the downfall of the first theory. Popper suggests that Parmenides' choice to put forward the Way of Truth before the Way of Seeming is a deliberate "inversion of the 'traditional style.'" His Way of Truth is such a break from the work of his contemporaries that to use the traditional model would detract from the originality of his thought. Though this attempt to place Parmenides in context is laudable, the inclusion of the Way of Seeming still appears superfluous. The Way of Truth was, in fact, so groundbreaking that it could easily have stood alone, and this would also break with traditional style Popper implies Parmenides was so eager to avoid.
John Burnet's attempt to reconcile the two halves of Parmenides' work also appeals to the context in which Parmenides was writing. He claims that the Way of Seeming is, in fact, written as though it were from the point of view of a Pythagorean philosopher. The purpose of its following on from the Way of Truth is to emphasise its falsity, throwing its wrongness into stark relief. Burnet gives several reasons for this suggestion, the central one being that Parmenides was himself part of the Pythagorean School of philosophy until he divined the Way of Truth. Burnet speculates that "IN BOOK LENT TO AMBROSE" Indeed, this seems a likely suggestion, were it not for the fact that Parmenides and the goddess both describe the Way of Seeming as being the 'beliefs of mortals.' The use of the plural here indicates that this Way is not limited only to the Pythagorean philosopher.
To my mind, the most satisfactory explanation of the link between the first and second halves of Parmenides' poem is that put forward by Karl Popper in his 1988 essay 'Can the Moon Throw Light on Parmenides' Ways?' He points out that Parmenides was the first to discover that the waxing and waning of the moon was in fact a trick of the light, and as a consequence the moon remains a spherical solid no matter what stage it has reached in the lunar cycle. So, that which appeared to change with the passage of time was, in fact, not changing at all. Popper speculates that this ground-breaking discovery is likely to have had an influence on the whole of Parmenides' thought. As a direct result of his discovery, Parmenides might well have come to the conclusion that all change is in fact an illusion, like the waxing and waning of the moon; "a play of shadows," as Popper puts it. This is the basic principle of the Way of Truth and must be understood before Parmenides can explain why us mortals perceive the world the way we do. After all, the Way of Truth is the dark, solid, unchanging foundation upon which those shadows (which constitute the world as understood by the senses) are projected. For this reason the Way of Truth must proceed the Way of Seeming. As Guthrie says,
There could, however, be a way of reading the text which removes all confusion over the inclusion of the Way of Seeming in Parmenides' poem. It is based upon the belief that perhaps the word 'apatlon', meaning 'deceitful' could have been mistaken for the word 'apatton', meaning 'so far unused.' If the instances of 'deceitful' were replaced with 'so far unused', then, Popper suggests, the Way of Seeming can be read simply as "Parmenides' claim that his conjectural theory is new." The way that is not and cannot be, which the goddess stresses the falsity of in the Way of Truth is therefore not identifiable with the second part of the poem. Parmenides' cosmological discoveries are in fact entirely compatible with the Way of Truth, since they rely upon an unchanging world for their basis. What we have left of Parmenides' Way of Seeming is so fragmentary that it is quite possible that the original Greek could have been transcribed incorrectly, and as a result, misunderstood for millennia.