The question about the teachability of virtue came to the fore in 5 th Century BC Athens, and E. Seymer Thompson provides an excellent summary of the reasons for this. It was obvious that parents were incapable of instilling virtue in their offspring, since 'great fathers sometimes had feeble sons, good fathers vicious sons, wise fathers silly sons.' (xxviii) While certain things could be communicated - by the ordinary arts, one assumes that Thompson means things like habits or mannerisms - but where virtue 'that vaguely-apprehended something that made one man count for more than another' (xxviii) was concerned, the actions of parents and guardians had little effect. At about the same time, a class of men emerged who claimed to 'fill the gap that home-training obviously left.' (xxviii) Opinion was divided in Ancient Athens over these Sophists, with the older generations cursing them and the younger praising. Their claim to teach virtue was crucial, for if, as it emerged, the Sophists appeared unsuccessful in their task, it could be for one of two reasons. 'It might either be because they were attempting something in itself impossible or because they were attempting a possible task in the wrong way.' (xxviii) Either way, the Athenians were eager to know whether or not virtue could be taught.
This Platonic dialogue is initiated by Meno, a wealthy mathematician with political ambitions, who wishes to know how to acquire aret, 'that elusive quality which makes all the difference between success and failure.' (Guthrie 237) The knowledge of how virtue is obtained is of crucial import to the young Meno, who knows he must develop a virtuous character in order to further his political career. Rather than answer Meno's opening question straight away, Socrates insists that they attempt to define what virtue is. When their attempts fail, Meno suggests that learning is impossible, since if one knows something, one does not enquire into it, and if one does not know a given thing, all enquiry is futile, since one does not know what one is looking for. In answer to this paradox, Socrates explains that the soul is immortal, and as a result it has had countless opportunities to observe the world of forms where true virtue resides. 'Learning or discovery, therefore, is in reality only recovery, or recollection, of what we knew before.' (Guthrie 239) To prove this point Socrates calls in Meno's slave boy and asks him a series of questions. In this way he hopes to show that the slave is not being told the correct answer, but rather is required, by faltering steps, to recall knowledge he already possessed.
Having established that learning, (or recollection), is possible it would seem logical to determine the nature of virtue next before progressing on to whether or not it can be taught, since only by establishing what virtue is can any conclusions be drawn about its teachability. Nevertheless, in his desperation to answer to his original question, Meno insists that Socrates find out whether virtue is teachable rather than become sidetracked in defining virtue itself. This is the point at which the dialogue begins to get confusing, since the logical order has been confounded by Meno's eagerness. In order to combat the lack of working definition, Socrates 'suggests that they might proceed on a hypothesis.' (Guthrie 239) This hypothesis is that if virtue can be taught then it must be a form of knowledge as only knowledge can be taught. If virtue were teachable, Socrates argues, there would be people who claim to teach it, yet no such people can be found. Indeed, even the Sophist Gorgias, Meno's teacher, is said to laugh at the other Sophists who claim to teach virtue. (Plato 95c) scorns those who claim to teach virtue. Because no teachers of virtue can be found, Socrates concludes that virtue is not knowledge and therefore cannot be taught.
In order to explain how and why some statesmen regularly make good political decisions, he makes his famous distinction between knowledge and opinion. Knowledge is constant and always correct. If someone had true knowledge of virtue then they would know the form of virtue. Opinion, however, is far less stable, and is not always correct. This is the sum of human virtue. Nevertheless, Socrates finishes by claiming that 'whoever has it [virtue] gets it by divine dispensation without taking thought, unless he be the kind of statesman who can create another like himself.' (Guthrie 156) The conclusion of this dialogue is then deeply unsatisfactory, seeming to claim that if someone were to have a true knowledge of the form of virtue, he could teach it, but as no one can possibly have this sort of knowledge, virtue cannot be taught.
W.K.C. Guthrie claims that the conclusion Socrates reaches at the end of the Meno is not the correct one, 'because Meno has made Socrates ask the wrong question.' (244) He argues that virtue is knowledge, (knowledge being, of course, recollection) and so asserts that virtue can be taught, if teaching is viewed as the 'bringing to birth truths with which another is pregnant' (244) as opposed to the Sophistic claim, which Gorgias mocked, of being able to hand over 'ready-made packets of knowledge'. (244)
The doctrine of anamnesis (or recollection) is essential for a proper understanding of Guthrie's interpretation. It tells us that learning is a continuous process, and that there is no 'impossible leap' (257) from total ignorance to complete knowledge. When we get things wrong, we gradually realise the correct way of seeing things, based upon our previous experiences. Thus we gradually gain knowledge of the forms through our incorrect interpretation of the world. While Guthrie views this concept of recollection as the key to understanding how virtue can be acquired, Jerome Eckstein views it as nothing more than elaborate ploy on Socrates' part to ridicule Meno. Viewing the dialogue from a dramatic-philosophic perspective, Eckstein suggests that the inclusion of the doctrine of anamnesis serves only to avoid the paradox that Meno puts forward,
After all, if all learning is simply a matter of recollection, then one already has knowledge, though it is buried deeply in one's brain. This is likened by Guthrie to 'invisible ink, awaiting the proper reagent to make it perceptible.' (257)
If this idea is correct, then we never acquire new knowledge, but rather recall that which is latent, thus neatly avoiding Meno's paradox. Eckstein claims that Meno should not be appeased by this solution. He points out that 'even if "there is no difficulty in her [the soul] eliciting, or as men say, 'learning', out of a single recollection all the rest," there is a difficulty according to Meno's argument, in explaining how "the soul has learned all things" during her immortality.' (32) Indeed, this makes perfect sense, for the soul must have had some means of acquiring knowledge during the course of eternity. A response to Eckstein's criticism could be that the soul's observance of the forms is not in any way the same as the active seeking of truth that Meno describes in his paradox. If the soul's observance of forms is in fact passive, then there is no learning as we might understand the term, but rather detached perception of ultimate truths. Our method of learning in this life is then a gradual progression toward that ultimate knowledge we had once witnessed.
Eckstein's way of resolving problematic conclusion of the Meno is by a very literal reading of the text. He states that virtue is 'largely unguided by knowledge; for if it were its guide, then virtue would be teachable and taught.' (70) Instead, we are guided in our pursuit of virtue by right opinion. Naturally this then presents us with a further problem, namely how someone can be consistently virtuous when correct opinion is so frequently a fleeting phenomenon. Rather than provide an answer to this crucial question, Eckstein avoids the issue completely in a vague statement towards the end of his commentary. 'Right opinion, whether evanescent or constant, is a good guide while it prevails; but its genesis is largely beyond human control.' (71) So, if Eckstein is correct then virtue is guided, sometimes, by right opinion and not knowledge, and when right opinion abandons us (which it frequently does), we have no guide at all and no way of summoning it.
The contribution that this makes toward a solution to the question of the teachability of virtue is negligible. After all, Eckstein has denied that virtue is knowledge, and as a result it cannot be taught. Instead, the path to virtue appears to be guided by powers which 'are enveloped in mystery,' and which are 'chance occurrences.' (71) Surely a more useful conclusion would be to follow the suggestion implicit in Guthrie's reading of the Meno. Such an approach would suggest that the more frequently we allow ourselves to be guided by correct opinion (doxa), the more often we will be virtuous. After all, as Guthrie says, 'doxa in the Meno is a dim and uncertain awareness of the same objects (Forms) of which knowledge is the full, clear and stable understanding.' (244)
R.S. Bluck attempts to avoid the problems that Eckstein encountered by differentiating between higher and lower forms of virtue. This higher virtue is knowledge, and could be taught by Socrates' method, but nobody knows how to do it. The lower form of virtue, on the other hand, has nothing to do with knowledge, but is based upon right opinion which is allocated to men by divine dispensation. V.C. Chappell criticises Bluck for this separation of virtue, pointing out that there is no evidence for this in the text itself. He also takes issue with Bluck's assumption that Plato 'thought no actual virtue' (by which he means the virtue we encounter in the mortal world) is based on knowledge.' (228) Instead, Chappell points out that it is entirely plausible that Plato thought Socrates alone had virtue-based knowledge and that Socrates' 'professions of ignorance were to be taken ironically.' (228) If this interpretation is correct then the Socratic method of drawing out truths latent in the minds of his pupils is the way of teaching virtue. Chappell argues that it is possible to make a case for the Meno acting as a sort of showcase for Socrates' abilities, demonstrating that he alone 'had devised the proper method...if only men would listen to him or listen to him long enough.' (228)
While an ingenious solution, it does not entirely resolve the problems that the Meno presents. Are we to conclude that virtue can be taught, but that the only person capable of teaching it is Socrates? This is somewhat nonsensical and entirely unhelpful for the billions of us who have been born since Socrates' death in 399BC. Either virtue is teachable or it is not, and it would be rather ridiculous for Plato to claim that there was only ever one person capable of teaching it.
Another critic, R.E. Allen makes quite another attack on Bluck's conclusion that virtue is teachable. He points out that in the Meno, Plato
The method of most commentators including Bluck, says Allen, is to assume that the Meno gives us 'positive news' (531) about the teachability of virtue, and to attempt to reconcile these bizarre contradictions by picking and choosing from among Plato's premises. In Bluck's case, he tells us that Plato 'intended us to understand that virtue can be taught, but that it is not taught at present because such virtue as exists at present is not knowledge.' (531) Bluck's distinction between higher and lower forms of virtue enables him to reach such a conclusion since the virtue we come across on earth is guided by right opinion, and not absolute knowledge. But as Allen makes clear, such an approach is inherently flawed because Socrates spends a good chunk of the dialogue (87c-89a) systematically showing how virtue is knowledge. To arrive at Bluck's conclusion then is to contradiction oneself. In Allen's own words, 'knowledge is an intrinsic or defining characteristic of virtue. If, therefore, such virtue as exists at present is not knowledge, such virtue as exists at present is not virtue.' (531-2) This conclusion is clearly nonsensical.
Allen then suggests another approach to the Meno as a dialogue. The question of whether virtue can be taught is raised at the very outset by Meno, desperate to learn how to further his political ambitions, for which virtue is essential. He is so keen to be told the answer to his question that he ignores the attempts by Socrates to define what virtue is, and this is precisely what leads to a conclusion in which nothing appears to have been resolved. After all, 'a satisfactory conclusion about whether virtue is teachable requires knowledge of what virtue is.' (Irwin 137) Allen suggests that the reason the dialogue ends in 'bewilderment' is because Socrates and Meno do not have a firm grasp of the concept they are trying to understand. 'If this is true, the tangled conclusion of the Meno is a piece of dialectical irony, its purpose not to plead the necessity of definition but to exhibit it.' (532) The purpose of the Meno then is not to resolve the problem of the teachability of virtue is, but rather to demonstrate in dramatic form what goes wrong when philosophers try to resolve complication questions without first understanding the basic concepts. According to Allen, the Meno indicates 'the conditions of inquiry under which alone moral conclusions may be properly reached.' (532)