Neoclassicism was a literary movement which took Classical writing as a model, taking the qualities present in the original works and make them relevant to a 17 th Century audience. In particular, Aristotle's 'Poetics' was rediscovered and 'was taken as a rulebook for literary composition.' (86) In it, Aristotle examines the most successful tragedies of his time and then lists the ingredients essential to make a good play. By the Renaissance, Aristotle's authority had grown to such a point that these suggestions were taken as absolutes against which all plays were judged. In particular, the 'Poetics' stipulate that a play should follow one action without digression and that the action should take place within the space of one day, and in one location only. These unities of action, time and place form the basic framework for writing a play.
Despite being backed by the philosophical mind of Aristotle, these restrictions of the forms drama can take do seem somewhat absurd. In his 'Preface to Shakespeare', Dr. Samuel Johnson makes a case for them, declaring that
In short, we know that the literature produced by the Classical world is of a high calibre since we have had well over a millennium to critically evaluate it. These classical forms are then tried and tested ways to ensure the production of excellent literature.
Much of the reason for the 17 th Century following of these prescriptive rules was because their view of art was very literalistic. Lacking a concept of the aesthetic, art was thought to be isomorphic, having a direct and immediate influence upon the viewer. Thus, if the play lasted only two hours, it would be stretching the audiences' credulity for the action to take place over more than a day. Likewise, switching from one setting to another would be problematic: how can it be possible for an audience to apprehend that one location has transformed into another? In fact, this very literal view of theatre meant that the guidelines devised by Aristotle produced highly intense theatrical experiences, since the action was concentrated in one place in a short period of time. Aristotle says that 'the plot, since it is a representation of action, ought to represent a single action, and a whole one at that; and its parts (the incidents) ought to be so constructed that, when some part is transposed or removed, the whole is disrupted and disturbed.' (97) This unity of action would result in yet more intensification, with a total absence of digression. This experience would be quite alien to a modern viewer.
A phrase which occurs repeatedly in Aristotle's 'Poetics' is that a drama should be 'in accordance with probability or necessity.' (97) A play must be completely believable, and any untoward elements ought not to form part of the action of the play. As an example he uses Sophocles' 'Oedipus Rex', which neatly sidesteps the issue of portraying the mythical sphinx by excluding her entirely from the play itself. Thus 'verisimilitude' becomes a key element in any Neoclassical play. Decorum is also of great importance, meaning that the virtuous should end happily and the wicked badly since it was the job of a playwright to improve the moral calibre of his audience. For this reason Aristotle says that tragedies should not 'show wicked men passing from misfortune to good fortune. This is most untragic of all, as it has nothing of what it should; for it is neither morally satisfying nor pitiable nor terrifying.' (100)
Though frequently read as a staunch defence of this prescriptive method of producing drama, Pierre Corneille's piece 'Of the Three Unities of Action, Time, and Place' is in fact a plea for flexibility. His 'Le Cid', while enjoyed by the public, was heavily criticised for ignoring the three unities, and for being immoral. Somewhat mollified by these attacks, Corneille made sure his subsequent plays followed Aristotle's guidelines to the letter. Years later, however, he wrote this piece in which he suggests a more relaxed approach to the three unities. Corneille tells us that 'the poet is not required to show all the particular actions which bring about the principal one,' (368) reasoning, quite rightly, that there can be a number of 'lesser' actions which inform the main one, and which, more to the point, need not happen on stage. These, he suggests, the poet could 'hide...behind the scenes' (368) and relate them to the audience by means of a narration or another theatrical device.
As to the unity of time, he recalls the debate as to whether the line 'one journey of the sun' (373) in Aristotle's 'Poetics' meant twelve or twenty four hours. In fact, Corneille says that he 'should push the total without scruple as far as thirty,' (374) since the restriction of even twenty four hours creates a great deal of difficulty for the playwright. By way of illustration, Corneille mentions Euripides' 'The Suppliants' where Theseus is obliged to leave in one scene to fight a rival army at Thebes before returning victorious in time for the next act. (374) Surely this unnatural compression of time would cause difficulties for the audience? It seems rather illogical to believe in the literalistic view of theatre and think that the viewer can believe that events spanning twelve, twenty four, or even thirty hours can be fitted into the space of two hours. Although Corneille is unable to find anything addressing the unity of place in the 'Poetics', he supposes that it is simply an extension of the unity of time. After all, if the action takes place over the course of a day, then there is a limit to the distance the characters can travel in that time if the play is striving for verisimilitude. Though this is frequently limited to one place alone, Corneille suggests that this be extended to encompass, say, an entire city, since it is entirely possible for a man to 'go and return in twenty-four hours.' (376)
In this way Corneille attempts to increase the flexibility of the three unities, pointing out ways in which they can be extended to provide playwrights with greater artistic freedom. It is worth noting, though, that he still thinks that the unities are worth preserving. 'I hold, then, that we ought to seek exact unity as much as possible, but that this unity does not suit every kind of subject.' (377) Just over a hundred years later, when the 'Preface to Shakespeare' was first published, Johnson takes these Neoclassical rules to pieces by appealing to the 'authority of Shakespeare.' (477) He states openly, and simply, what Corneille hints at throughout his piece on the three unities, namely that 'they have given more trouble to the poet, than pleasure to the auditor.' (474)
Johnson allows that the Bard's plots have 'commonly what Aristotle requires, a beginning, a middle, and an end.' (476), but that 'to the unities of time and place he has shewn no regard.' (474) Despite this, Shakespeare has still managed to 'outlive his century, the term commonly fixed as the test of literary merit.' (469) If he has succeeded in doing this without adhering to the rules prescribed by Neoclassicism, it would suggest that the three unities or the following of rules are not necessary to produce works of literary excellence. This would perhaps come as somewhat of a shock to Alexander Pope, who wrote in his 'Essay on Criticism' that 'those RULES [of literary production] of old discover'd, not devis'd, / are Nature still, but Nature Methodiz'd. ' (88-89) Shakespeare defy the rule of verisimilitude by giving 'to one age or nation, without scruple, the customs, institutions, and opinions or another, at the expense not only of likelihood, but of possibility.' (475) Not only that, but his plays also lack decorum since the characters that populate his plays are carried 'indifferently through right and wrong.' (474)
Why, then, the enduring popularity of Shakespeare's plays if theatre ought to be literalistic? Johnson declares that 'the truth is that the spectators are always in their senses, and know, from the first act to the last, that the stage is only a stage and that the players are only players.' (478) When watching a play the audience is always fully aware that the action they are observing is a fabrication. There is therefore no need to strive for verisimilitude or decorum, since they know that what they are watching is not real. Johnson points out that there is no absurdity in 'allowing that [theatrical] space to represent first Athens, and then Sicily, which was always known to be neither Sicily nor Athens, but a modern theatre.' (478) Once it is granted that the unity of place is redundant, so too must be the unity of time, since Corneille has pointed out that the two are inextricably linked. If the action can take place all over the globe then 'time may [also] be extended.' (478)
Johnson likens playwrights who produce excellent plays in line with the three unities to an architect who manages to fit a number of architectural features into a citadel 'without any deduction from its strength; but the principle beauty of a citadel is to exclude the enemy; and the greatest graces of a play are to copy nature and instruct life.' (479-80) Following Neoclassical rules does not ensure that a literary work is good, and if a playwright is able to abide by them and create an enduring work of theatre, the following of the rules made no contribution to its merit as the play would still be excellent even if the unities did not exist. As a result of these revelations, Johnson declares that the unities 'are always to be sacrificed to the nobler beauties of variety and instruction.' (479)
The fixed literary rules of the Neoclassical period are certainly absurd to a modern audience, but this is largely because the literalistic view of art that they had then has since been surpassed by the concept of the aesthetic. Lacking such a concept, the literary critics of the 17 th and 18 th centuries thought that art should mimic nature, and that the guidelines for writing would help ensure that the literary work was as true to nature as possible. Thus to set the action of the play in one place and within the cycle of a day would seem a logical solution, since jumping around in time and place would be unnatural. Nevertheless, a century after Corneille suggested grounds for increasing the flexibility of the three unities, Johnson criticised them, understanding that the audience is always aware that what they are watching is a play. Since then, our concept of the aesthetic has expanded even further. Modern playwrights switch between the past, present and future, the real and the imagined, and delight in the abstract. This is because we are fully aware that the aesthetic is most certainly not the same as nature.