The term 'meme' was first introduced by Richard Dawkins in 1976. Dawkins popularised the influential view that evolution is best understood in terms of competition between genes (Blackmore, 1999), and in his conception of memes he takes this one step further, drawing on the analogy between genetic and cultural evolution to claim that culture can be split into units called memes; ideas, habits, skills, stories or any kind of behaviour or information that is copied from person to person by imitation (Dawkins, 1976). Memes are the replicators of the cultural world; the smallest elements of culture or complex ideas that replicate themselves with reliability and fecundity (Dennett, 1993). Like genes, memes are selfish. They pursue their own interests and are concerned only with their survival and replication. Since each mind has a limited capacity for memes, there is considerable competition among memes for entry into as many minds as possible (Ball, 1984). Dawkins urges us to take the idea of meme evolution literally; it is not just analogous to biological or genetic evolution (Dennett, 1990), but a phenomenon that obeys the laws of natural selection exactly, and is achieving evolutionary change at a rate that leaves conventional genetic evolution far behind (Dawkins, 1976).
One of the most comprehensive works on memes is Blackmore's (1999) The Meme Machine, which uses memes to elaborate an ambitious theory designed to account for numerous aspects of human evolution and psychology (Jahoda, 2002). Blackmore claims that imitation, as the primary mechanism by which memes replicate themselves, can be taken as the basis of a major theory of the evolution of the human mind and even of what it means to be a conscious self. Imitation is posited as the key to what set our ancestors apart from all other animals. The theory starts with one simple mechanism - the competition between memes to get into human brains and be passed on again - and from this it gives rise to explanation for such diverse phenomena as the evolution of the enormous human brain, the origins of language, human altruism, sex, religion, and even the evolution of the internet (Blackmore, 1999).
Blackmore's theory is certainly well argued, and her justifications of both the meme-gene analogy and how memes drive many aspects of human development are theoretically sound. However, I believe there may be an initial flaw in Blackmore's argument in that she appears to take the existence of memes for granted and expounds her detailed argument from this premise when this fact is not necessarily clear. It may be contended that if one refuses to acknowledge the reality of memes, Blackmore's argument fails. One can question whether cultural evolution is truly analogous to genetic evolution (Dennett, 1995), whether there are really cultural units that have interests of their own, and whether imitation is indeed the driving force behind all human behaviour (Holdcroft & Lewis, 2001). Midgley (2000), for example, calls memes 'mythical entities' and an 'empty and misleading metaphor'. She argues that thought and culture cannot be broken down into distinct units, since they are moving and developing patterns in human behaviour. There is therefore no use in trying to understand them by tracing reproductive interactions among memetic units Midgley, 1999).
Nonetheless, if, for now, one accepts the existence of memes and ignores such criticism, Blackmore's memetic model provides feasible and coherent explanations of a diverse range of phenomena that have traditionally proved difficult to explain in terms of biological evolution or individual genetic advantage (Edmonds, 2002). It has been argued that the development of human language, for example, does not conform to a Darwinian evolutionary explanation since it shows no genetic variation or selective advantage and cannot exist in intermediate forms (Blackmore, 1999). The same can be said of the excessively large human brain, which stands out greatly in comparisons of encephalisation with other primates. Most early theories suggest that toolmaking, technological advances and the human social environment, drove the need for a larger brain, whilst language is explained as a non-adaptive side consequence of the evolution of the brain, or as evolving as a response to selection pressure for improved communication between humans (Gould, 1997). However, Blackmore presents a memetic explanation. Memes compete to be copied, and people who are especially good at imitation gain a survival advantage by being able to copy the currently most useful memes. Since imitation is a difficult skill requiring extra brain power, the advantage is given to genes for bigger brains and better imitation. The genes were therefore forced into creating big brains, capable of spreading memes. Blackmore also proposes that the human language faculty primarily provided a selective advantage to memes, rather than genes. Successful replicators are those with high fidelity, longevity and fecundity. Digitisation of sounds into words may increase fidelity, combining words into novel combinations may improve fecundity, and every improvement leads to increased memetic competition. The memes that can get themselves spoken will be copied more than those that cannot, and people who can best copy the winning sounds have an advantage and pass on the genes that gave them that ability. Gradually, human brains would be driven by this emerging language. The development of language was thus an evolutionary process like any other, creating complex design apparently out of nowhere (Blackmore, 2003).
A further problem Blackmore tackles is that of altruism, which conflicts with traditional understanding that humans selfishly pursue their own interests. Traditionally altruism has been explained either in terms of advantage to the genes; you are altruistic towards your children because they are the only direct way your genes can be carried on into future generations; you are altruistic toward fellow men because you may get aid in return, or in terms of a true morality, an independent moral conscience or a spiritual essence in humans that overcomes the selfish dictates of our genes; a view which finds little favour with scientists (Blackmore, 1999). Memetics provides a third solution. Blackmore suggests that the kind, generous, altruistic person will spread more memes. He will have more friends and spend more time talking to them; they will be influenced by him and in turn will imitate his popular behaviour. Thus his altruism will spread. In contrast, the mean and selfish person will have few chances to replicate his memes because the few people who could potentially imitate him rarely do so.
Blackmore provides a number of such examples of behaviours that are mimetically adaptive but biologically unadaptive (Cook, 1995); for example, she claims the rise in the use of birth control, whilst not genetically advantageous, means women who have fewer children will have more time to spread their own memes, including memes for birth control and the pleasures of a small family. These are the women whose success inspires others, and who provide role models for other women to copy. Furthermore, whilst adoption may be viewed as a mistake from the gene's point of view, for memes the benefits of adoption are obvious. As far as memes are concerned, the time and effort expended on an adopted child are as valuable as that expended on one's own offspring. All that matters is that you can pass on your memes to people who will be influenced by you and subsequently imitate your behaviours and beliefs. Genetic relation is of no importance. In both of these examples there is a battle between memes and genes to take control over the machinery of replication (Blackmore, 1999).
All of these arguments therefore appear to be perfectly logical and acceptable; however, as previously argued, I believe they are only acceptable if one first accepts the existence of memes. If one refuses to believe that such elements of culture exist or compete to get themselves replicated through imitation, there is no reason to believe Blackmore's theory. Furthermore, I believe that Blackmore goes too far in attempting to apply memes to areas such as mate selection, and in implying that memes are even responsible for our sense of a conscious self.
Traditional genetic evolutionary theory suggests we choose mates based on fitness and biological advantage; men are sexually attracted to women who appear fertile, with big hips and youthful, symmetrical features, whilst women are attracted to strong, high-status men with plentiful resources. Essentially we should choose to mate with people who would, in the environment of our evolutionary past, have helped to increase our genetic legacy (Blackmore, 1999). Blackmore suggests mate choice is based not only on genetic advantage, but also memetic advantage. Once memes arose in our far past, natural selection would favour people who chose to mate with the best imitators. In an early hunter-gatherer society a man who was especially good at imitation would have been able to copy the latest hunting skills or stone tool technology and hence would have gained a biological advantage. Thus a woman who mated with him would be more likely to have children who shared that imitation ability and that advantage. Such a woman would have to look in potential mates for signs of the general ability to imitate and innovate. This argument suggests we will still want to mate with the best imitators and spreaders of memes, such as writers, artists, journalists, broadcasters, film stars and musicians (Blackmore, 1999). However, whilst it may be the case that some high profile people who are prominent in the media are often seen as desirable mates, this is not true for all such people, and I do not think it can be reasonably argued that we choose mates on the basis of whether they are a good imitator. Firstly, we arguably do not know what the signs of a good imitator are, and secondly, in being attracted to someone we tend to consider factors such as their looks and personality; we are certainly not aware of considering their potential for spreading memes.
Furthermore I believe that Blackmore's conclusion regarding our concept of the conscious self is largely unbelievable. Blackmore claims that the idea of the continuous, persistent and autonomous self is an illusion; the self is actually just a collection of memes. Memes gain an advantage by becoming associated with a person's self-concept. A 'self' therefore aids their replication. The sense of 'self' has simply been created by the processes of memetic evolution acting in the relatively short period of one human lifetime. Blackmore then goes even further and says that the ways we behave, the choices we make, and the things we say are all a result of complex interactions between memes. There is no inner self which is the initiator of actions, controls the body, or is conscious; thus there is no free will. Blackmore presents an eliminative account of design, mind, and human agency which removes the possibility of voluntary choice or invention on the part of humans (Holdcroft & Lewis, 2001). Intentionality is transferred away from humans and to the memes. Whilst Blackmore has tried to argue against the fact that her argument makes humans completely passive, stating that our intelligence, capacity for making choices, and active social life are all part of the copying environment in which memes compete (Blackmore, 2002), it is hard to see that this could imply anything other than that we are caught up in "a remorseless process in which we are mere pawns" (Jahoda, 2002). I find this aspect of Blackmore's argument hard to accept since it contradicts our very experience of thought and conscious deliberation, and violates the assumption that in making choices we truly have free will and are not influenced or bound by either internal or external forces.
Overall I would argue that The Meme Machine provides a detailed and interesting account of the concept of memes, and certainly does provide some plausible theories that appear to be explained better by memetics than any other theory we currently have available. However, I believe that in attempting to use memes to explain all aspects of human nature and behaviour, Blackmore takes memetic theory beyond logical boundaries. Furthermore, Blackmore restricts memetic transmission to imitation, claiming that imitation is what sets us apart from other animals; however Tomasello (1999) argues that whilst imitation has played a role in cultural evolution the critical difference is in fact the understanding of others as intentional beings like the self. Thus, if the basic principle of cultural learning being driven solely by imitation is rejected the foundations of The Meme Machine collapse and there is no reason why we should accept any of Blackmore's arguments. Critics also argue that just as a gene is nothing without its biological and environmental context the same is true for memes (Wheelwell, 1998; Dupre, 2000), and indeed it is difficult to conceive of memes as cultural units residing in brains that exist independently of contextual interpretation. However, proponents of memetics argue psychology will be as transformed by this discipline as biology was by Darwin (Brodie, 1996), and this perhaps is where the problem lies in getting people to accept memetic theory. In acknowledging the existence of these cultural replicators we have to radically transform our ideas regarding human nature, behaviour and motivation and reformulate our understanding of how and why culture evolved, just as Darwin caused us to rethink our beliefs about the origin of our species. Maybe we are too scared to accept we do not have consciousness, free will, or the possibility of rational choice but rather are completely at the mercy of the interaction between our memes and our genes? Whether the theory of memes is true or not, The Meme Machine provides a comprehensive and detailed insight into how memes may shape human development which, although somewhat unbelievable in parts, is certainly an interesting and enlightening read.