After establishing his own existence by means of his process of systematic doubt, Descartes "does a U-turn and starts coming back, constructing knowledge as he goes." While he considers his own existence as certain, to progress to knowledge of the external world Descartes has need of something external to him that can 'guarantee' the existence of the external world. That something is God. At the start of the second meditation, he likens his task to that of the Greek mathematician Archimedes. "Archimedes, in order to take the terrestrial globe from its place and move it to another, asked only for a point which was fixed and assured." Descartes must prove the existence of God before he can go on to affirm the existence of anything external to him. Unless he can establish these two truths, viz. that there is a God and that He is no deceiver, Descartes concludes that he does not see that he can ever be certain of anything.
As Descartes has already dismissed the evidence of his senses, he cannot use these as the basis for his proof. Instead he turns to the only thing he is certain of: his thoughts. In them he finds certain "clear and distinct ideas," about which he finds that he cannot doubt, and one such is God's existence. In the ontological argument, Descartes attempts to prove God's existence without any reference to human experience, thinking it can be proven by logic alone. This step is absolutely essential because at the end of the second Meditation, he is sure only of his own existence as a 'res cogitans' and thus cannot appeal to evidence in the world for his proof for God's existence. If he fails in the task he sets himself then the proof of the existence of the external world must necessarily fail. Only if Descartes' God exists can he escape the insularity of himself. In its simplest form, the argument reads as follows:
The idea of God is the idea of a supremely perfect being.
A supremely perfect being has all perfections.
Existence is a perfection.
A supremely perfect being has the perfection of existence.
It is impossible to think of God as not existing.
God exists.
Any number of critics, from Descartes' time to our own, has attacked some or all of Descartes' premises in this argument, but Antoine Arnauld is unique among Descartes' objectors in that he views the argument as a whole rather than as being constructed from several different parts. His concern was "how the author avoids reasoning in a circle." Williams and Magee put forward a condensed version of his objection: "only because he [Descartes] "clearly and distinctly" apprehends that God exists can he make any progress from the cogito at all. But only because he knows that God exists and is no deceiver does he have any assurance that what he "clearly and distinctly" apprehends is true." If Descartes' argument is guilty of circularity then it can be entirely dismissed because, being self-contained, it is impossible to prove one way or another.
Anthony Kenny offers a response to this. "Though I cannot doubt something I am here and now clearly and distinctly perceiving, I can - prior to proving God's existence - doubt the general proposition that whatever I clearly and distinctly perceive is true." When we once more start to doubt that, for example, 2 + 3 = 5, we must again return to the beginning and prove that God exists and is no deceiver. However, Descartes maintains that it is sufficient, once we have satisfied ourselves that something is constant, such as 2 + 3 = 5, we no longer need to doubt this anymore and can continue to follow the reasoning of the meditator. Ultimately, however, the ontological argument fails to prove existence of God. His attempt to use logical, scientific method to prove what is, at its most basic level, an intuition, is faintly ludicrous. As Simone Weil says of the ontological enquiry, "one supposes that one knows things in themselves, and compares them with the knowledge one has of them...[this] view is absurd." He is comparing his idea of God with his idea of God and comes to the conclusion that he is correct.
Once Descartes has assured himself that God exists, he believes he is a mere hop skip and jump away from proving the existence of the external world. His argument, laid out in Meditation VI, is based entirely on belief in a God who would not deceive him. Bertrand Russell, in his customarily succinct style, provides a summary of Descartes' argument: "since God has given me such a strong inclination to believe in bodies... He would be deceitful if there were none; therefore bodies exist." To examine Descartes' argument in more detail, I shall provide a brief summary of it:
I can perceive things via the senses by means of a passive faculty
I could not make use of this faculty if there was not also an active faculty to produce these ideas
This active faculty cannot be in me since "the ideas in question are produced without my co-operation and often even against my will."
This active faculty must then be in another substance from me - either a body or else God
I cannot tell which of these is correct, but even though God has not provided me with a way to determine which of these is true, "He has given me a great propensity to believe that they are produced by corporeal things."
[The external world exists]
It is worth noting that Descartes never explicitly makes this final point, but rather that he views this as the most probable conclusion. In his own words, "there is nothing...nature teaches me more expressly, or more sensibly than that I have a body...and therefore I must in no way doubt that there is some truth in this."
This statement appears to directly contradict the view he put forth in the first Meditation, when Descartes informed his reader that "it is prudent never to trust entirely those [the senses] who have once deceived us." Distrusting the evidence of his senses has left him with the certainty of his existence and also that of God, but by the time he writes Meditation VI he declares that "all my senses report the truth much more frequently than not." Descartes even calls the extreme scepticism of his first meditation as "exaggerated doubts" and dismisses them as "laughable." Nevertheless, we are still left with the problem that our senses sometimes play us false. How is it that an omni benevolent God would allow this to happen? Descartes' somewhat vague response is that "the nature of man as a combination of mind and body is such that it is bound to mislead him from time to time." He is quick to point out that this is a human fault, not a divine one, for if this deception were due to God then we would simply return to the problem of the omnipotent malicious demon. Therefore, Descartes claims that, in virtue of the life we lead, we are often obliged "to make a decision before we have had the leisure to examine things so carefully." If we take our time in considering something, Descartes implies that we will never again be deceived. In order to preserve his concept of the omni benevolent God, Descartes has chosen to blame any apparent deception upon "the infirmity and weakness of our nature," so as to avoid returning to the problems he outlined in the first meditation.
In Meditations I and II, Descartes goes about proving his own existence, admitting that the fact that he is thinking is the only thing he can be truly confident of. This part of his quest for certainty does not require a God of any description, because God would have to exist independently of Descartes, and he cannot be certain of anything extraneous of him. In order to move from the certainty of his own existence to the certainty of the external world, it is necessary for Descartes to include an intermediary step. This is to prove the existence of an omni benevolent God who would not wish to deceive him. The role of God in Descartes' Meditations is to prove that the external world is not a figment of Descartes' imagination, since this God of his would not want to deceive him. However the Meditations essentially consist of a number of proofs, the earlier ones forming the foundations for later ones. Each must be absolutely rock solid, because the failure of one means the failure of the subsequent proofs. For this reason, Descartes' failure to definitively prove the existence of God means that his proof for the existence of the external world fails by default.