In order to appreciate whether or not 'I exist' is a well formed claim, it is first necessary to examine the reasons why some have considered it not to be. To begin at the beginning, predicates, as a general rule, describe a given subject. They provide us with information about a subject: 'Sweeney Todd is a man', 'Sweeney Todd is a barber', and 'Sweeney Todd likes murdering his clients'. The predicates in the above sentences are those words which follow the proper noun 'Sweeney Todd'. Already we can see a pattern emerging; each of the above sentences is identical in terms of their logical grammar. As a result, they can all be expressed as 'x is F', where x is the subject and F the predicate. By using logical grammar instead of the muddled English language, the structure of the sentence is exposed, revealing the meaning rather than masking it behind the ambiguity of language. It also enables us to compare sentences with greater ease.
To say that 'exists' is a first level predicate is to say that it works in precisely the same manner as predicates such as 'is a man' and 'is a barber': namely that it attributes something to the subject being described - the quality of existence. In Descartes' 'Meditations', he argues that God's existence is inseparable from His essence, meaning that God, along with all His attributes, must necessarily exist. Here Descartes is using 'exists' as though it were a first order predicate. This is clearly erroneous, however, since adding 'exists' to the end of a long list of attributes does not describe the subject in any more detail. When, for example, describing the perfect man, tacking on 'and he exists' to the end of the description provides no more information about his appearance or personality. Further evidence of the fallaciousness of thinking that 'exists' is a first level predicate is the peculiarity of negative existential statements. If 'exists' is indeed a first order predicate, then to deny the statement 'God exists' ('x is F' for ease of expression) is equivalent to saying 'there is an x, x is not'. The subject is asserted before it is denied: how can it be possible for something to both exist and not exist at the same time? Quite obviously 'exists' cannot function in the same manner as 'is a man', rather it describes predicates themselves - the Predicate of Predicates, if you like. When we say 'x exists' we mean that x, along with all its attributes, is present in our universe.
It would, therefore, appear that 'exists' is a second level predicate rather than one of the first order. If we exchange 'exists' for 'there is', we find that a sentence such as 'there are barbers' is equivalent to saying 'there is an x, x is F'. When we phrase this in the negative, we get 'there are no butchers', or 'it is not the case that there is an x, x is F'. In other words, the fictional character of Sweeney Todd, demon barber of Fleet Street, can 'be a man' and 'be a barber' without actually existing. There is no contradiction here, unlike that which emerges when one tries to negate first order existential claims because we are denying the existence of a subject along with all its predicates.
Mackie, in 'The Miracle of Theism', claims that Descartes has confused first and second level predicates in his ontological argument. Mackie asserts that we can agree with the claim 'the existing God does not exist is self-contradictory' while at the same time denying the claim that 'Ex, x is God'. The first statement, which takes 'exists' to be a first level predicate, is a matter of definition, and as a result everyone ought to agree upon it. It does not, however, necessarily entail the second statement: 'Ex, x is God.' It is quite possible with second level predicates, as has been shown, to deny the subject and the predicate alike. To borrow an example from Kant, it is logically consistent to acknowledge that triangles have three sides while at the same time denying that such a thing has the property of existence. Therefore, Mackie argues that Descartes' form of the ontological argument fails.
Nevertheless, if we examine the notion of second level predicates in more detail we begin to see that there may be a difficulty with this wonderfully neat solution. The problem with 'exists' being a second level predicate is that, by virtue of its formation, it can only be used to make general claims. A sentence which uses 'exists' as a second order predicate appears in the form 'Ex, x is F' in logical grammar. What it does is to change the subject into a predicate, for example 'x exists, that x is Fred', where 'is Fred' is the predicate. Therefore the claim about God's existence becomes 'there is an x, x is God', but does transforming 'God' into a general predicate solve the problem? It would surely seem that the word 'God', certainly in the manner Descartes understands it, if not the majority of Western culture, is a singular expression, not a general one. It refers to a specific entity, much like the words 'this' and 'I'. If 'exists' is a second order predicate then there can be no singular existential claims. Descartes, however, thought that singular existential claims were possible: his entire cogito depends on the validity of the pronoun 'I'.
If we assume for the moment that the statement 'I exist' can be generalised, we end up with a sentence like: 'Ex, x is me'. The inclusion of 'me' in this sentence means that this statement still retains the sense of singularity: 'me' applies to me and no one else. In order to remove this singularity, we might produce a sentence such as 'Ex, x is sitting at a computer in Rootes next to a pot plant.' The problem with this sentence is that it removes any sense of agency. If I am informed that I am about to be killed by a crossbow bolt, I shall move with all necessary speed. If I understand that 'Ex, x is sitting at a computer in Rootes next to a pot plant, x will shortly be killed by a crossbow bolt,' there is no real sense in which I understand that I am about to die. To attempt to generalise the statement 'I exist' is to lose the sense of agency attached to the pronoun 'I'. This would then suggest that 'I exist' must be a well formed claim, despite the fact that it cannot be made into a generalised expression.
Where, then, does this leave debates about the truth of the ontological argument? If 'I exist' is in fact a well formed claim, then we must allow for the potential truth of the claim 'God exists'. 'I exist' is a genuinely referring expression, and, as such, cannot be turned into a predicate without losing that crucial sense of agency. If 'God' is a genuinely referring expression, then the simplistic view would be that Descartes' ontological argument is completely true. But is it?
It is, of course, debateable whether 'God' really is a genuinely referring expression. With a word like 'this', the object referred to can be directly pointed at. When we say 'this brick', we are singling out that particular brick out from all the other trillions of bricks in the world. It is hard to see how this requisite ability to point at the thing you are describing applies to God. Descartes would perhaps argue that the very act of thinking about God involves a 'pointing' of sorts: each time we think of God we are effectively singling Him out. If the term 'God' is indeed a genuinely referring expression, it must refer to itself in the same manner as 'I' and 'this'. The problem with this is that it appears to beg the question; it assumes that its central tenet has already been proven. Rather than provide a step-by-step proof of God's existence, we are simply told that He exists and that His existence can no more be separated from His essence than a mountain can be from a valley. We appear to have returned to Descartes' original assertion in Meditation V.
The difficulty raised by these genuinely referring expressions is that they are entirely unpackable. They are their own reference points and as such cannot be described in terms of anything else. This seems like a fairly accurate description of an omniscient, omnipotent God, but it is essentially unhelpful in providing a proof for His existence. The question that remains, then, is this: is the circularity of the ontological argument incredibly clever, in that every possible avenue of exploration terminates in a necessarily existing God? Or is this simply a superb example of begging the question? It appears simply too close to call.