The contents, development, methods of implementation and subsequent success and failures of the European Employment Strategy (EES) have attracted the interest of many European researchers and commentators. This is largely due to the fact that the formation of common policy on employment matters at European level signifies a formally acknowledged wish for the countries - members of EU to streamline their efforts towards the achievement of coordinated results in the social dimension of their activity. As Jacobsson puts it, 'traditional welfare policy areas, such as employment policy and social protection, have recently been defined as areas of 'common concern' among the EU member states and are no longer exclusively a national responsibility' (2004:357). It is clear that regulations at supranational level became necessary to ensure that European social policy does not fall too much behind the more developed economic one and that the compliance with common rules was established. In addition, Jacobsson (2004:357) points out that the inability of pre-EES employment policies to 'effectively reduce unemployment increased the willingness of member states to consider coordinated action and voluntary convergence of labour market policies.' Other factors like the changing demographic profile of Europe, the onset of new working patterns, which required new types of workforce as well as the emergence and development of the service sector demanded the introduction of 'new modes of governance' able to respond to the challenges created by increased complexity' (de la Porte and Pochet 2004:71).
The European Employment Strategy was launched in 1997 at the special Luxembourg 'Jobs Summit', attended by all EU heads of state. It followed the Amsterdam Summit, held earlier in the same year, where an additional Employment Title was brought into the Treaty. Authors like Watt (2004:118) draw attention to the fact that 'the Treaty emphasized from the start that EU guidelines on labour market policy had to be consistent with the overall coordination of economic strategy'. This is a fact that without doubt places some restraints on European social aspirations from the very beginning and it is important to keep that in mind when discussing various features of the social policy at European level, largely embodied in the EES. The way in which the EES is meant to work as a process is 'being based on guidelines that provide a margin for adaptation at national level, but which also involve processes of benchmarking, multilateral surveillance and peer review (de la Porte and Pochet 2004:71). As Gons summarizes 'the ideal model is that guidelines, discussions, and analyses of the national policies, closely monitored through benchmarking and best practice, lead to the creation of a method of convergence not only in EU goal-setting, but also in national policies (2004:141). This is achieved through the implementation of the so-called National Action Plans (NAPs) for employment, which each member state prepares and which are based on the employment policy guidelines set by EU under its EES. These NAPs are reviewed and assessed annually, after which the European Commission issues a set of recommendations to each member country. Initially, the European Employment Strategy rested on four main pillars (employability, entrepreneurship, adaptability and gender equality), which were revised in 2002, alongside with the implementation of the Strategy itself, and in 2003 the old pillar structure was replaced by three 'overarching and interrelated objectives' (as well 10 more detailed 'commandments', deriving from them) - full employment (reinforcing the overall EU employment rate targets set at the 2000 Lisbon Summit - 70% for the labour force as a whole by 2010, 60% for women and 50% for older workers (aged 55-65)), quality and productivity at work and social cohesion and inclusion. As Watt (2004:125) underpins 'the importance of involving all actors, of taking account of gender issues, and of a focus on unemployment and inactivity, not just employment, is emphasized at the outset'. It is clear that new agendas, prompted by demographic (ageing European population), gender (more and more women entering the workforce and demanding equal treatment) and social inclusion matters have been brought about.
In this sense, the European employment and social policy and, more specifically the European Employment Strategy acknowledges the especially problematic employment rates for three categories of workers in Europe - women workers, elderly workers and young workers. Employment for these groups remains an issue as the European Commission 'Employment in Europe 2005' report confirms. It points out to the fact that in 2004 employment rates for these groups of employees remained below their Lisbon and Stockholm targets with levels for female and older workers staying at 4 and 9 percent below their 2010 targets respectively (employment rate of 55.7% for women in EU member-states in 2004 and employment rate of 41.0% for older workers). As far as the young workers are concerned, the report notes that at 18.7%, youth unemployment in the EU is approximately twice as big a rate as the overall unemployment level for the region. These ongoing trends have prompted the special focus of the EES on these three categories of workers and purposeful measures have been introduced to address their employability problems. By examining the contents of the EES in more detail, this essay will attempt to assess the measures provided for each of the three mentioned groups of workers and will try to make a tentative evaluation and prognosis on which of these types of workers the Strategy will have the greatest impact. In doing so, it will try to suggest that measures aimed at encouraging female participation in the labour market in Europe have so far had relatively greater success than those supporting elderly or young workers, due to several factors, pointed further in the text. It will draw on data from the EES itself, as well as various evaluation papers (official, as well as representing individual positions), created after the first years of its implementation.
It is important to note that this essay acknowledges the notion that the different countries - EU members have had different starting points in the implementation of the policies and guidelines of the EES. It will, nevertheless look for the existence of common understanding of how things should ultimately look like under the joint policy and will assess the common approach and its potential to succeed, rather than dwell on difficulties or inefficiency, brought about by individual countries' setbacks in the process.
Despite the suggestion that Gons places at the beginning of her research on gender segregation and the European Employment Strategy, i.e. that 'women are still regarded as the last reserve in the European labour market' (2004:141), there have been some quite positive indicators to mark the attempts to facilitate female participation in the labour market under the EES. This fact is supported by Rubery et al. which, although acknowledging the potential drawbacks the replacement of the specific equal opportunities pillar by one of the 10 priorities for action in 2003 may have, note 'the commitment to an integrated approach which still combines gender mainstreaming with specific gender equality policies and which aim at achieving substantial reductions in gender gaps in employment, unemployment and pay by 2010' (2003:478). Long-term measures, embodied in the EES have supported and emulated the efforts to include active women population in the workforce, which have existed in some form or other since the second half of the 20 th century in Europe. One of the most significant policy implementations designed to make women employment more widely spread and viable is the introduction and the improvement of childcare provision availability. As Rubery (2002:516) points out 'perhaps the strongest evidence of the response to the higher profile of equal opportunities is found in the almost universal improvements in care provision in the EU'. This argument is advanced by Ruberyal. (2003:478), who draw attention to the fact that, even under the review of the EES pillars, 'the quantitative targets set during the first phase of the employment strategy of (...) childcare coverage of 33 per cent for under three-year-olds and 90 per cent for over-three-year-olds have been retained'.
Another area where notable progress has been made is marked by the attempts to desegregate the European labour market with regard to female participation. Rubery (2002:515) points to five sectors of improvement - programs which aim at diversifying the potential employment forms or training schemes which unemployed or women returners enter (introduced in countries like Portugal, France and Sweden), incentives to influence initial choices of women with regard to education, career and further training (in Finland, France, Austria, Portugal and Sweden), schemes to increase the employment of women in the IT sector (in countries like Belgium, Greece, Sweden and Germany), positive action programs for women employees in the public sector (in Ireland, Luxembourg and Germany) and efforts to introduce women to sectors where their participation is underrepresented. The wide geographical spread, as well as the quick take-up rate of these desegregation initiatives clearly demonstrate the commitment of EU countries to introduce measures to include more women in their workforce, in line with the European Employment Strategy.
The measures aimed at facilitating the entry into the labour market and equal working opportunities for women have proved to be quite successful, both in qualitative (more diverse training and employment opportunities, including part-time and flexible working patterns, childcare provisions and measures for achieving work-life balance) and quantitative aspect (employment rates in pursuing the 2010 targets). The development of the former aspect is highlighted by Ruberyal. (2003:479) who claim that 'with respect to the equal opportunities pillar, progress has been most notable in tackling gender employment gaps and in work-family reconciliation measures.' As far as the quantitative aspect is concerned, the 'Employment in Europe 2005' report confirms that the improvement in overall employment rates in Europe in 2004 has been very much driven by the steady rise in the employment for female workers (0.7 % on average for the counties-members of EU).
It is visible that with regard to rising the activity rates and employment opportunities for women employees, the measures of the European Employment Strategy have started to yield results which, if not yet reaching the targets of the 2010 Lisbon Strategy, show the commitment of the parties concerned to ensure the adequate participation of female workers in the EU workforce. Initiatives to promote female employability have been long-standing and, as demonstrated, diverse and far-reaching, which makes them, at least for the time being, relatively more successful and effective than those meant to support elderly and young workers.
The issue of more actively involving the part of the workers aged between 55-64 (65) in the European workforce is reinforced by including it as one of the 10 commandments of the EES, introduced in 2003. It sets out to 'increase labour supply and promote active ageing' (quoted in Watt 2004:126; emphasis added). This is complemented by the qualitative target, agreed at the Barcelona summit, to increase retirement age by five years in the countries-members of EU (from 60 to 65). As Watt notes, this falls in line with EES priority 'to raise employment rather than simply cutting (registered) unemployment (...) [which] could be viewed as a positive shift of emphasis, taking account of the risks (not least to the sustainability of the welfare state) posed by policies such as early retirement' (2004:122). It becomes evident that the question of increasing the effective retirement age becomes important with regard to stability of the country social models as well as a pure necessity when it comes to demographical realities (the population of Europe is ageing steadily, placing huge burdens on the countries' social security systems and further threatening productivity levels). This argument is advanced by Lonard (2005: 321), who summarizes that 'in economic terms, [employment levels have] a direct impact on social security costs and, as a consequence, on labour costs and on public expenditures [and] older workers' participation is a key variable for the viability of pension regimes.' This demonstrates the cardinal importance of elderly workers' involvement in the labour market, which in turn has prompted the introduction of policies in the European agenda (including these within the framework of EES) to promote the extension of active time in employment. It has been reflected in national agendas, as well, through bipartite and tripartite agreements, which as Lonard claims address employment-related concerns by 'facilitating (...) withdrawal from the labour market, mainly by means of (...) phased retirement for older workers' (2001:38). On European level, measures aimed at increasing elderly workers' participation in labour supply have shifted their focus slightly. According to the evaluative CEC (Commission of the European Communities) Communication 416 'at the beginning of the EES, [the] issue [of active ageing] was mainly covered under the tax-benefit agenda, but it became a separate guideline in 2000 with a broader focus.' (2002:11). Currently, measures like the above-mentioned reforms in pension systems, allowing for increases in pension age, as well as diminishing of the use of early retirement schemes have come into the foreground.
These measures have proved to be quite effective, as the 'Employment in Europe 2005' report claims in saying that workers aged 55-64 have markedly increased their employment rates with an overall increase of 4.4% since 2000 and actually account for the majority of the rise in total employment in all categories of workers between the years 2000 and 2004. It can be therefore concluded that EES measures supporting elderly workers have been aimed in the right direction and the reason that they could be defined as maybe not as successful as those meant for women workers as yet lies in the fact that they have relatively shorter history, with governments at national and European level acknowledging the full implications brought by Europe's ageing population only in the last one or two decades.
Contrary to the relatively optimistic developments for female and elderly workers in the labour market in recent years, the situation for younger workers continues to raise concerns. The 'Employment in Europe 2005' report states that the employment levels for people in the age group of 15-24 have recently deteriorated, with increases in the employment rates from the 1990s being replaced with declines from 2002 onwards, a process more marked for young males than young females. At the same time the problem of inclusion and participation of young people in the labour market retains its significance and continues to pose questions. Crespo and Serrano (2001:1) draw attention to issues like 'lower social value placed on young people's work, the lower expectations of young people (which means that they are likelier to accept jobs with poorer conditions), and the potential danger of their work ethic suffering.' It seems that the task of ensuring adequate types and forms of work for younger employees, thus granting their social inclusion becomes principal. Lonard (2005: 321) goes on to suggest that 'in social terms, [the employment level] is related to individual social status and recognition and to the collective challenge of the integration of young people (...) as well as to inequalities and social exclusion or cohesion'. In this sense, the greatest challenge seems to stem from the apparent contradiction between some of the goals of the EES. On the one hand, the strategy is clearly geared towards combating (long-term) unemployment and ensuring full employment (including for young people), according to pre-defined targets. On the other hand, some of the quantified targets, included in the 2003 EES Guidelines are aimed towards decreasing the numbers of early school-leavers and raising the numbers of people with completed secondary education. The relevant targets state that 'by 2010, at least 85 percent of 22 year olds in the European Union should have completed upper secondary education' and 'achieve by 2010 and EU average rate of no more than 10 percent early school leavers' (quoted in Watt 2004:128). Although these targets are clearly meant to improve young people's potential employability in the future, they may lead to more people continuing to higher levels of education and actually staying out of the labour market for much longer. It seems that striking the balance between achieving sufficient educational levels and adequate entry into the labour market is quite difficult and is what currently prevents the EES measures supporting young workers to be fully effective.
Crespo and Serrano see the activation-based measures of the EES as a possible solution to social inclusion issues, which is more likely to be successful on young workers 'largely because it is easier to make them accept what other groups might consider to be a rather questionable form of intervention in view of its coercive and paternalistic nature' (2001:1). Another measure that is predicted to have a positive impact on youth participation in the labour market is the one that the 'Employment in Europe 2004' report mentions and that is the recently adopted European Youth Pact, which streamlines the measures supporting young employees with the more general targets of the EES. Still, as noted, measures aimed at improving the activity rates of young workers fall behind their goals and efforts to coordinate education and training with career planning for junior workers should be strengthened. As the 'Employment in Europe 2005' report concludes more action is needed to support the pursuit of the 'non-linear' career paths young people are currently following, which alternate employment with study periods and combine phases of unemployment with updating or renewing of knowledge or skills. It becomes evident then that, for the time being, EES initiatives to increase the activity rates of young workers do not yield the necessary results, partly due to their somewhat conflicting aims with regard to young people occupation, and are currently less effective than those supporting elderly and, especially, female workers.
One of the main agendas for the European Employment Strategy is to, as Goetschy (1999:133) argues 'serve as a catalyst for the efficiency of national employment policies' as well as to 'enhance the legitimacy and increase the efficiency of social measures taken at EU level'. In granting special attention to groups with lower activity rates like women workers, elderly workers and young workers, the EES focuses the efforts at national and supranational level towards addressing these lower rates. By looking into the measures and initiatives adopted to support the participation of these three categories of workers, as well as data on the actual employment levels for each of these groups, this essay has attempted to demonstrate that activities to support female work involvement have been the most effective, followed by measures for older workers, with initiatives assisting younger employees having most limited success. Participation rates for women workers have been affected most positively - in its assessment of the five-year span between 1997 and 2001, the CEC Communication 416 has pointed out that 'the total number of jobs [in the EU] grew by slightly more than 10 million (+ 6.5%), of which 6 million were taken up by women, (...) [and] labour force participation grew by nearly 5 million, driven largely by women. (2002:7). This success of EES initiatives has been largely attributed to the longer history of promoting women's employment rights, which has preceded it, with the result that it has led to as Rubery defines 'a pace of change [that] has been, by historical changes, dramatic' (2002:516) and the relatively shorter period of time during which the problems of elderly and young workers have been addressed. Another factor that could be noted as supporting the greater effect of EES measures for female employees is the fact that it is, actually, a much larger category, encompassing members of both the elderly and young workers' groups. In this sense, some of the positive effects on policies aimed at improving activity rates for the latter two categories, could, in fact, have benefited the former group.
It should be noted, though, that improvements in activity rates for female workers have not countered all existing problems - employment rates have, indeed, bettered, but the issue of gender pay gaps is still very much on the agenda of European industrial relations and has not been successfully overcome by measures embodied in the EES. Still, comparing the achieved results to these in the other categories - this of the younger workers and, to a lesser extent, this of the elderly workers, it could be summarized that the EES is currently most successful when it comes to the category of women workers in that that it has helped increase its activity rates more than it has done so for older workers or young employees.
Finally, it should be reinforced that variations still exist across countries, sectors or occupations. As Kirton and Greene (2005:148) claim 'the outcomes of gender and equality policies are likely to be varied and patchy across countries and industries or sectors' and a more in-depth analysis of the success of the EES measures to improve activity rates for any category of workers will be more accurate if it focuses on a specific business sector, country or region.