Employee participation and involvement have been the basis of a debate in British industrial relations since the 1970s, over three decades which have witnessed the reincarnation of different terms for similar processes - workers' control, industrial democracy, workers' participation, employee involvement, empowerment, social partnership (Marchington 2005). The interest in these mechanisms of providing employee voice has been prompted by the different agendas of industrial relations actors - of 'those seeking higher level of organisational performance and (...) those desiring better systems of employee representation' (Wilkinson et. al 2004:298). In addition, research has been aimed at exploring the on-going shift of focus from indirect to direct forms of employee involvement (EI) and the growth of the latter techniques, demonstrated by empirical survey data - as Marchingtonal. (1994:1) summarize there has been 'an absolute growth in direct communications and individualist techniques, and an aggregate decline in indirect and representative forms of participation'.
Before referring in greater detail to the survey data, it is felt that a definition of the notion of (direct) employee involvement is necessary. The terminology used to analyse trends relating to it is often vague and imprecise which hinders the possibility for objective comparisons and conclusions (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). Hyman and Mason draw a distinction between the terms of participation and involvement, defining the former as 'state initiatives which promote the collective rights of the employees to be represented in organizational decision-making (1995:21, emphasis added). By contrast, the latter is described as integrating 'policies and practices which emanate from management (...) and which purport to provide employees with the opportunity to influence and where appropriate take part in the decision-making on matters which affect them' (ibid).
It is clear that EI refers to management-led initiatives, aimed at stimulating employee commitment and allowing discretion for employee decision-making on lower, often task-based ground s. In this, it is very different from both industrial democracy and participative representation. This is reinforced by the description supplied by Fenton-O'Creevy which claims that EI marks 'the exercise by employees of influence over how their work is organized and carried out' (2001:25). The notion, defined in this way, will be further explored in this text and concentration will be more specifically on the direct (individual) forms of employee involvement (as opposed to indirect or representative forms), which concern the immediate interaction between management and single or group of employees, without the intermediation of third parties (Hyman and Mason 1995). The direct form of employee involvement could be further subdivided into consultative (where management seeks employees' opinions but reserves the right to take decisions unilaterally) and delegative (where workers are granted increased responsibility with regard to their work) participation (Sisson 2000). In addition, some authors see the rise of the term 'empowerment' as evolution of the participative decision-making and involvement concepts and by this term acknowledge the task-centered nature of employee involvement in allowing discretion about individual jobs (Greasleyal. 2005)
This essay will review the survey evidence of the growth of direct EI techniques in the UK, will trace the managerial objectives in promoting and utilizing such methods and will critically evaluate the gains from them. By contrasting the espoused and achieved effects from direct employee involvement schemes, the text will try to demonstrate that although their extensiveness is growing and they are being applied in an increasingly systematic way, the successful implementation of such techniques still depends on numerous context- and process dependant factors and the searched effects are by no means guaranteed Marchington and Wilkinson 2005).
As noted above, direct EI initiatives are primarily management-led in their introduction and implementation. Managers have various and multi-layered motives in applying such schemes and some of these will be examined below.
This essay has tried to explore the objectives behind the increased or consistent utilization of direct employee involvement techniques in the UK, as demonstrated by empirical survey data. It has also attempted to note the gains that are derived from such schemes in practice and their dependence on the various factors and actors that influence them.
Clearly, direct involvement schemes are being introduced in the workplace in a management-driven effort to increase employee motivation and commitment to their work, thus leading to enhanced organizational performance and flexibility (see also Cunninghamal. 1996). The real gains are more difficult to detect as materialized in practice, not least because as IRS points out 'most organisations do not have any formal mechanisms for monitoring the effectiveness of their EI strategies' (1999:8).
In addition, the strong contextual dependence of EI schemes should be noted. They are introduced in different ways, at different organizational levels and by different functions as their champions (Ackers et. al. 1992). Moreover, their success is largely shaped by the business environment of the company (e.g. more prominent utilization in manufacturing firms with consultation traditions, IRS 1999), the different agendas actors involved in their implementation have (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005, Fenton-O'Creevy 2001) and their overall fit with the remainder of employee policies and business strategy (Marchingtonal. 1994). In sum, although managerial logic behind using direct EI schemes is manifest, the real gains from them are more problematic to demonstrate in practice.