I have chosen a shot from the very beginning of Martin Scorcese's Raging Bull. I chose this shot because I feel that a lot is often made of the stylised fight scenes in this film and, spectacular as they are, the scenes of LaMotta outside the ring are just as vital to the overall effect of the film on the audience and the portrayal of the main protagonist as a man whose anger is both the key to success and ultimately the cause of his downfall.
The shot cuts in from an image of a billboard advertising LaMotta's show. In this previous shot his voice can be heard practising a speech. When we cut to LaMotta in his dressing room this voice is matched to a body. This is a medium shot in black and white, with DeNiro framed slightly right of centre and the camera at about head height with De Niro. The camera does not move at any point during this shot and the light source appears to be coming solely from the naked bulb which hangs into the shot on the far left, however a fill light must have been placed SOMEWHERE. There is a second bulb hanging next to the lit one but it is not lit, leaving De Niro's face half shadowed. The mise-en-scene is sparse and the dressing room appears small and cramped. On the wall below the bulbs there are two small mirrors placed directly next to each other to create one larger mirror. The reflection is difficult to make out but it seems simply to show a similar mess on the other side of the room, which is off screen. Under the mirrors is a shelf which holds only some old newspapers, a screwed up ball of paper and SOMETHING ELSE. On a smaller protruding part of wall to the right of the mirror, facing the camera is a black old-fashioned telephone. Part of this wall appears to be affected by damp. Behind DeNiro there is a folded up chair, a steel coffee pot and plastic cup on a table, a singular, bare heating pipe and old, dusty looking striped curtains which cover the window. There is no background noise, diegetic or non-diegetic. The only sound that can be heard is De Niro's voice.
De Niro himself is wearing a black suit with a white shirt and a white handkerchief in the breast pocket. He is not wearing a tie and the shirt is open at the collar but even so he appears fairly well dressed. His hair is slicked back and he is holding a cigar. He is clearly not a fit man, he is quite fat and his face, although hidden in part by shadow, is obviously scarred and even deformed, his nose appearing bulbous and his eyes small and sunken.
There is not an enormous amount of action in this scene. The lack of external sound focuses the audience on LaMotta and his words. His eyes do not meet the camera; he is not talking to the audience but to himself. He appears to be practising some sort of speech, repeating phrases and using varying hand gestures, lighting a cigar halfway through. Finally he is satisfied with this little private performance. The camera then cuts to a closer shot of his face with his name and the year in bold print beneath the image. From the previous image the audience can infer that they person they are looking at is in fact Jake La Motta. However this is not confirmed until this quick cut.
A medium shot is used here to get a clear view of the actor and to encompass his hand gestures, as well as to relate him to his surroundings, the voiceover in the previous shot acts to prepare the audience for an image of the speaker. However, not only does it look very unlike the setting for a successful boxer, but the actor before our eyes looks nothing like the image of Robert De Niro we have in our minds. Immediately the audience is surprised and identifies with the sense of loss that plagues this character. He speaks nostalgically of his former career, which heightens this feeling. Despite his tired, overweight, beaten appearance, he dresses well. The costume clashes entirely with the surroundings as does the cigar, often symbolic of wealth, power or high class, not to mention masculinity. De Niro also acts with a certain sense of self-respect and esteem. This gives the impression that although this man appears to be in a rather sorry situation now, he probably came from a better place, and has certainly not given up trying to be the man he was. Pam Cook suggests that this is a story of the loss of masculinity. Perhaps this is an image of La Motta trying desperately to regain a little of that masculinity which he himself destroyed.
The fact that this shot and indeed the entire film is shot in black and white has many implications. Scorcese himself suggests that it is in the name of nostalgia or perhaps even slight realism 'anyone's memories of Jake La Motta are black and white memories' and points out that black and white is 'not black and white, it's shades of grey'. Michael Powell also suggested to him that the red boxing gloves were distracting. He also cites his growing dissatisfaction of colour film stock as reasons for this decision. Pam Cook also suggests that it is homage to 1940s Warner Brothers films, and Kevin Hayes claims that is was also a method of distinguishing Raging Bull from the many other boxing films which were around at the time. All these arguments are valid however with regard to this particular shot, I would say that the nostalgic sense of memory, and of a time long passed by is the most important effect which the use of black and white film has on the audience. This shot is the memory of a man remembering, it seems totally appropriate to use black and white in this context.
This shot also conjures, in my opinion, a mistaken sense of sympathy for the character. The black and white shot, the shoddy mise-en-scene, the poor lighting coupled with the massive contrast in costume and performance of De Niro makes us feel that this is a man who, through some unfortunate circumstance has found himself in a place where he does not belong. As the film progresses the audience finds that they are entirely wrong. There is only one person to blame for La Mottas downfall and that is himself. The mirror in the dressing room is one of many in which La Motta peers in an attempt to understand and deal with his own animalistic qualities. The man we see in this shot is the result of his inability to do this.
The total lack of camera movement during the shot is, like the sound, a method of keeping the audience's eyes fixed on the only moving thing in the room, La Motta. This is clearly a film which circles around him and his turmoil, much less the pain he causes others. This shot also prepares the audience for that. What it does not prepare them for is the brutality of the rest of the film. This version of the boxer is quiet and almost tired looking. Cramping him into this tiny space also suggests that he has never quite got out of the cell he was put in and the lighting although not dark is not particularly bright, also suggesting the shadows of the cell in which La Motta is now eternally trapped.
When we cut into the next two scenes, although Scorcese maintains some distinctive graphic continuities, such as shot length, the contrast between the young and old La Motta is not only painfully physically obvious but the tone of the film changes to reflect the character. Our first impression is of a rather slow, dignified but humorous man. The young La Motta is louder, fast talking, blunt, foul mouthed and far more angry than the man we already know he will become. This is reflected in the noisy, tense environment we are suddenly thrust into: the boxing ring.