Managers, when faced with decisions about whether to invest in the financial markets or invest in machinery, will use mathematical and scientific approaches to quantity the benefit that may arise from either option and will base their decision on that result. Natural science studies the natural world in a fashion where there are finite answers. Studying Management in this manner may succeed in explaining what managers do and the work they perform, but may fail to address the nature and causes of human behaviour at an organizational level. Therefore, there should be an acknowledgement of the limitations that arise when trying to approach the study of Management using natural scientific techniques. When organisations adopt these techniques, their strategies become more rational, more productive and efficient and there is an inclination towards scientific management. While the organisation may be very competent and profitable, the workforce's skills and satisfaction may be endangered.
Managers are taught theories, methods, scientific and mathematical ways of arriving at optimum solutions; however the issue lays on whether the study of Management as a natural science is able to explain how manager's behave with each other and with other employees, how manager's are affected by the environment or what determines their level of performance. The question is whether the techniques used to study the natural sciences will be able to capture the psychological and social aspects of Management. Management studied as a natural science takes the positivist view, where human behaviour in organisations is analysed using objective methods comparable to those used to study the natural world in an attempt to discover facts or come up with universal laws and codes governing human behaviour. Positivism equates the study of Management with the study of any other natural science, as would be quantum Physics or genetics, arguing that an organization possesses an objective reality independent of the individual's personal interpretations. In contrast the interpretatists or phenomenologists believe reality is socially constructed where patterns, instead of facts, about human behaviour are inferred. In order to find the extent to which the study of Management is scientific, a critical analysis of how the positivists would apply the natural scientist's methods of gathering data: description, prediction, control and explanation to Management is required.
The positivists may observe how people interact, witness an interview or view the effects of training, however these methods of observation bring in ambiguity. Ambiguity arises when the observer has to choose, using his own criteria, the different and sometimes invisible variables to include in his observation; this receives the name of operational definition. Questionnaires are a way of trying to quantify the study of human behaviour. If personality is defined as a relatively stable set of characteristics, then it may be predicted. Making personality more objective in this manner gives questionnaires and personality tests a more scientific leaning and supports the notion that the study of Management is scientific. Nomothetic
 questionnaires seek to profile personality according to some given norms that are identifiable and which are mostly genetic. They contain a positivist bias since they assume universal personality traits; in addition these are not always accurate as the person taking them is free to be dishonest. However proper questionnaires widely approved and renowned have methods to decrease the frequency of dishonest answers. The phenomenologists idiographic
 approach contains its own bias as well, as direct contact with the testees opens way to lies, exaggerations, replies that are socially acceptable but which are not genuine etc. This qualitative method is subjective since it tests personality based on the individual's own interpretation of him/herself and thus cannot be easily used to compare.
Social scientists may predict that a specific management style is probably more successful, in terms of turnover, than another but the prediction fails to determine by how much. Hence the determinate predictions used in the study of natural sciences cannot be applied to Management; rather there is only scope for probabilistic predictions. For the natural scientist controlling natural phenomena is a matter of manipulation as seen for example in genetically modified products, for the social scientist in contrast it raises ethical/moral issues and is constrained by law. The way social scientists try to control is through organisational intervention; training is an attempt to control employee skills and expertise. Indirect Ethnography is an example of the ethical implication of attempting to study human behaviour from a more scientific angle. The direct method is less reliable as the fact that people know they are being tested already influences the outcome of the study. Although this seems not to hold for the empirical results of the Stanford Prison experiment where the testees took their role as prisoners and prison wardens very seriously and realistically.
In order to explain the world around us, natural scientists identify the time and order of events and establish causal links between the variables involved. A chemical reaction in a laboratory can illustrate this point, the scientists are aware of the timing and order of events as a reaction proceeds and attribute the cause to the nature and chemical behaviour of the two substances. These results tend to be universal hence natural scientists can discover laws and rules that govern the behaviour of natural phenomena. However human behaviour does not reconcile with the scientific cause-effect explanation, people act according to meaning, sentiment and their free will, and hence there is little scope for generalisations. Aware of this, the positivists take the view of the behaviourism school of thought, which is restrained to the observable behaviour, captured by the senses, thus discarding emotions, beliefs, values etc In response to this view, that rejects abstract and invisible factors affecting human behaviour, the phenomenologists separated psychology into cognitive psychology and social psychology. The former accepts the notion of the physical and mental process in the mind that might affect human behaviour, even though unperceivable and unobservable whilst the latter deals with all the emotions, attitudes, motives affecting human behaviour.
Today there has been a shift from behaviourism and philosophy towards a more socio-psychological perspective of organisational behaviour, which has a focus on intrinsically human behaviour away from seeing the workforce as a variable responding to stimuli. There has been a move from a radical functionalist view of Management as scientific, positivist and objective to one that conciliates with the humane aspects of organisations. The rise of the functionalist firm was a result of the shift from home and independent production, artisanship and craftsmanship to industrialisation and the first factories. The protestant and Calvinistic approach to work gave birth to the spirit of capitalism and rationality. This is observed in the formal procedures implemented such as accounting, planning, systematic management and implicitly in the way operations became calculable, quantifiable, logical and reasonable. The organisation had a functionalist role of optimality where bureaucracy was its suitable structure as it encompassed speed, precision, clarity, specialisation, authoritarian hierarchy, record keeping, regulation, selection and the impersonality of the workers (Weber, 1930).
The connection between bureaucracy and rationalism is most visible in scientific management or Taylorism. The division of tasks and responsibilities between management and the workforce, the scientific methods to optimality, the selection of employees, efficient training and the surveillance pursued through authority, hierarchy and supervision, are the most rational and efficient ways of managing an organisation (Taylor, 1911 cited in Huczynski &Buchanan, 2001). Practical experiments such as the Bethlehem Steel Corporation
 underpin scientific management as productive efficient. Output was quadrupled, savings increased and costs fell, this was obtained by reducing deliberate systematic soldiering (output restriction) of the workforce, by task fragmentation which was undertook after in depth studies of the time and motions involved in each task; and finally by establishing discipline through authority and hierarchy. The experiment is a clear manifestation of the separation between conception and execution, management deals with the former while the workforce with the latter which effectively became more monotonous, repetitive and demotivating. Underlying this experiment is the assumption that workers behave like rational economic beings, motivated by financial remunerations thus reacting positively towards an increased workload. It ignores that workers may be motivated by social and self actualising needs with higher levels of responsibility and self direction (McGregor cited in Fincham & Rhodes, 2003).
In a Tayloristic organisation, the workforce is being alienated from the outcome and process of their contribution. The dehumanisation of work is apparent when labour is perceived as an investment, as a cost of production and is equated with any other factor of production, as would be capital. The pursuit of surplus value in capitalism makes production processes less stable and more dynamic as firms try to gain competitive advantage. Thus a conflict arises between labour and capital that heightens as the ease of their substitution increases (Marx, 1887 cited in Fincham & Rhodes, 2003). Ford's introduction of the mechanized assembly line, where "he sought to make his workforce as interchangeable as the parts that they handled" epitomizes this conflict (Huczynski & Buchanan, 2001, p429). In this manner, the workplace turns into an inhumane and hostile environment, intrinsically where exploitation occurs. The deskilling of labour is attributed to task fragmentation, rationalization and mechanization (Braverman, 1974 cited in Huczynski & Buchanan, 2001). This is exemplified in an empirical study of Call centres in the UK which underlines the deskilling of the operator's who work with standardized scripts and who are being constantly speech monitored (Taylor and Bain, 1999). Most organizations are becoming subject to Weber's rationalisation and are inherently possessing four key elements high speed, high value and minimum waste, standardization of product and control (Ritzer, 1993 cited in Huczynski & Buchanan, 2001). This is observed in the serving of a Big Mac or any other standardized product/service. Generally there are six main procedures when delivering the service: greeting the customer, taking the order, assembling the order, presenting the order, payment and thanking the customer (Morgan, 1997). Each procedure is subsequently divided into further categories and managers check all of these are taking place. This example embodies many scientific and rational principles, such as task fragmentation, speed, minimum waste and maximum value, which take place at the expense of the deskilling of the workforce. Organisations like McDonalds highlight both the benefits of rationalisation and the consequent degradation of the workers.
The functionalist, scientific view of organisations is criticized for exaggerating unity and consensus, for ignoring the problems of conflict and legitimising the actions of the powerful. The interpretatists and humanists view organisations as cultural entities where there is consideration for the sentiments and attitudes of the workers. One of the Hawthorne Studies, the Relay Assembly Test Room Experiments (1927-33), proved that care and attentive observation cultivate loyalties, motivate workers, reduce the stress of intense supervision and the tendency to create informal groups which adopt output restriction strategies, thus resulting in higher productivity. In this view, there should be a positive attitude towards personal counselling, which is a way of reconciling informal and formal conducts in an organisation; hence narrowing the gap between management and the workforce. (Mayo, 1939 cited in Huczynski & Buchanan, 2001) Human relations was developed in the 1930`s in the US due to the political and economic instability and in the 1950-60`s in the UK and as means to discourage further union growth and bargaining power. During Thatcher's and Reagan's governance it was also applied but under the name of Human Resource Management. Firms` structure and goals seem to reflect the economic state and the political orientation of a government. Scandinavian countries place a higher value on quality of life and social needs, European and Anglo-American on productivity, efficiency and self-actualisation while the Chinese in collectivism and community rather than individualism.
The Aston studies supported the notion that an organisation's structure is affected by its surrounding environment. Most of Weber's aspects of bureaucracy formed the criteria used in the studies, in the 1960/70`s, to measure the degree of bureaucratization in different companies. The companies were measured according to their level of specialisation, formalization (rules and regulation), standardization, centralization and configuration Studies like these try to codify Management by determining whether a firm meets a certain type and quantity of standards that are subject to the experimenters` decision and judgement. In this case, as the set of standards was based on Weber's beliefs they could be considered more legitimate and inherently more objective and scientific. Ethonomethodology, tries to make management more scientific by bringing forth general guidelines, rules and practices. It underlines the codes and conventions of everyday activities as observed in the six managerial activities and fourteen principles of management propounded by Fayol. The six managerial activities were: Forecasting, Planning, Organising, Commanding, Co-ordinating and Controlling; and his fourteen principles search for the best way of managing organisations. Fayol`s contributions are the foundation of the classical school of Management, heirs of Taylor, but with an integration of the employees in the conception of a plan and the promotion of the Esprit de corps
. The issue that arises when trying to approximate the study of Management to that of a natural science is whether Management can be codified and expressed as rules, guidelines that may be perceived as an equivalent to numbers or symbols in Mathematics and the natural sciences.
Social science texts books raise more questions than they answer, many of the debates are "open ended" with arguments being constantly challenged. Students may find it difficult to deal with undefined and multiple answers, making the study of Management more scientific may be helpful to a certain extent. Positivism attempts to apply some of the techniques used to study the natural sciences but these have limitations when used to study Management as the many dimensions of human behaviour cannot be observed and measured in precise and accurate quantitative terms. For example ambiguity arises when trying to define an operational definition in the observation of human behaviour, predictions fail to be deterministic and are instead probabilistic, people cannot be manipulated as is done with natural phenomena and there is no scope for universal laws and codes. Phenomenologists also encounter problems when trying to make the study of management more scientific as seen in the subjectivity of idiographic questionnaires and by the notion that all observation is subjective as beliefs and suppositions are made in advance. This view narrows the span for the use of scientific approaches, although there seems to be some certainty in the statement because human behaviour is unique for every individual as is the interpretation of it. For this reason, social sciences have been criticized for possessing "ideology in disguise" (Huczynski & Buchanan, 2001, p24) where social and political ends may be pursued in the studies, hence neglecting the possibility of applying the methods of study used in the natural sciences. In defence the social scientists claim that their ideologies do not interfere with the objectivity of the research. If it were the case their research would have no value to society. In addition social scientists need to have beliefs and ideologies in order to feel the compulsion to change an aspect of society; hence the involvement of their judgements is inescapable.
Some social sciences are more quantitative than others such as Economics as opposed to Sociology but even the former cannot be entirely studied using the techniques used in Biology or Chemistry. Scientific approaches may only be used to study the social scientists to a certain point where a limitation exists which is the uniqueness of humans as opposed to the homogeneity of the natural phenomena. This point varies for different individuals but in general today in westernised countries, especially since the 1980`s, organisations have coupled scientific goals of efficiency and profit maximisation with a more people orientation with concerns for job satisfaction, quality of working life and personal and group autonomy among others. There has been a gradual shift from the first factories whose sole attention was placed in being profitable and where human conditions were appalling, to Taylorism, to classical Management theories, to a need for a people-centred strategy in fear of union power and to a genuine consideration of the workforce, in part because these have become more educated and demanding. In general organisations are not entirely functionalist or interpretative but a combination of both, having absorbed the efficiency of scientific management without jeopardizing the employees well being. This is reflected in the study of Management, which makes use of scientific and mathematical tools to analyse and make optimum decisions and at the same time has a more a critical inclination when contrasting the different but equally valid answers and methods to study human behaviour. Nevertheless, the scientific approach to study has garnered some respect as many Management degrees are classified as BSc not BA.
Social science improvements to society are abstract and invisible, hence they are more difficult to perceive as opposed to the improvements of the natural sciences such as computers, airplanes or spacecraft. The differing nature of the improvements implies differing methods of research and study. These methods may be reconciled to a certain extent where a constraint exists, because the behaviour of natural phenomena cannot be equated to that of humans. At this point, the organisation can be more rational but at the expense of the employees. Thus by regarding the well being of the workforce, both productivity and job satisfaction may be attained. Today, most Western organisations are rational and cultural entities.