Capital investment decisions are critical as they entail substantial amounts of cash and time that are usually irrecoverable. They reflect the long-term strategy of the firm.
Compotech Industries Plc is facing a choice between three capital investment projects involving either an expansion of a current plant in Santa Clara, the conversion of a phased out one in Waltham or the construction of a new one in Ireland.
A critique of the net present value model used to evaluate each alternative is put forward whereby the most significant advantages are its use of cash flows, its account of the time value of money and its value-additivity and ranking properties.
The most highlighted disadvantages are the uncertainty in the estimation of cash flows and the difficulties in obtaining an appropriate discount rate.
In a 5 year span, using a 20% discount rate, the NPVs of Santa Clara, Waltham and Ireland are -$1.14m, $6.38m and - $29.1m respectively.
In a 5 year analysis and applying a 10% cost of capital, the NPVs for Santa Clara, Waltham and Ireland are $4.55m, $11.3m and - $25.6 respectively.
Using a 10 year time horizon and a 10% opportunity cost of capital, the NPVs for Santa Clara, Waltham and Ireland are $40.9m, $40.1m and $62.5m.
Solely on financial grounds, Ireland should be selected in a 10 year analysis and Waltham in a 5 year one.
- Prior to making a decision Craig Thomas should engage in more detailed cost benefit analysis exploring issues such the experience of operating in Santa Clara, the complexities of building a greenfield plant, the uncertainty of operating abroad, the reliability of the variable inputs (demand, price and variable cost), inflation and tax implications and the possibility of applying other capital appraisal techniques.
Capital budgeting decisions are critical because they are irreversible, (or costly to do so), they involve large amounts of cash outlays for a considerable number of years and are effectively the implementation and evolvement of the firm's long-term strategy.
Compotech Industries Plc (CIP) wants to expand production in order to cater for the increase in demand for the Flexi-Connector. It can either expand the plant where production currently takes place at Santa Clara, or can convert the manufacturing technology of another plant in Waltham or build a Greenfield plant with a novel and more efficient technology that is being Beta-tested.
These three alternatives will be considered under three different scenarios using net present value (NPV) as the financial analytical tool to aid in the decision making process. NPV is the difference between the present value (PV) of the future expected cash flows and the initial investment outlay.
If demand for the Flexi-Connector will remain strong for 10 years and CIP`s actual cost of capital is 10% then the Ireland option should be selected, otherwise if considering a shorter time span Waltham seems more promising. This decision assumes that no other factors will adversely affect it. The limitations of NPV are pertinent when making a decision and attention should also be directed to the non-quantitative benefits arising from each alternative. An appraisal of each project employing an alternative financial tool is recommended. Lastly, the project chosen should be aligned to firm's overall objectives and strategies.