The Hedley Byrne V Heller case falls into the law of negligence within that of tort, claiming compensation for an economic loss as a consequence of a negligent statement. The case judge, McNair J held that the defendants were careless but that a duty of care was not owed. In the Court of Appeal the judgment was agreed on the same grounds and in the House of Lords it was likewise avowed yet on different grounds. A claim under negligence will be successful if it can be proven that a duty of care is owed and was breached causing damages. The fact this case reached the most Supreme Court in the English hierarchy of courts and that it created a new precedent, highlights its impact on the development of the law of negligence, in particular in cases were proximity between parties is not of contractual or fiduciary nature but akin to it. The use of judicial precedent in the creation of the common law shall be explored and a balanced critique of it shall be put forward.
The claimants, Hedley Byrne & Co, advertising agents, were approached by a client, Easipower and a contract of 100,000 annual payments on credit was settled. However before signing the contract, Hedley Byrne & Co unsure about Easipowers creditworthiness asked its bank, National Provincial Bank Ltd, for a reference regarding Easipower`s credit disposition. The bank contacted Easipowers bank, Heller and Partners, the defendants, who agreed to provide a gratuitous reference free from any responsibility. The reference was a positive one and Hedley Byrne signed the contract, but soon lost 17,000 when Easipower went into liquidation.
The Donaghue V Stevenson case in 1932 gave rise to the modern law of negligence and established the `neighbour test to measure legal proximity. The effects of negligent statements are far more reaching and easier to commit than that of actions. They may create liability for a large amount of unidentifiable people over an indefinite time period. Hence following Caparo V Dickman (1990), the `neighbour test was replaced by the three-stage approach to decide whether a duty of care was owed.
The first stage identifies whether the defendant would have reasonably foreseen that the claimant would rely on his words and voluntarily assumed responsibility for them. Although the defendant had the professional ability to provide reliable advice and that the it was provided in a professional environment, the fact that Heller and Partners Ltd choose to place a disclaimer demonstrated that the defendant did not voluntarily assume responsibility. In addition the defendant must know for what purposes his/her services are required, for whom they are required and that the listener will act upon them without any further clarification. Although Heller and partners new that an advertising agent, client of the National Provincial Bank, inquired the reference, they did not know for what purpose and if it would be solely relied upon. The claimants should have considered the bank's conflicting position before relying entirely on the reference. The enquiry was a quick free of charge check on Easipowers credit potential rather than a detailed and considered advise on the matter. It is difficult to impose Heller & Partners with more duty than that of being honest. Given that there was no contract this disclaimer could have only served to exclude the defendants from liability for negligence.
For a duty of care to be owed a close relationship between the parties must exist (second stage approach). In the present case as the relationship was created ad hoc it is not clearly equivalent to that of a contract. Mere hearing or reading of statements is not sufficient to create a close proximity as this would put no limits to being liable for what one says or writes. Consequently, the last stage-approach, whether it is just, fair and reasonable to impose a duty of care would also fail.
Liability for negligent statements or services which cause economic loss has for the most part been restricted and economic loss is rarely protected. Following Hedley Byrne V Heller it was determined that in the absence of a contractual or fiduciary relationship, a `special relationship entailing an assumption of responsibility resembling that of a contract would establish a duty of care. Consequently, the possibility of claiming for consequential (not pure) economic loss as a result of a negligent misstatement was first was recognised. The impact of this case in the development of the law of negligence illustrates how common law is created through the use of judicial precedent.
The conducts and decisions taken in previous cases have served as a guideline for future application since the Norman Rule of England. The judges travelled around the country deciding major cases some of which were based on common customs. This unified the law and made it common to all. Common law was hence developed from customs and judicial decisions. Judges use precedents, in forming decisions for similar cases. The  ratio decidendi, is binding on any other similar cases whilst the obiter dicta
, are only persuasive. Other persuasive precedents include dissenting judgements, decisions taken by lower courts, the Privy Council and by Commonwealth countries. The decisions of superior courts are binding to their immediate lower court. The decisions of the European Court of Justice (EJC) are binding on all British Courts; likewise the decisions of the House of Lords are binding on all the inferior courts.
Precedent is used to create new law (original precedent) and to extend old principles. The rules that govern the formation of contracts owe their existence to judicial precedent. Similarly, the law of negligence has been refined by judicial law making, beginning with the aforementioned `neighbour test and now extended to include cases on liability for economic loss and nervous shock. As regards criminal law, judges have played a vital role in the development of the law of intention.
The certainty attached to judicial precedent helps lawyers advise their clients on the likely outcome of cases. It is also a consistent, fair and precise system where all cases are treated similarly with slight variations in the facts, saving time in cases where facts are similar. Nonetheless it is also true that if a case is unjustly or wrongly decided the decision will persist, until someone has the funding, time and perseverance to appeal to the House of Lords where it is thereupon considered. Given that the Court of Appeal has to follow its own past decisions makes the system rigid and slowly progressing. However this inflexibility is lessened by the ability to distinguish cases contributing to the detailed set of case rules that characterises common law. Yet given the vast collection of cases, distinguishing a case to avoid its past decisions may be unfounded. Searching for similar cases, even with the aid of databases, has become a complex task and precedents may be overlooked. In addition the lengthy judgments complicate the extraction of the ratio decidendi. Judicial precedent is also criticised for creating law only when a need arises as a dog is disciplined once he has misbehaved and for the fact that a tight majority does not make the precedent any less valuable.
The Hedley Byrne V Heller case gives an illustration of how the three-stage approach is applied to the facts in the law of negligence. In reaching the House of Lords, the case demonstrates the difficulties in establishing liability for economic loss. It has significantly contributed to the development of the law of negligence as it has created a new precedent, the need to prove a `special relationship between those in question in the absence of a contract. Besides disproving the epithet "dogss law", as the claim was dismissed on grounds unrelated to the established precedent, the case also illustrates the rigidity of the court system. The high degree of communication in the world of today will demand a considerable evolvement in the liability for negligent misstatements.