Although once only observed in the United States, mergers and acquisitions (M&A) are now occurring throughout the world. Adopted since the turn of the century up to today, as a corporate strategy, M&A is continuing to grow in an exponential fashion. The bulk of M&A occurred in the fourth and fifth wave, in the 1980`s and the 1990`s respectively. Despite their popularity and the large amount undertaken among both small and large firms, acquisitions often fail to deliver value to shareholders and do not meet the expected financial rewards and benefits. It is widely known that in fact shareholders of the acquired firm have benefited more than the buyers themselves. The failure to create shareholder value, in the 1990s in the US and UK is accounted primarily by managerial hubris and the high premiums paid. In concentrated firms, though it is principally the actions of controlling shareholders that affect the premium size and the outcome of the M&A. Nonetheless other factors should also be considered.
The 1980`s merger wave was an attempt to restructure and unite core businesses, in the 1990`s firms intended to gain economies of scale and scope, hence market power, in response to the increasing competitive global markets. Notwithstanding, it was discovered that only 23% of acquisitions were successful, that between 30%-40% were resold at prices below the acquisition cost and that 60% failed to recover it (Hitt et al, 2001). The failures of Quaker Oats when acquiring Snapple Beverage, and Novell of World Perfect Corp, who lost $1.4 and $700 respectively, empirically accentuate the risks involved in M&A.
M&A offers an opportunity to acquire the high growth rated assets that reward managers. Yet managers might become too overconfident as for acquisitions to be successful it is essential for them to act with due diligence from the earliest stages of takeover. Prior to acquisition an in depth analysis of the firms compatibility is essential. Unfortunately, it is not only unlikely for acquirers to inadequately analyse and evaluate targets but also for them to poorly select them. The acquiring firm's lack of knowledge about its target is exemplified in 1997 merger of HFS, Inc and CUC International, Inc to form Cendant Corp.CUC. Shortly afterwards, it was discovered that CUC had engaged in fraudulent financial reporting since the 1980`s causing stock prices to plummet. (Hitt et al, 2001).
In the last three decades the means of payment have been cash, junk bonds and equity swap/cash respectively. M&A`s financed through risky debt usually involved poorly financially performing firms, which underinvested in the acquired company (consequently continuing underperformance) and which had a substantial possibility of defaulting. In contrast, by issuing stock acquiring firms may conserve their cash and borrowing potential for future synergic growth opportunities. Stock deals also favour the acquiree`s shareholders because of their non-taxable nature and because of the positive returns reported through the use of the pooling of interests accounting. Yet cash payment is most common because the acquiree`s shareholders do not have to bare the risk of stock price devaluations (in stock acquisitions) if the market considers the purchase price too high. Sharing risks might also suggest that the acquirers are unsure about the future and hence managers may opt for a cash transaction to prevent sending inaccurate signals to the market (Hitt et al, 2001).
The premiums paid appear higher when there are conflicts between CEO`s, when a CEO has been positively appraised and is also the chairman of the Board. Managerial hubris is evident in the Hilton proposal to takeover ITT, where the respective CEO`s refused to negotiate and instead opted to use the press to trade insults, consequently leading to the payment of irrational premiums. The premiums offered by competitive bidders augment in a similar fashion to auctions. Likewise, in hostile takeovers the premiums paid are greater than that of friendly takeovers, because of the upward pressure the reluctance to takeover has on the bid. The tools managers use in defence of hostile takeovers may apparently protect shareholders against unfavourable takeovers whilst genuinely used to ensure their jobs and their perks. In contrast, Japanese firms try to avoid takeover by become more firm specific investment. (Hitt et al, 2001).
Most M&A action in continental Europe involves a transaction from a large shareholder to another large shareholder. These owners are perceived as controlling because they can influence decision making, without bearing the full cost of ownership. A large shareholder may free ride on insider information such as growth opportunities by exploiting them through his/her share and control in another firm. Likewise, the controlling owner might internalise corporate decisions by recommending managers to reduce overcapacity, so that supply falls and prices increase in the industry where he/she possesses stocks. More obvious benefits of control are perks and stock options. An owner with a majority stake in two companies, A which is gaining profits and B which is under performing, may oblige A to buy Bs products above market price in order for B to recover until it is breaking even. Consequently the large shareholder pays lower taxes for A, unfortunately this imposes a sub-optimal position for A`s minority shareholders. (Zingales, 1998)
For a controlling shareholder whose firm is a potential target and who may lose say as a result of the acquisition, the value of control will justify the high premiums paid. Likewise occurs in UK/US in targets with high levels of management ownership. The market price is a fair representation of the value of a share; therefore any amount paid for the target above the bidder's share price represents an estimate of the private benefits of control the buyer is willing to pay for (Zingales, 1998).
Beyond this universal ownership reason, the following differences between countries account for the M&A failures: shareholder rights and degree of protection, accounting standards, enforcement of corporate law and governance. In the UK/US the difference between non-voting and voting shares is minimal, as opposed to countries with concentrated ownership where non-voting shares are worthless but voting shareholders are more powerful. In France, managers are not legally committed to act in the shareholder's interest and may seek to maximise their own utility. (Zingales, 1998). In the South Korean  Chaebols, due to owner-managers exerting significant control and the weak legal protection for minority shareholders, associate firms may engage in an acquisition that might result in a share price drop, but a share price rise for the rest of the firms in the group. (Bae et al, 2002 cited in Ben-Amar & Paul Andre, 2005). The transfer of price is obvious in the Japanese Keiretsus for example the Mitsubishi and Mitsue Keiretsu, where a subsidiary bank can facilitate its parent larger and cheaper loans. Similarly, if the workforce is quite influential it might receive greater benefits and higher wages (Zingales, 1998).
In the 1980s Japanese firms situated near the frontier of the PPF, could compete both on quality and cost but as other companies approach the frontier, quality and cost are becoming mutually exclusive. As differentiation between firms diminishes and management emulating techniques such as benchmarking become exhausted, competition takes the form of rival takeover. A successful M&A under these circumstances involves an alignment of both firm's strategies, which are either cost cutting, or quality emphasis strategies (Porter, 1996).
In spite of the aforementioned, the overpayment of targets may be attributable to unintended calculation errors in arriving at a takeover price, rather than a genuine desire for managers to overlook shareholder's interest and maximise their own utility. The overpayment for targets is visible in the way the distribution of the valuations is skewed to the left. This unsymmetrical distribution curve is due to the error involved in calculating the bid, which is rooted in the asymmetries that exist between the bidder and the target coupled with the formers belief that his/her valuation is correct (Roll, 1986 cited in Seth et al, 2000). Many risk averse and traditional firms perceive acquisitions as a means of achieving the innovate approach they lack. As the new firm integrates it internalises the acquirer's attitude towards innovation and is discouraged from advancing, effectively hindering shareholder value. Moreover unexpected coercion from the acquirer may force the best employees to leave resulting in a loss of human capital for the firm. Lastly, the fact investment banks fees world-wide are directly related to premium size, may make analysts recommend unreasonably high premiums (Hitt et al, 2001).
In diverse ownership firms it has been managers and their proposed premiums that pose a threat to the shareholders; alternatively in concentrated firms it has been controlling shareholders and their private benefits of control. Managerial hubris may distort objective analyses of targets and may be the catalyst for the overvalued takeover bids. Likewise the pressure exerted by controlling shareholders has a substantial effect on the premiums paid for acquirees. Nevertheless as has been explored, there are other factors embedded in the differences between countries, that may not be first and foremost reason for the failures of the bulk of M&A`s but should neither be ignored. Exercising an adequate and precise due diligence process, assessing the viability of the post merger integration of the two firms, protecting minority shareholders and acting with corporate social responsibility will ensure that shareholder value is added. Hopefully, these criteria will be met in the forthcoming cross border acquisition of O2 by Telefnica.