Philip G. Zimbardo. Stanley Milgram. Their names are synonymous with any form of psychological research. Their work rages with controversy as with their theories that still spark incessant debates. Both are eminent psychologist that studied aspects of human behaviour concerned with obedience to an authoritative figure. Both psychologists studied this phenomenon differently using different methods. Zimbardo created a make-shift prison and Milgram created an electric shock experiment, to ultimately deduce the same conclusion.
The conceptual reason behind Zimbardo's experiment was to test the power of social situations over individuals. The focus was on the power of roles, rules, symbols, group identity, and situational validation of ordinarily ego-alien behaviors and behavioral styles. Zimbardo explored the theory of deindividuation and its influence on obedience. The psychological state of deindividuation is aroused when individuals become part of a crowd or large group. This state is characterized by diminished self-awareness and individuality. There is a reduction in an individual's self-restraint and normative regulation of behavior which leads to a newfound obedience to any form of authority.
Milgram on the other hand had a different hypothesis and focus. His study was inspired by the many atrocities that had been committed in the Second World War. Many culprits put on trial at the end of the war used the chief defence that they had been following orders from somebody above. It was of popular opinion that there was something intrinsic in the German character that made them particularly cruel. That was a dispositional view that people are genetically determined and a person's genetic makeup was the influence behind their acting in a certain fashion. This view was questioned and disputed by Milgram. He inferred that most people, regardless of nationality, could perform inhuman acts upon another, under certain circumstances. Milgram reasoned that people could commit atrocities when they are given orders by an authority.
Where Zimbardo's aim was to study situational behaviour, in the context of deindividualization, and its ability to affect obedience, Milgram sought to prove that when under authority, people would obey indubitably.
Zimbardo's experiment commenced on a quiet Sunday morning in August. 24 males were used as subjects and they were randomly allocated to either "guard" or "prisoner". They were then to assume the roles as they best see fit. Prisoners had to wear a smock with no underwear, rubber sandals, stockings on their heads and a heavy chain on their right foot. Guards wore a khaki uniform, reflective sunglasses, a whistle around their necks and they carried a billy club. The subjects were placed in a make-shift prison. Prisoners were never called by name and were only identified by number. All these were to cause deindividuation of both prisoners and guards. Cameras and intercom systems were set up so as to be able to observe and record all the happenings.
Milgram on the other hand had a very dissimilar experiment set up to Zimbardo's experiment. Milgram placed his subjects under a certain situation for only a short period of less than an hour whereas Zimbardo's subjects were placed in a make-shirt prison for a considerably longer period of 6 days. Milgram's obedience study was carried out to measure to what degree people would obey an authoritative figure in the light of a moral dilemma. The sample for the experiment was chosen from a newspaper advertisement. It must be noted that the participants were clearly informed that they were paid the money just for appearing at the laboratory, and they were free to leave at anytime without forfeiting the money. A stern looking male experimenter was used and a mild mannered man played the part of the victim. The subject was placed as the teacher in a rigged draw. The teacher reads a list of word pairs which the learner has to learn. The teacher then tests the learner and if a wrong answer is given, the electric voltage would be increased.
The 1971 Stanford Prison Experiment was a classic demonstration of the power of social situations to distort personal identities and long cherished values and morality as normal healthy males internalized situated identities in their roles as prisoners and guards. This psychological condition was clearly demonstrated in a particular episode with the prisoners. Prisoners were told if they wanted to leave the prison, they would have to go through a parole hearing. When the prisoners were asked whether they would forfeit the money they had earned up to that time if they were to be paroled, most said yes. This proves that the money was not a factor in their obedience. However when the hearings were ended by the parole officers telling the prisoners to go back to their cells while their request were being considered, every prisoner obeyed, even though they could have obtained the same result by simply quitting the experiment. Why did they obey? Because they felt powerless to resist. By this stage, the prisoners were immersed too deeply in their restrictive roles to realise that the officers had turned down their request as prisoners but not as a free human being. Their sense of reality had shifted, and they no longer perceived their imprisonment as an experiment. The participants were deindividuated and recognised their status only as prisoners, not as paid experimental participant. This led to their blind compliance and unquestionable obedience to their orders.
In Milgram's experiment, it was predicted that only one in a thousand would continue to the end. In fact, 26 out of 40 subjects continued until the end. It must be stated that although there were many protests from the subjects especially when the learner started to cry out in pain, none of the subjects ceased obeying the experimenter when prodded to continue. Milgram had essentially gotten 100% obedience out of his subjects.
Interestingly enough, subjects in both experiments displayed physical symptoms of their discomfort. Subjects of Milgram's experiment exhibited signs of extreme nervousness and started displaying sweating, trembling, stuttering, biting lips, groan and dug their fingernails into their flesh. Some subjects burst out in nervous laughter and three subjects had seizures. This sort of behaviour is comparable to those displayed in Zimbardo's subjects. In a bid to escape the mental torture and trauma they were in, four prisoners reacted by breaking down emotionally. One prisoner even developed a psychosomatic rash all over his entire body when he learned that his parole request had been turned down.
By the end of Zimbardo's study, the prisoners were disintegrated, both as a group and as individuals. There was no longer any group unity; just a bunch of isolated individuals hanging on. The guards had won total control of the prison, and they commanded the blind obedience of each prisoner.
Likewise in Milgram's experiment, the experimenter seen as authority had commanded obedience of each subject. The experiment demonstrated with jarring clarity that ordinary individuals could be induced to acts of cruelty even in the absence of physical coercion. Humans need not be innately evil to behave in ways that are reprehensible and inhumane. While it was thought and believed that when confronted with a moral dilemma humans would act as their conscience dictates, Milgram's obedience experiments proved that in a concrete situation with powerful social constraints, moral sense can easily be overcame.
Both Zimbardo and Milgram's studies demonstrated obedience to an authority even in moral dilemmas and personal disinclination to do so. Their controversial research stunned the world. There has since been a moral outrage about prisons and their treatment of prisoners. Their biggest contribution to the world is the knowledge that their research now brings. Knowledge is power and it empowers us to prevent and minimize such prison situations and possible suppressions of our morality in the face of authority.
Milgram's warning--that when an individual "merges...into an organizational structure, a new creature replaces autonomous man, unhindered by the limitations of individual morality, freed of human inhibition, mindful only of the sanctions of authority"--has much resonance. We did not need Milgram to tell us we have a tendency to obey orders but we did need a reminder of just how powerful this tendency is. As we have now been enlightened about our extreme readiness to obey authorities, we can attempt to better guard ourselves against unwelcome or reprehensible commands.
Zimbardo's research would also benefit many prison reforms. With this knowledge of the possible repercussions and outcomes that could occur in prison, jails all over the world should be better equipped to prevent or at least minimize bad treatment of prisoners' occurrences, from happening. This knowledge has also benefited leadership courses as now people are taught to be more aware of the way they deal with their subordinates.
Zimbardo's research can be mirrored to today as with the Iraqi prisoners. There is still mass torture prevailing even in this day and age. His research provided us with an explanation and a prediction of possible occurrence but has done nothing to prevent it.