Should monetary authorities be guided by rules or exercise discretion in their decision-making? The case of rules versus discretion has been a matter of debate in macroeconomics for many years. Those in favour of rules argue that "tying the hands" of policymakers will prevent the monetary authorities from implementing counter-productive attempts at short run stabilisation and will thus eliminate inflationary bias inherent in discretionary monetary policy. Opponents, conversely, stress the inability of predetermined rules to deal with unforeseen shocks or changes in the structure of the economy and sustain that the Central Bank should have freedom to select the best policy to follow given the current situation. Economists Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott gave an argument for rules in their 1977 article showing that the outcome in a rational expectations equilibrium where the government cannot commit to policy in advance - that is, discretionary policymaking- results in a lower welfare that the outcome in an equilibrium where there are binding commitments. This essay will focus in analysing the author's argument for rules as well as comparing two policy rules widely followed around the world along the years: inflation targeting and fixing the exchange rates.
In their model, Kydland and Prescott made the key assumptions that governments choose policy in order to maximise the welfare of citizens and that private agents hold rational expectations about future policy. They proposed that "even if there is an agreed-upon, fixed social objective function and policymakers know the timing and magnitude of the effects of their actions, discretionary policy does not result in the social objective function being maximised. Rather, by relying in some policy rules, economic performance can be improved". This arises due to the fundamental problem of time inconsistency of policy: if given the opportunity, governments would re-optimise and change their plans at a later date. Given the positive short run effects of surprise inflation, governments are tempted to cheat on their announce policies. If they are unable to make binding commitments regarding future policies they will face a credibility problem, and since private agents based their decisions on future policies, discretionary policy will not give the best outcomes.
Let's illustrate the authors' argument with an inflation-unemployment example, which assumes a linear relationship between inflation and unemployment in the form of the expectations-augmented Phillips Curve:
where u* is the natural rate of unemployment, t is the inflation rate, t
e is the inflation rate expected by private agents in period t-1 for period t, and  is a positive exogenous parameter.
The policymaker's objective is to maximise the function social function S(u t, t). Taking an adaptation of the quadratic form specified by Barro and Gordon (1983) we have:
Where  represents the weight the policymaker assigns to inflation (relative to unemployment) and k < 1 represents some distortion that makes the government target an unemployment rate lower than the equilibrium rate.
The policymaker can use monetary policy in period-t to control t. Since there is no uncertainty in the model, rational expectations imply that t
e = t and therefore u t = u*. If in period t-1 the policymaker can commit to the inflation rate in period t, then he will choose t = 0, since u t= u* must hold. The ex ante optimal outcome becomes (u*, 0), illustrated in figure 1 below.
However, the commitment outcome is not time consistent. Ex post, when expectations have already been formed, the government finds it optimal to choose an inflation rate higher than 0 if allowed to change its plan. The optimal policy will increase the inflation rate up to the level at which the marginal gain from lower unemployment equals the marginal cost of higher inflation. This outcome produces an inflation bias, labelled C in figure 1.
From the previous equation we derive that the equilibrium inflation under lack of commitment is given by:
This result implies that inflation is higher when the difference between the policymaker's unemployment target and the equilibrium rate is larger (k lower, or u* higher), the weight it assigns to inflation is lower (), or the responsiveness of unemployment to real wages is greater ( higher). Policymakers with a strong preference for unemployment over inflation, end up without lower unemployment, but higher inflation, than do policymakers with a stronger preference for low inflation relative to low unemployment. This result arises entirely due to the lack of commitment. Under commitment, the ex post temptation to inflate is absent, and rational expectations dictate the same outcome for any preference.
Kydland and Prescott's analysis of the time consistency problem inherent in monetary policy provides an explanation as to why many countries appeared to be trapped in vicious spiral of high inflation during the 1970s, despite continuous declarations from governments and central banks that inflation would be brought down. Their argument for rules favoured central bank independence as a mechanism to achieve policy credibility. Governments gain more from surprise inflation than central banks as it reduces the government's real debt and interest payment, as well as providing an opening for new debt and more opportunity for government spending. In addition, political pressures and change in command makes government policy very susceptible to changes and highly incredible. Central bank independence could secure that stabilisation mechanism are appropriately followed. Fixing the exchange rate and inflation targeting are two examples of stabilisation rules widely followed in recent years.
In a fixed exchange rate system a government sets the price of its currency against a major world currency (usually the U.S. dollar but it can be the euro, the yen or a basket of currencies). The central bank is then in charged of maintaining the predetermined rate by buying and selling its own currency on the foreign exchange market in return of the foreign currency to which it is pegged, and therefore must keep a high level of foreign reserves to execute such transactions.
An important advantage of a fixed exchange rate is that the damaging volatility of a floating exchange rate disappears. Although associated costs have not been quantified rigorously, many economists believe that exchange-rate uncertainty reduces international trade, discourages investment, and compounds the problems people face in insuring their human capital in incomplete asset markets. Much of the enthusiasm for monetary unification within the European Union stems from the belief that locked exchange rates maximise the gains from a unified market and that exchange-rate induced shifts in competitiveness within the EU can undermine the political consensus for free intra-EU trade. Similar beliefs motivated the designers of the Bretton Woods system to require fixed exchange rates.
In addition, pegging to a low-inflation currency could help restrain domestic inflation pressures, whether these originate in excessive government budget deficits or in the wage- and price-setting decisions of the private sector. The commitment of keeping the exchange rate fixed could prevent government temptations to follow excessively expansionary macroeconomic policies. However, keeping the promise of the fixed exchange rate could be very costly to maintain, especially if the government lacks credibility. And in the case where the government has to back down from this promise, economic agents will suspect this and will attack the currency, producing speculative crisis.
Mexico's 1994 experience illustrates the interaction between exchange rate commitments and credibility. Mexico began tying the peso to the dollar in 1989, however it was unable to convince investors and price setters of its long-term unconditional commitment to its exchange rate targets. Therefore, as the peso appreciated in real terms and nominal interest rates remained high, monetary authorities could not maintain the fixed rates due to its depressing effects and the currency depreciated largely. As a result, a speculative crisis took place. If Mexico's anti-inflationary policy had been more credible in the eyes of the markets, the crisis could had been avoided. Something similar occurred in Argentina, who had fixed its currency to the dollar in 1990s to get rid of hyperinflation. However the government acquired too much debt to fund its activities, and when it was obvious that the country could not sustain the fixed exchange rate anymore a speculative crisis occurred, leading the country to high levels of depression.
The fundamental problem with fixed exchange rates is that the government must be prepared to forgo completely the use of monetary policy for stabilisation purposes and face the difficulty of finding good substitute policy tools. Fiscal policy responds sluggishly and may entail undesirable intergenerational distributions, political side payments and dead-weight costs. Commercial policies such as tariffs imply their own efficiency costs and are often restricted by international agreements, in addition of causing trading partners to retaliate. A government that fixes its currency's exchange rate losses control of the domestic money supply, and its domestic interest rate is determined abroad, as according to the interest rate parity condition.
Another mechanism for achieving monetary stability, adopted by increasing governments in recent years, is inflation targeting. This approach is characterised by the announcement of official targets ranges for the inflation rate at one or more horizons, and by explicit acknowledgement that low and stable inflation is the overriding goal of monetary policy. Following the announcement of the target policymakers have to maintain increased communication with the public about their plans and objectives, and the central bank holds in most cases increased accountability for attaining those objectives.
The major advantage of targeting inflation is the increased transparency and coherence of policy. The public can rely on the announcements of the authorities and set their expectations accordingly, there is more room for debate and discussion of the strategies to follow, so the public is more informed, it thus reduces the financial and economic uncertainty associated with other policies. In addition, inflation targeting does not only provide a ceiling for the inflation rate but also a floor. Inflation targeting accentuates the effects of negative, as well as positive, shocks to aggregate demand.
On the other hand, the relative disadvantage of targeting inflation rate is that unanticipated shocks to the price level may be treated as bygones and never offset; as a result, forecasts of the price level at long horizons might have a large variance under inflation targeting, which presumably impedes private-sector planning. Furthermore, inflation is very difficult to predict accurately, particularly at both very short and very long horizons. This poses two important problems for the inflation targeting strategy. First, given the long run lags between monetary policy action and the inflation response, low predictability suggests that accurate targeting of inflation could be extremely difficult. Second, if inflation is largely unpredictable, and hence not finely controllable, then it will be difficult to judge whether the central bank has made it best efforts to hit the inflation targets.
The motivations to adopt the inflation targeting policy have been varied across different countries. UK and Sweden, for example decided to adopt this approach after the collapse of an exchange rate peg, as way to have an alternative "nominal anchor" for monetary policy and reassure the public that monetary policy would remain disciplined. Similarly, Germany took a money-focused approach in mid-1970s after the fall of its fixed exchange rate regime. Some countries such as Canada came to inflation targeting after unsuccessful attempts to use a money-targeting approach. In other cases, countries that by tight monetary policies had succeeded in reducing their core rate of inflation adopted inflation targeting as an institutional means of locking their inflation gains.
The choice between inflation targeting and fixing the exchange rate involves many considerations. Fixing the exchange rate is preferable when domestic political pressures are great, policy preferences between a foreign bank (to which the currency would be pegged) and home are similar, and shocks are world wide. Inflation targeting works well in the opposite situation, when political pressures are not major, when the foreign central bank is pursuing very different policy goals, or when shocks causing the stabilisation problem are mostly regional. In addition, inflation targeting will be easiest to implement in a situation in which inflation is already low and the basic approach has been made familiar to the public and the markets.
Kydland and Prescott made a strong argument for rules by showing that discretionary policy creates an inflationary bias due to the time inconsistency of policy in an environment where private agents are rational and forecast assertively. They proved that discretionary policy would not work well in dynamic economic systems, thus opening the eyes of authorities to the importance of committing to policy objectives. An important consideration here is the preference for long term goals, as discretionary policy could in fact achieve short term goals but miss the long term objective. Nowadays, granting the central bank independence is an approach widely used as a commitment device, especially by European nations. This essay analysed the merits and disadvantages of two stabilisation mechanisms used by Central Banks, fixed exchange rates and inflation targeting, concluding that is difficult to determine the superiority of one mechanism over the other as their success highly depends on the nation's economic state prior to its implementation.
If we go back to real world examples, we'll see that countries such as Mexico and Argentina experienced chaos while following a fixed exchange rate with the dollar, that why also the ERM was ended.... While more and more countries are following inflation targeting, like Canada, UK, New Zealand. Germany and Switzerland follow inflation targeting from a more indirect approach.
Mexico and Argetinean examples show that it has become increasingly difficult for countries to build the reputation needed to sustain a durable fixed exchange rate. Many countries have labored hard and long to makes exchange rate peg credible, only to watch their efforts crushed by market pressures in short time.
Kydland and Prescott's article proposed that They proposed that Optimal control theory in an appropriate planning device for situations in which current outcomes and the movement of the system's state depend only upon current and past policy decisions and upon the current state. Disretionary policy would not work in dynamic economic systems, as Current decisions of economic agents depend in part upon their expectations of future policy actions. Only if these expectations were invariant to the future policy plan selected would optimal control theory be appropriate.
In their model The model had no uncertainty, so that private agents can have perfect foresight. Lets use a two period example to illustrate the model. The government set the policy for period t in period t-1. economic outcomes in period t depend on both the policy undertaken in the period and on private agents decisions made in period t-1. In turn, private agents decisions in t-1 depend on their expectations about the period-t policy. Agents have perfect knowledge of the determinants of government policy and base their forecasts in that.
Without commitment, the government chooses its period-t policy in period t-1, without the ability to change this policy later on. The optimal choice of this policy must take into account its effects on private sector decisions in period t-1. Because the equilibrium period-t policy pins down the expectations in period t-1 as to what this policy will be, it influences private sector decisions made in period t-1 that affect period-t economic outcomes.
In the case of discretionary policy, i.e. without commitment, in period t-1 the government cannot make binding decisions over policy in period t until period t arrives. The period-t policy choice will not take into account how private sector decisions are made in period t-1, because when this policy choice is undertaken, private agents decisions have already been made in period t-1 and can no longer be influenced. This will generally lead to different policy choices than in the case with commitment. As a result, economic outcomes will lead to lower welfare than under commitment. This follows from the fact that with rational expectations, policy in period t is perfectly anticipated, but owing to the time sequencing of decision-making, there is no way for the government to influence these expectations. When deciding its policy in period t, the government thus solver an optimization problem that does not consider all the effects of its policy choice.
For practical purposed lets refer to the inflation-unemployment example present in the article. This example assumes the following linear relationship between inflation and unemployment, in the form of the expectations-augmented Phillips curve.
As Lucas (1976) has argued, since optimal decision rules vary systematically with changes in the structures of series relevant to the decision maker, any change in policy will alter the structure of these rules. Thus changes in policy induce changes in structure, which in turn necessitate reestimation and future changes in policy, and so on.
For some implausible structures this iterative procedure does not converge, and, instead, stabilisation efforts have the perverse effect of contributing to economic instability.
For most examples, it did converge but the resulting policy was suboptimal. It was consistent in the sense that at each point in time the policy selected was best, given the current situation. In effect the policymaker is failing to take into account the effect of this policy rule upon optimal decision rules of the economic agents.
An important consideration is the preference for long-term goals, following discretionary policy might produce the desired outcome in the short run but K + P introduced the distinction between time-inconsistent and time-consistent policy. A time-inconsistent policy may make the public happy in the short run but will ultimately fail to produce the long-run policy goal. A time-consistent policy, in contrast, nails the long-run policy goal but does not make people unhappy in the short run. K+P emphasised the importance of pondering not only the desirable policy for a given set of circumstances but also the framework likely to produce the best policy over time. They went on to argue that rules produce time-consistent outcomes because they make policy-maker-s pronouncement credible.
Developments in macroeconomic theory also played some role in the growing popularity of inflation targeting approach. These familiar developments included reduced confindence in activist, countercyclical moentary policy; the widespread acceptance of the view that there is no long-run tradeoff between output (or unemployment) and inflation, so that monetary policy affects only prices in the long run; theoretical arguments for the value of pre-commitment and credibility in monetary policy (Kydland and Prescott 1977, Calvo 1978, Barro and Gordo 1983); and an increasing acceptance of the proposition that low inflation promotes long-run economic growth and efficiency.