The existence of involuntary unemployment remains a key issue of macroeconomic study. Unlike other markets, the labour market fails to clear following price mechanisms. Efficiency wage models provide an explanation for the existence of involuntary unemployment as an equilibrium phenomenon, stating it results from employers offering wages above the market-clearing wage level in order to induce higher levels of worker productivity. In this essay, we will focus on analysing one efficiency wage model in particular, the shirking model produced by Carl Shapiro and Joseph Stiglitz in 1984. The rationale and predictions of this model will enable us to study the relationship between unemployment and real wages, and the causes and consequences of involuntary unemployment in relation to firms' behaviour.
The Shapiro-Stiglitz model portrays involuntary unemployment as a worker-discipline device. The model is based on the assumptions that workers dislike putting effort into the job and firms cannot monitor worker behaviour perfectly or without cost. Under these circumstances, the payment of a wage in excess of market-clearing represents an effective way for firms to provide workers with an incentive to work rather than shirk, promoting productivity and reducing labour costs. However, in the presence of full employment, wage incentives are not enough to prevent workers from shirking. If a worker is caught shirking and fired, with full employment, he could find a job immediately, there would be no penalty associated with losing his job and therefore no real incentive not to shirk. Only if there is a cost to being fired then the threat of being dismissed from the job if caught cheating creates an incentive not to shirk. Equilibrium then entails the existence of unemployment.
Since workers are risk neutral and dislike effort, their utility function exhibits the following form: U(w, e)= w - e ; where w is the wage level and e is the effort level on the job. Given the opportunity they would prefer to provide minimal or no effort. When facing the decision of whether to shirk or to put effort in the job, workers select an effort level that maximises their discounted lifetime utility stream by comparing the utility they get from shirking and the utility they get from not shirking. They would choose not to shirk only if their expected lifetime utility stream from not shirking (VNE) is greater than the expected lifetime utility from shirking (VSE). The latter represents the not shirking condition (NSC), which can be expressed algebraically in terms of the wage level (w), the effort level (e), the quit exogenous quit rate (b), the probability of being caught shirking (q), the lifetime utility stream of being unemployed (VU) and the interest rate level (r). If the expected utility stream of being unemployed is equal to the utility of shirking ( if VU = VSE ), the NSC could never be satisfied. The NSC is therefore given by:
or
It pays each firm to raise its wage to eliminate shirking, paying at least the critical wage level. The wage level serves as method of increasing the penalty for workers of losing their job; therefore, if a firm pays a sufficiently high wage, the worker will not shirk as he would derive more benefits of receiving that wage than living out of unemployment benefits. When all firms do this, average wages rise and firm's demand for labour decreases, resulting in a fall in the level of employment. In equilibrium all firms pay the same wage above market-clearing, and unemployment, which makes job loss costly, serves as a worker discipline device. Unemployed workers cannot offer to work at lower wages, as it would be in the workers benefit to shirk at such wage. Firms have knowledge of this, and therefore would not agree to hire workers in such conditions.
The aggregate non-shirking condition is given by:
w ( e + w + (e/q) (b/u + r) (
The NSC equation shows that the critical wage () able to deter workers from shirking would increase along with the effort level (e) as workers derive disutility from effort, and the interest rate level (r) as it decreases the present value of future payments. Equally, a higher exogenous quit rate (b) and high unemployment benefits (w) would increase the critical wage, the latter increasing the expected utility of unemployment. The critical wage holds a negative relationship with the detection probability (q) and the unemployment level (u); the lower the probability of being caught cheating the more likely are workers to shirk and the lower the unemployment level the lower the penalty related with being unemployed, therefore a higher wage is demanded. In addition, the equilibrium unemployment rate must be sufficiently large that it pays workers to work rather than shirk. The following diagram shows the equilibrium conditions:
Firms' demand for labour decreases the more costly it is to hire a worker, as the demand for labour is a decreasing function of the wage level. So, the higher the critical wage level required for a worker not to shirk, the higher the unemployment rate that would be produced in the economy as a result, and vice versa. In that sense the unemployment rate and the real wage level hold a positive relationship. In the presence of very high wage levels, employees would not only value work for the high compensation they are receiving, but because high wages correspond with low levels of employment.
On the other hand, as the unemployment level increases so does the penalty associated with being unemployed for workers, as a higher unemployment rates entails longer unemployment spells. The utility of being unemployed under such circumstances would be decreased. In this case, the threat of being fired would be the main incentive for workers not to shirk, making wages play a secondary role as incentives, therefore employers could offer lower wages without tempting workers to shirk. The effort model predicts, in fact, that during periods of high unemployment firms will cut wages, since it is easier to deter shirking when unemployment is high. The longer the expected duration of unemployment, the greater is the punishment associated with being unemployed, and hence the smaller the wage that would be required to induce non-shirking. In this sense, there is a negative relationship between unemployment and wages, the higher the unemployment level the lower the critical wage level necessary to deter workers from cheating on the job.
The effect of macroeconomic changes on the non-shirking condition and hence on the wage, supervision and effort levels within the firm is less clear. As previously mentioned, a higher unemployment rate will typically decrease the probability of an unemployed worker finding a job; therefore, an increase in the unemployment rate would increase the penalty associated with being fired and cause a fall in the non-shirking condition. However, an increase in the aggregate unemployment rate also causes workers to start believing that they are more likely to be fired in the future due to exogenous factors. Under such beliefs, it will be more difficult to deter shirking and the no-shirking condition would tend to rise. If the first effect dominates then the effort inducing effect of wages would tend to diminish business cycles. If the second effect dominates the opposite would happen; wages would tend to accentuate business cycles as firms respond to business downturns by raising wages and respond to upturns by decreasing wages.
The wage level necessary to deter workers from shirking does not only depend on the unemployment level. A key variable that determines firm behaviour and workers behaviour is the level of unemployment benefits and hence the expected utility stream of being unemployed (V U). The higher the unemployment benefits the higher the wage the firm should offer to deter workers from shirking. If w is high, V U is high, and the punishment associated with being unemployed is low. To induce workers not to shirk, a higher wage must be paid independent of the unemployment rate present in the economy.
In the Shapiro-Stiglitz model firms are assumed not to be able to monitor the activities of their employees perfectly (i.e. continuously and precisely) and costlessly, there is a principal-agent information problem. Productivity cannot be observed through the amount of output produced as it is difficult to identify the outcome of an individual worker when he is involved in team production. When wages are chosen to deter shirking the rigor of supervision as well as the standards imposed by the firm for a worker to keep his job are critical choice variables of the firm. In an effort model the cost of supervision affects both the wage and the equilibrium unemployment; since firms cannot afford perfect monitoring they must offer efficiency wages above market-clearing level to induce workers to exert effort on the job, this creates unemployment. The more imperfect the monitoring system, the higher is the wage necessary to deter workers from shirking.
Decreasing the monitoring intensity decreases workers' incentives to be productive. If aware that the probability of detection has decreased, workers would be tempted to risk shirking due to the equivalent increase in the probability of shirking without getting caught while receiving the same salary. Therefore, a wage increase would be necessary (at each level of employment) to induce individuals to exert effort; the NSC curve would shift upwards. This leaves the demand for labour unchanged, and hence the equilibrium level of unemployment and the equilibrium wage are both increased, as observed in the following graph:
If perfect monitoring were sufficiently cheap, firms could pay wages that were arbitrarily close to the reservation wage of their workers (that is, the wage that makes worker indifferent between working and being unemployed), and still prevent them from shirking. For this to hold some level of unemployment must exist and unemployment benefits must not be attractive, making the prospect of being unemployed less appealing.
In the presence of high unemployment level firms could consider lowering monitoring intensity. High unemployment levels entail long unemployment spells, therefore, as long as the utility the worker receives from being a non-shirking employee is higher than the utility of being unemployed, firms could lower monitoring expenses without risking worker productivity. However, firms must choose between lowering wage levels and lowering monitoring expenses. Both cost reducing strategies cannot be implemented at the same time. A reduction in the wage level tends to make unemployment prospects more attractive, worker would be tempted to shirk and gain the utility surplus associated with the wage and zero effort until they were monitor and fired. How much workers would be tempted to shirk depends on the level of unemployment benefits, and the utility associated with being unemployed.
Empirical evidence is not consistent in accepting or disregarding the shirking model. Several surveys showed that other efficiency models were preferred to the shirking model. A survey by Bewley in 1998, shows, for that although employers indeed do not like cutting wages, they disagree with higher wages leading to higher effort levels. Similarly, a survey produced by Campbell and Kamlani in 1997, found that less than 10% of people interviewed regarded high unemployment or intensive monitoring as efficient in deterring workers from shirking. Econometric evidence, however, is more supportive of the shirking model. An study performed by Capelli and Chauvin in 1991 found that there were less shirking-related discipline problems when wages were higher; while a study by Wadhani and Wall showed that firms in industries with growing unemployment also experienced higher productivity.
The Shapiro-Stiglitz shirking model provides a microeconomic approach consistent with explaining the existence of involuntary unemployment. The model shows because have imperfect monitoring systems, unemployment is necessary in equilibrium to induce worker productivity. In addition, an efficiency wage must be paid above the market-clearing level in order to increase the penalty associated with being unemployed. Only anticipated future wages and termination probabilities affect the current behaviour of workers.
The effect that changes in the unemployment level have on wage levels and monitoring intensity are not clear. With high unemployment, lower wage levels could be offered as the penalty of being unemployed is increased by the prospects of long unemployment spells. However, because high unemployment levels increase workers' expectations of getting dismissed due to exogenous factors, workers might be highly tempted to shirk anyway. Monitoring expenses could only be decrease during a high unemployment period if the wage level is not decreased at the same time. Firms must make a proper decision about which one to decrease according to their own cost structure. Finally, unemployment benefits play an important role regarding the penalty associated with being unemployed. High level of unemployment benefits would require high wage levels and/or high monitoring intensity even in the presence of high unemployment. Therefore, firms' behaviour when there is high unemployment in the economy is hard to predict as it depends on several factors, such as unemployment benefits, their own cost structure, worker-loyalty and preferences.