The front door will have a motion sensor which will be activated when the person comes in and will be on until the person leaves the front door from this the system will know whether the person is inside the house or not.
Each door will have a motion sensor to monitor whether the person has come in or not. After the sensor in the front door is activated only one of the other sensors should be activated at a time which shows that the person is in a room. If more than two sensors are activated at the same time, it may be a burglary so this can be used as a security system as well.
All the windows will have an alarm which should be switched off before opening the windows. This will be used to prevent thieves from breaking in to the house.
The kitchen will have a fire alarm. A carbon monoxide detector will be used to make sure there are no gas leaks. Also there will be a motion sensor to make sure that the person is not still fro a long time.
The hall way will have a light which works a as a motion sensor. If the person is stationary for a considerable amount of time the system will know that something has gone wrong.
The bedroom will have a sensor connected to the light to see whether the light is on or not. The bed will be fixed with a pressure sensor a heart beat sensor and a temperature sensor. The pressure sensor will be used to find out whether the person is on the bed or not. The heart rate sensor will monitor the person heart beat and if there is a change the system will take action and do the necessary such as informing some one using an alarm system. The temperature sensor will be used in a shower which will be used to find out whether the person is in a critical condition and needs assistance.
A temperature sensor will be used in the shower which will automatically control the temperature if the water is too hot. The bathroom floor will have infrared sensors running across the floor. So if more than one is cut the system will know that the person has fallen and needs help. The shower will have a sensor which will show whether it has been turned off or not.
The sofa will be equipped with a heart rate sensor and a pressure sensor and the room will have a motion sensor to find out whether the person has been still for a long time.