The Volkswagen beetle the VW type 1 is a small family car. It's the most popular car among the Volkswagen family, also its one of the famous cars from Germany. It has its own unique design which makes it recognizable among a million of other cars. The production went from 1938 until year 2003 it was only interrupted by the World War II. Over 21 million were produced at the end of 2003.
Also know by different names such as Beetle Bug or in German it was known as Kafer. The car was 4m (13.32 ft) long, 1.6m (5.08 ft) wide and 1.5m (4.92 ft) high. It weighed around 810 Kg (1,786 lb) and consists of 4 cylinders and a 1.6 L engine. Five passengers were able to travel without any difficulty. The tank could take up to 40 L (10.57 gallons) allowing it to go on long journeys.
The car was originally known as Type 1 until for the first time in 1967 Germens used the name "Der Kafer" in all their brochures which meant "The Beetle" in German. The name Beetle was reused when the new beetle was introduced in 1998 and has been in use ever since.
The beetle has an interesting history which goes back to the 1930s. This took place in Germany when Hitler wanted a private motorized transport to be widely available thus he got an engineer Ferdinand Porsche to produce a vehicle which many claim that it was based on a sketch Hitler him self drew in 1932. He wanted the car to transport two adults and three children at a speed of 100 Km/h and that the cost of it should be the same as a motorcycle and sidecar, not more than that. A saving scheme was launched so people will be able to purchase the cars that were produced. But most of the people who paid in to the scheme never got their cars as a result of the 2 nd World War. It was originally planed that the beetle should be designed as an armored car to be used during war time. It resembles a tankette without a turrer or armor.
The popular belief is that the honor of designing the beetle goes to Ferdinand Porsche but in the 1920s Joseph Ganz had already made a similar model which was very economical. A person named Adler produced the "Maikafer" and standard the "Superior", which was advertised as "Der Deutsche Volkswagen. It was the cheapest four wheel car at that time.
The first prototypes produced by Daimler Benz in Stuttgart Germany, was called "Kraft durch Freude" which meant strength through joy. This name was given to it because the cars were made for members of the Nazi leisure organization. The first prototype had the distinctive round shape and a rear mounted engine. They had only produced a small amount of cars by the time the war started. The first volumes produced were military vehicles.
The air being cooled was very useful in North Africa's desert heat. Very little number of beetles was made due to gasoline shortages during war time the cars were fueled by wood pyrolysis gas produced under the hood.
The production was halted due to heavy damage sustained in Allied air raids on the factory. Most of the equipment was moved to underground bunkers for protection.
Beetles were produced at such a rate that the millionth car was produced in 1954. The reliability and the sturdiness helped more consumers come looking for the beetle. By the end of 1973 the total production exceeded 16 million and by the year 2002 over 21 million were produced. The car was known under various names the Germans called it
The car was known under various names the Germans called it Kafer, It was called Fusca in Brazil, Coccinelle in France, Maggiolino in Italy; The Mexicans called it Vocho, and in Netherlands it was called Kever, It was called Bug in the United States.
The super beetle was produced in 1979 it had front suspension better turning radius, and more space in the front luggage compartment. It also had a padded dash board and a curved wind shield made it popular among people.
The main production of the Beetle was done in Brazil and Mexico the last one was produced in Puebla.
Even though the Beetle was modified with time there is not much of a difference between the old VW type one and the one that we see on the roads today. The original Volkswagen has still being one of the best selling cars of all time.
A very popular beverage known by every one by its nick name coke is a carbonated soft drink produced by the Coca Cola company in Atlanta It was invented in the late 19 th century as a patent medicine which was sold for five cents a glass. It was supposed to be mixed with still water. It was sold at soda fountains because the Americans at that time believed that carbonated was good for your health. Pemberton claimed Coca-Cola cured a myriad of diseases, including morphine addiction, dyspepsia, neurasthenia, headache, and impotence. In 1887 he him self was addicted to morphine and sold the company to Asa Griggs Candler a businessman whose influencer ended up making it one of the soft drinks that dominated the market in the 20 th century. Though people talk about the health effect to date it still remains as a soft drink which is popular world wide.
The inspiration for the coca cola bottle was got by a coco pod. With time it gradually transformed in to the design that is used now a days.
Described as the "design icon of the decade" by pop artist Andy Warhol the bottle is one of containers that can be recognized easily without any difficulty due to its unique design.
The first bottle was made in the early 1900s. This was the time when the packaging and the actual coca cola product was imitated.
In 1916 the company came up with a popular belief that anyone could recognize the bottle at any circumstance even if he feels the bottle in the dark. And that the Coca cola bottle should be shaped that in such away that even though it was broken by one glance at it some one could say that it was a coke bottle. They needed a bottle that could fight other substitutions. This is how the glass coke bottle was born. After conducting research the coca cola company found out that the consumers still prefer to drink off a glass bottle than anything else.
The inspiration for creating the bottle with fluted sides and the bulging middle with its distinctive grooves came out from the African Cola nut. The South American coca leaf contributes to the drinks unique flavor. The famous Coke bottle, called the "Contour bottle" within the company, was created in 1915 by a Swedish former glassblower, Alexander Samuelsson, who employed as a manager at Root glass Co. of Terre Haute, Indiana. Atlanta pharmacist John S. Pemberton invented the drink in 1886. Pemberton developed a non alcoholic version of the French Wine Cola due to legislations. Five ounces of coca leaf per gallon of syrup. The first drink was sold on the 8 th of May in 1886 at Jacob's Pharmacy in Atlanta. Only nine drinks were sold per day for some. It was first advertised in 1886 in the Atlanta Journal.
And it was given the name by Pemberton's bookkeeper Frank Robinson who suggested that the two ingredients that were used most had a nice alliterative sound. That's how the beverage got its name Coca Cola. He came up with the logo and the distinctive cursive script. The typeface used, known as Spencerian script, was developed in the mid 19th century and was the form of formal handwriting in the United States during that period. The design was so successful that Root Glass became one of the wealthiest men in Indiana even though the designer just got the same salary.
During World War II the company made sure that the U.S fighting forces could count on Coca Cola where ever they were and they set up 64 bottling plants around the world. The sight of the bottle reminded them of home and good will towards the soft drink. Now Coca Cola is sold in more than 200 countries and even now remains as one of the most popular beverages around the world.
This was something that came up in the UK and in the US in the late1950s. Most of the themes and techniques have been drawn from mass culture. Pop art can be defined as a visual artistic movement. Pop art like pop music where there is a subgenre of popular music. Since the term spans many rock, hip hop, rhythm and blues (R&B), country, dance and operatic pop acts, it's quite hard to give a clear cut definition for pop music. It is reasonable to say that "pop music" is a loosely defined category. This aimed on employing images of popular as culture in art. It emphasizes the unpredictability in the taste of any culture. Pop art is widely interpreted as a reaction to the dominant ideas of Americans world war II movement or an expansion upon them. . Pop art most of the time targeted a broad audience, even though much pop art is considered as being very academic.
In 1958 Laurence Alloway a peroson who wrote reviews for "Art news and Reviews" coined the term and stated that it has a popular culture of its day. "pop" movement was widely recognized by the mid 1960s. In the meantime, the movement was sometimes called Neo-Dada, a name which reveals some of the thinking behind this type of art, and the strong influence of dada pioneer Marcel Duchamp some of the famous pop figures are Hamilton, Jasper Johns, and Andy Warhol.
Richard Hamilton, born in 1922 on the 24 th of april to a working class family. He was born and bred in the Pimlico part of London. Having left college with no formal qualifications he grew up to be a British painter and college artist. He was introduced to the G reen Box notes of Marcel Duchamp in 1952 through through Roland Penrose. Who also helped him get a teaching post which lasted till 1966. During this time he did further research. The homage of duchamp could be clearly seen at the exhibition of paintings he had at the Hanover Gallery in 1955. Another exhibition about Man and machine motion was organized in Hatton Gallery. This exhibition lead the foot steps to his next exhibit This is Tomorrow at whitechapel Gallery in London it was a huge success that it even resulted in him getting promoted and securing his carrier as a teacher. He received a grant from the arts council in the early 1960s to work on Kurt Schwitters :Mertzbarn' in Cumbria. Hamilton ended up relocating his research in to the Hattoin Gallery. Hamilton made the first British retrospective of Duchamp's work. He had another exhibition in the Tate Gallery in 1966. Hamilton made friends with Paul McCartney and he ended up producing the collage for the inside of the Beatles White Album.
The world got to know about him in the 1970s due to number of exhibitions consisting of his work taking place. Since the late 1940s Hamilton has been engaged with a project to produce a suite of illustrations for James Joyce's Ulysses. Some of his works are Longcech Prison which is popular as The Maze. It shows a dirty protester with long hair and a beard stylised in a way to make him appear similar to a Christian martyr. Also The Subject onother one of his works emphasizes on an Orangeman, a member of the order dedicated to defend Unionism in Northern Ireland. His creation named the State shows a British soldier undertaking solitary patrol on a street. The Tate Gallery now has a comprehensive collection of Hamilton's work open for the public to look and admire what a great artist he is.
Another name that comes in to our mind when talking about pop art is Jasper Johns born on 15 th of may 1930 in Auguta Georgia, even though art had noting to do with his child hood. He grew up to be one of the well known artists. He studied at the University of South Carolina and then moved to Parsons School of Design in New York in 1949.
Johns' early technique of painting was with thick, dripping encaustic over a collage made from found materials such as newspaper. Jhon Jasper is most famous for his pinting "Flag". His work is often described as a 'Neo-Dadaist', as opposed to Pop Art, even though his subject matter often includes images and objects from popular culture.
At the beginning most of his works were concentrated on flags, maps,letters and numbers. His treatment of the surface is often lush and painterly; he is famous for using media as Encaustic (wax-based paint), and plaster relief in his designs. His other major works include False start (1959), Study of skin (1962) and Seasons (1986)
In 1950s and 1960s pop art became the fashion among the youth. For example Peter Blake, designed album covers for Elvis Presley and the Beatles and placed film stars such as Brigitte Bardot in his pictures in the same way that Warhol was immortalizing Marilyn Monroe in the USA. Pop art came in a number of waves, but all its adherents Joe Trilson, Richard Smith, Peter Phillips, David Hockney and R.B. Kitaj shared some interest in the consumer, modern experience.
It has won the reputation for being the world's largest tower. It's situated in the city of Taipei Taiwan. Its official name is Taipei 101 it has got this name because it is situated in Taiwan and had 101 floors over the ground. The structure was finished in 2004.
The Taipei Tower is one of the world greatest buildings of all times. And the honor goes to C.Y. Lee and Partner, Architects, and Turner International Industries, Inc., project and construction management, the designers and the builders of this great piece of art.
The tower is 508 m (1,667 feet) high. It has 198,347 m 2 (2,336,000 sq. ft.) of office space and a retail space of 77,033 m 2 (796,000 sq. ft. ). And also a parking space of 83,000 m 2 (893,000 sq. ft. ) where over 1,500 vehicals can be parked without any difficulty. The tower also has a 60 foot spire made by using the bamboo plant.
Designing a building this high always prone the risk of facing earthquakes, and failing at such a circumstance. Taiwan is a country which is subjected to earthquakes most of the time of the year. So to make sure it's safe a mass damper system has been used in the structure. To over come this challenge and to insure safety, a 800 metric ton (1,764,000 lbs.), spherical steel mass which is located on the 88 th floor and is visible from the restaurant and observation decks. The energy is transferred from the building to the swinging sphere, keeping the building stable without making it collapse on to the ground.
The Taipei tower adopts heavily from the Chinese culture. The interior and the exterior, inherits the shape of bamboo flowers. The lucky number eight, which means blooming or success, is represented by the eight clearly delineated exterior sections of the building. Even the Jin Mao Tower in Shanghai used the 8 design.
There are observation decks are located in the 89 th floor and the 91 st this includes the highest restaurant in Taiwan the 89 th floor includes a indoor observation area where the 91 st floor indicates an outdoor observation area this is the second highest out door observation area according to Shanghai World Financial Center.. The towers use to elevators to cope up with its activities. The Two high-speed elevators reach a maximum speed of 1,010 meters/minute (55 ft./second) when traveling to the 89th floor. It is quipped with the world's fastest elevators. Each elevator is designed in sucha way that it is aerodynamic and with emergency braking systems, and the world's first triple-stage anti-overshooting system. The cost for each elevator is over $US 2 million.
The roof top topping out ceremony was held on the 1 st of July 2003.The president of Taiwan and the mayor of Taipei participated in the event. The final section of the spire was put in place October 9, 2003, thus giving Taipei 101 the official world's tallest building title. This is the only supertall building built in a highly active earthquake zone. Petronas Towers still holds the record for the world's tallest twin towers but the Taipei 101 still hold the worlds tallest title. The tower is also famous for being the tallest building in the 21st century. The shopping mall, Taipei 101 mall, officially opened in November 13th, 2003. Exterior construction elevators and elevator shaft were fully disassembled in late February of 2004. The Taipei towers hold 3 of the worlds tallest building titles Tallest to structural top, Tallest to roof and Highest occupied floor. The Taiwan Stock Exchange has rented out 7 floors of the bilding. The official top-out of the tower at a ceremony held on October 17, 2003. Till now and even tomorrow it will remain as one of the greatest creations done by man kind.
As Ernestine carter one said in the Sunday Times It is given to a fortunate few to be born at the right time, in the right place, with the right talents. In recent fashion There are three: Chanel, Dior and Mary Quant.
And as well all know Mary Quant was widely credited with inventing the icon of 1960s fashion.
Mary quant has said that when she did her very first rough drawing she used to mark the focal point with a daisy so she could decide later. But since the daisy always looked better and because it was luck for her they started using it in cosmetics.
This talented lady was born in Kent on 11 th of February in 1934. She studied illustration at Goldsmith's college which is some sort of visualization such as drawing, painting, photograph or other work of art that stresses subject more than form. Illustration is basically about decorating a story poem or textual information for example like in new paper articles. The aim is to provide visual representation of something described in the text. The foots steps of her carrier wood have started off from Goldsmith's College, this would have had a great influence on quant ending up being one of the greatest fashion designers of all time.
She got married to an accountant named Alexander Greene in October in 1955 she opened her first clothes shop on the Kings road in London and it was named Bazaar.
Mary was one of the English fashion designers who took credit for inventing the mini skirts and the hot pants
Mary Quant (born February 11, 1934) is an English fashion designer, one of the many designers who took credit for inventing the miniskirt a called Bazaar.
After the designing clothes for this play called "mad house pyjamas" and because of the positive feed back she got from the opening she decided to carry out designing more clothes. Besides quant wasn't satisfied with the clothes that was available for her this she decided to follow her instincts and make her own clothes. Even though at the beginning she started off alone all by her self after some time she had many machinists working under her who helped her produce unusual clothes which she found fascinating.
Rather than concentrating on the fact that how good it looks she also considered the fact that how easy and convenient the dress would be for the beholder. Starting from 1958 she kept on making her skirts shorter allowing women to run to the bus and do their activities more easily. Even though quant most famous inventory is the mini skirt, even Andre Courreges developed it separately. The mini skirt was the fashion in the 1960s. There are still doubts as in to who came up with the idea first.
Quant not only designed the mini skirt but also she designed many other dresses which had a huge influence on the society. She is also credited with inventing the coloured and patterned tights. She also accompanied the garment.
Quant opened her second shop which was also named bazaar in Knightsbridge. After her first shop was a very popular hunt for fashionable. She was so successful and popular that by 1965 she was exporting garments to the USA. The demand was so much that she went in to mass production setting up the Ginger Group.
She was so popular in the mid 1960's the time when she introduced the micro Mini skirt and plastic raincoats. She was also appointed an OBE(The Most Excellent Order of the British Empire) in 1966 for the revolutionary service she did for the fashion industry.
Her last big fashion development was in the late 1960s, she launched hot pants. These are short, tight shorts, usually made out of cotton, nylon, or some other common material. They are meant to emphasize the buttocks and the legs of a female. In the 1970s she concentrated more on household goods and make up.
She resigned as director of Mary Quant Ltd. in 2000 after a Japanese buy out. She has a son, the two lived together in Japan while she set up her business there in the late 1980s.