Modernism is surely the most indefinable movement of the twentieth century. As critics have remarked, it is a concept which 'incorporates major contradictions'. However, a key factor in our understanding of modernism is an awareness of the socio-political, cultural and scientific context of its conception. If we are to define it as a movement which, as Peter Childs argues, was 'primarily located in the years 1890-1930', then there are many notable developments which took place in Germany during this period crucial to the birth of modernism. Indeed, death contributed greatly to this birth. According to one website, '1,773,000' soldiers died and '11,000,000 mobilized' and '4,216,000 injured' men arrived home in the defeated Germany in 1914. More positively, the 1919 National Constitutional Assembly elections led to the 'right to vote' being given to women, who, six years later, represented over a third of the working population. Moreover, female emancipation occurred not only in political and professional realms, but also in the sphere of sexual relationships. The creation of 'die neue Frau' was influenced by the 'free sexuality' encouraged by the Berlin and Munich cabaret scenes; in addition, the arrival of sexual health clinics meant that women were no longer confined to the roles of housewife and mother imposed on them by the former Imperial state. Indeed, Weimar Germany embraced the presence of both low and high culture, just as it questioned the hierarchy inherent in the German marriage, as Theodor Van der Velde's guide to marriage, Die volkommene Ehe, testifies. In contrast to the artistically dubious cabaret, several creative movements, some essentially part of Modernism, others in conflict with it, formed throughout Europe in the early twentieth century. In Germany, one can note the concept of the 'socially critical' Neue Sachlichkeit, Expressionism and its focus on the highly personal subjectivity of the emotions, as well as the Expressionist painters who formed 'die Bruecke' and 'die blaue Reiter' groups, and the Bauhaus movement, with its admiration of the New York skyscrapers. Meanwhile, figures such as Einstein, Planck, Max Born and Johnny von Neumann were making progress in the scientific world. It is these socio-political, cultural and scientific advancements which I shall consider in analysing the extent to which Metropolis and Der blaue Engel can be called modernist.
If, as Peter Childs declares, 'Modernism can be taken as a response by artists and writers to several things, including industrialisation, urban society, war, technological change and new philosophical ideas', then Metropolis is certainly a modernist film. Certainly, while it is set in the year 2000, it is the developments of the late nineteenth, and early twentieth, century which Lang exhibits in our first glimpses of the city Metropolis. Clearly, its planes, trains and automobiles reflect the urbanised, heavily populated London, Paris, or Berlin at the turn of the century, and its skyscrapers, due to America's influence on the Bauhaus artists, suggest more than a little nod to those of the modern New York. This first overview of Metropolis, then, suggests the positive side of man's progress in technology. As the skyscrapers and planes symbolically indicate, and which one critic has pointed out, man is literally reaching for the skies. But where is man? A closer look at this mise-en-scene implies, ironically, that what man has created has become more powerful than man himself. Indeed, man is present in this scene, but purely either to have his individuality suppressed by being part of one of those 'formal geometrical structures', so favoured by the architect in Lang, or literally to be relegated to the sidelines, making way for the car filled streets, devoid of people, in centre frame. Clearly, we must possess double vision when watching Metropolis, admiring man's industrial advancement and yet simultaneously questioning the cost of this advancement, remembering E. M. Forster's belief in the tyranny of the machine and the fact that behind these planes, trains and automobiles lies the ghost of the tank, man's creation in order to destroy only himself during World War One. Thus, the triumphant soundtrack to this scene, if not ironic insofar as it declares man's progress in technology, nonetheless belies the catastrophe which awaits man as a result of this progress.
If Modernist art criticises the tyranny of the machine, then it criticises society also for permitting this tyranny. Lang encourages the afore-mentioned double vision of the viewer by depicting firstly the lowest class in Metropolis. Their black attire, squadron-esque formations and bowed heads support one critic's argument that they are 'more machines than human beings', and our first view of the Heart Machine, in which the workers perform a choreographed dance within the machine, emphasises this. Evidently, they exist purely to work and are literally mere cogs in the machine, empowering with 'every revolution of a machine wheel', as an intertitle puts it, their superiors in the city of Metropolis above them. The social divide between the working class and the upper class is emphasised in several ways. Firstly, as one critic has suggested, 'architecture in Lang expresses [....] the hierarchy of classes', and the fact that our first glimpse of the workers has them descending to work in a lift highlights their inferiority. It is an inferiority nonetheless beautifully emphasised by the descending, altar poem-esque intertitle, 'Deep below the earth's surface lay the workers' city'. Secondly, the games scene in the 'Club of the Sons' shows that the upper class delights in its freedom of movement for its own sake, as opposed to the stiff movements of the workers illustrating how fettered they are to their machines. Lastly, the physicality of these sportsmen, highlighted by their wearing white, is enjoyed not only in sport of a competitive, but also of a sexual, nature, supported by Freder's frolicking with a half-naked woman in an Eden-esque garden. This is in clear contrast to the workers, whose sexual exploits are evidently limited to procreation, as we see no women in their lives until anarchy has broken out.
Certainly then, Metropolis depicts an unambiguous social hierarchy, but its Modernist attempt to destroy this hierarchy is only partially successful. Its 'reactionary and humanist resolution' is clearly problematic when we consider that, since Modernism resulted from a pessimistic attitude regarding the nature of mankind following World War One, the only truly modernist ending to Metropolis would in turn be pessimistic, rather than sentimental. As Lang himself remarked more than thirty years after the film was made,
Conversely, as one critic has noted, 'the purpose of art for Marx and Marxists was not to reflect social conditions but to attempt to change them', an idea far more positive than Lang's generally pessimistic view of mankind. However, Marx's view that, in the wake of industrialisation and its effect on the class system, the true progress of mankind could be measured only by his endeavour to destroy the social hierarchy he has created, seems to correspond to Metropolis' message. Where it differs is in Metropolis' ultimate failure to provide a satisfying answer to social inequality. Although the workers revolt against the machines which keep them firmly in the working class, 'capitulation rather than resolution', results, illustrated by a mere handshake between Joh Fredersen, representing the upper class, and Grot, representing the working class and yet simultaneously betraying them by revealing the workers' plans to Fredersen. Furthermore, the crucial word in the quote above is 'attempt'. Lang seems to attempt, successfully or not, to reshape society, and in doing so seems to aspire admirably to Marxist Modernism. However, Gunning's view of Metropolis' ending suggests otherwise:
Clearly, Marxism espoused Modernism, and Metropolis' ending, depicting the quietly yielding working class, means that one cannot perceive it as Modernist in a Marxist sense. However, if one views Modernism as what Lang himself called 'pessimism for its own sake', implying that, albeit subconsciously, he was aware of the cynicism inherent in his ending, then one can certainly say that the film's conclusion contains elements of the Modernist mentality.
An analysis of the Modernist mentality in the context of Der blaue Engel generates many ideas in common with the Modernist tendencies of Metropolis. Both films explore the Modernist thinker Freud's idea that the male fears castration at the hands of the female. Stephen Jenkins testifies to this in relation to Metropolis and its depiction of 'the Technosexual Woman':
This fear of castration is evidently genetic, as it is experienced not only by Fredersen, but also by Freder. While many critics have analysed his work on the 'Clock Machine' in religious, allegorical terms, reading it in terms of his representation of Jesus and therefore seeing it as a crucifixion, equally, particularly considering the common view that technology is feminised is Metropolis, his suffering at the hands of this clock clearly symbolises his fear of being castrated at the hands of the female. In contrast, Rotwang's threatening pursuit of Maria, in which he stuns her with her flashlight, symbolically depicts the male enacting his revenge on the supposedly castrating female
In contrast to Metropolis' serious and blatant illustrations of the male's fear of castration, the threat is dealt with far more light-heartedly and subtly in Der blaue Engel. While one could argue that the sexual objectification of Lola Lola ultimately exploits rather than empowers her, one cannot argue with the finality of the denouement, spotlighting the dead Rath whom she has truly vanquished. Her conquering, and thus castrating, him, is decided moments after he has entered the Blauer Engel. Literally turning the spotlight on him from the superior position of the stage, she simultaneously seduces him and discomforts him. Perhaps her most obvious parade of her phallic superiority is in her exhibition of her legs, constantly hugging them close to her, pulling stockings onto them and, in the scene where she drops her cigarettes and Rath rushes to pick them up, causing him to come literally face to face with them. A more subtle symptom of Rath's castration, however, is symbolised by his leaving his hat, a traditional piece of masculine attire and representation of the phallus, in her dressing room. Later, we see her donning a top hat, Rath's castration and her epitomising the modern concept of 'die neue Frau', who refused to conform to gender stereotypes in Weimar Germany, thus simultaneously completed.
Not only Freud's concept of male castration fear, but also his interlinking theory of the Oedipus complex, features in Der blaue Engel. He experiences a gradual regression back to childhood, in contrast to Freder, who alternates between the role of regressor and that of mature mediator in Metropolis, portraying the latter at the end of the film. Furthermore, whereas Freder's view of Maria as mother is inevitably intertwined with the anti-Modernist, religiously allegorical idea of their being Jesus and Virgin Mary figures respectively, Rath's regression has an inverse relationship to Lola Lola's Modernist progression to stardom and sexual freedom. While Maria inherits the features of the modern Virgin Mary in order to facilitate the suppression of the female, once the robot has been destroyed, at Metropolis' conclusion, Lola Lola refashions the traditional idea of the German mother who is concerned only with 'Kinder' and 'Kuche'. As one critic has said, 'she wears the signs and insignia of a phallic mother'. Sadomasochistally infantilising him, a fact exemplified in the mise-en-scene in which he awakes next to a doll in her bed, she reduces him to the status of one of his pupils, one moment blowing face powder all over him, the next comforting him like a mocking mother. His Oedipus complex and subsequent downfall is hinted at in his teaching of Hamlet, the eponymous character of which, arguably, is consumed by his sexual feelings for his mother and dies as a result of his jealousy of his stepfather. Indeed, it is the recurrence of these pupils in Lola Lola's dressing room, particularly when they are hiding under the trap door, which represents his unsuccessful attempt to suppress his inner child who both desires the mother figure and fears his castration at her hands. Understandably, for Lola Lola takes the idea of 'die neue Frau' to the extreme, marrying him only to make him her servant, not only defying his wish that postcards of her should no longer be sold, for they encourage other men to possess her, but also making him sell them to these men at the Blauer Engel.
If Der blaue Engel is modernist in the sense that it endeavours to destroy the hierarchy inherent in male-female relationships, offering a 'Reaction to [the] stuffy, religiously and sexually repressive Wilhelminian era', then it is modernist also in its use of the star as a vehicle to destroy the stereotypical, cinematic depiction of 'men as patriarchal heroes' and 'women as mothers to the nation'. Clearly, Marlene Dietrich personifies the move away in German cinema from Expressionism to Modernism, according to one critic, she 'embodies a new acting style'. Although von Sternberg pays homage to certain aspects of German Expressionist Cinema, most notably in the 'looming and misshapen' Blauer Engel itself, resembling Rotwang's house in Metropolis, and in the recurring 'animal imagery' which sees Rath crow madly like a rooster at the film's ending, it is Dietrich's self-consciousness portrayal of her own stardom, profoundly contrasting to the 'melodramatic acting' of Expressionism, which contributes greatly to the Modernist nature of Der blaue Engel. As one critic has noted, modernist film reveals 'the voyeuristic position of the film spectator', and it is specifically this voyeurism on which Dietrich bases her cultivation of herself as a star and which is encouraged on several layers. The spectator views Rath and his pupils lusting over the postcards of Lola Lola and, simultaneously, finds himself or herself lusting over Dietrich the star. Fittingly, however, it is at the Blauer Engel that this cult of voyeurism reaches its climax. Rath tries to take his eyes off Lola Lola in her dressing room, but succumbs, like the spectator, to watching her undress. Ironically, the screen, which should hide her body while she changes, only draws both Rath and the spectator to glance at it all the more. As one critic has noted,
Just as Dietrich self-consciously creates the cult of the star in her portrayal of Lola Lola, Lang embraces the Modernist concept of 'technical display' throughout Metropolis. Indeed, the UFA studio, at that time the biggest in Europe, became a microcosm of the world during the film's production. For Lang's vision not only showcased the planes, trains and automobiles, in the scene depicting Metropolis the city, which had been relatively recently invented in the world outside the studio, but also used the film to showcase the technological progress made by his production team within the studio. The Schuefften process, which 'used a camera with two lenses [....] [and] focused two separate images onto a single strip of film', the 3-D effect produced by a swinging camera during the flood, momentarily deceiving the spectator into thinking they could be engulfed by water at any moment, just like Freder and Maria , and, according to Lang, the back projection created to enable Fredersen to communicate with Grot through a television screen, were all invented during the making of Metropolis.
However, these revolutionary effects, despite their suggesting a Modernist tendency to 'technical display', are frequently used in Metropolis during scenes of an essentially Expressionist nature. Freder's second hallucination exemplifies one critic's definition of Expressionist cinema as involving 'melodramatic acting', 'a subjective experience of time' and 'a vividness or intensity of sensory perception'. His acting, as ever, is utterly melodramatic during this scene, illustrated throughout by his eyes, which are widened in terror, and at the conclusion of his vision, in which he punches an arm into the air to ward off Death's scythe. Yet the sheer 'vividness' of this vision and Freder's feeling that time has accelerated create an Expressionist mood which is enhanced, nonetheless, by the 'avant-garde editing figure [of] the jump cut' during the false Maria's dance.
Indeed, since this essay has attempted to emphasise the Modernist's concentration on mankind's technical progress, it would be useful, in the context of Metropolis, to view the Modernist movement as a hybrid form, constantly evolving and contradicting itself, as has already been suggested, unable to arrive at any fixed state. The ambiguity of Langian Modernism is reflected in the 'duality' of his characters, a duality which, in turn, is epitomised by the figure of Rotwang. In several ways, Rotwang is essentially a Modernist character. Like those who use their powers of invention to create ammunition only in order to destroy mankind, Rotwang's creation of the robot Maria may illustrate technological progression, but it highlights also, more importantly, the 'deathly magic in the creative impulse' which is magnetically drawn to the seemingly paradoxical dichotomy of creation and destruction. Conversely, as one critic has argued, 'the visual portrayal of his surroundings marks Rotwang as a medieval wizard, a trafficker in spirits and demons'. It is he 'whom Lang describes as the source of evil', and not Joh Fredersen, for whereas the latter desires the robot's creation in order to maintain the social hierarchy, the former uses the robot as a magical weapon against both the workers and Joh Fredersen. Clearly, then, the character of Rotwang espouses a contradictory 'gothic modernism'. For the robot is not only an invention of the Modernist, technological era, but also, in its ability only to obey Rotwang's orders, a creation inevitably intertwined to the ancient world of magic.
If Modernist Cinema 'questions how it represents and what it represents', then an unquestionably Modernist feature of both Metropolis and Der blaue Engel is not the mere presence, but rather the significance, of sound in the films. Despite the developments during Metropolis' making of the Schuefftan process, jump cuts and inventive use of the swinging camera, technology had not yet made the sufficient progress needed to add dialogue to film. However, this apparent technological deficiency is counteracted not only by the film's soundtrack, but also in its clever use of illumination. As one critic concurs, 'Light can even create the impression of sound', and this is exemplified by the extreme whiteness of the air emitted by the whistles, synaesthetically suggesting to the spectator's eye their sheer volume. Likewise, the instances of apparently incidental sound in Der blaue Engel are remembered for what they attempt to represent. Thus, Rath's constant nose blowing is symptomatic of his desire literally to unblock his sexually repressive nature. His opening the window in the classroom at the beginning of the film lets in the joyous sound of female singing, thus, once again, confirming his desire to reawaken his sexual appetite. Conversely, his closing the window almost straightaway foreshadows his initial fear at the Blauer Engel of the sexual colossus who is Lola Lola, a fear which she herself will confirm when, dressing, she strikes a discordant note on the piano.
In conclusion, to a certain extent, neither Metropolis nor Der blaue Engel can be described as Modernist. Both films owe a debt to Expressionism in their use of distorted sets and chiaroscuro lighting; a considerable amount of Metropolis, evidently, was influenced by the movement, and this is apparent not only in its sets and lighting, but also in the melodramatic style of much of the actors, particularly Freder, and its depiction of subjective reality in the form of hallucination. On the whole, however, several elements of these films force us to define them as Modernist. The influence of modern thinkers such as Freud is apparent in both films' explorations of the psychoanalytic concepts of the Oedipus complex and castration fear. In turn, despite their identities as a silent film and an early 'Tonfilm' respectively, Metropolis and Der blaue Engel both exhibit an admirable desire to be as creative with sound as technology and their directors' imaginations allowed. Regarding individual merit, it is clear that Der blaue Engel's Modernism stems from its embracing of 'die neue Frau' idea and the self-conscious, interrelated cults of stardom and voyeurism. But it is in turning to Metropolis that the essential duality of Modernism is recognized. In superficial terms, its mere depiction of man's technological endeavours class it as Modernist. Probing deeper, however, it is in the representation of both positive and negative views of technology, as well as the parallel desire to enact social change in spite of the tyranny of the machine, and yet pessimistically accepting that social change is often superficial, which classifies Metropolis, as well as Der blaue Engel, as truly modernist.