The works of Jane Austen and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe seem, on first reading, to be so profoundly different, that if one were to compare them, one would find mainly differences, and not similarities. Indeed, existing criticism always qualifies any statements made to liken them. One critic has even moved from remarking on a resemblance, albeit relatively slight, in saying that, 'Jane Austen's novels could, indeed, be called educational novels though they bear little resemblance to the 'Bildungsromane' of Goethe' (Klieneberger 33), to reminding the reader that, 'It is significant that Jane Austen whose work marks the transition from the eighteenth-century novel of manners to the social realism of the nineteenth-century, should have started her career [....] by satirizing Werther and the novel of sensibility' (Klieneberger 15). What can we make of this? Certainly, there are some major differences not only between the novels themselves, but also between their conception. Whereas 'Jane Austen no more drew her houses from life than she did her characters' (Nicolson 11), contemporary readers of The Sorrows of Young Werther were fully aware that Werther's love for Lotte was based on Goethe's unrequited love for a certain Charlotte Buff. Likewise, although we know that Goethe did not kill himself as a result of this unrequited love, Werther's death was clearly inspired by the suicide of Karl Wilhelm Jerusalem in Wetzlar, the town in which Buff lived. Like Werther, Jerusalem borrowed a pistol to kill himself, and the weapon was given to him by Goethe's model for Albert, Christian Kestner, who married Buff (Swales 13). Likewise, his suicide was a consequence of his unrequited love, in his case for a woman named Elisabeth Herd (Hulse 9). Despite these apparent differences in conception, there is still much to compare and contrast in the novels, and with these aims in mind, I now turn to discussing love in Emma and The Sorrows of Young Werther.
Since one critic has noticed the potential of Austen's novels, like Goethe's, to be 'Bildungsromane', it would seem that this is a good point at which to begin a comparison of the depiction of love in the novels. What exactly is a 'Bildungsroman'? 'A Dictionary of Literary Terms' describes it as 'a novel which is an account of the youthful development of the hero or heroine' (Cuddon 78), and indeed lists The Sorrows of Young Werther as an example. Certainly, both Emma and Werther's development is unequivocally concerned with love. One of the great ironies of Goethe's novel is that he has his hero imply, at the beginning, that one of his reasons for going travelling was to escape a girl named Leonore's unrequited love for him, when, instead of finding freedom in Wetzlar, he instead becomes fettered by the chains of unrequited love himself. So if we cannot see any positive connotations in Werther's development in the novel as a whole, because of his unrequited love for Lotte, how, then, can we compare the development of this unrequited love with the development of the mutual love between Emma and Mr Knightley? One aspect to analyse in the novels is the predominance of dancing and its significance for the two main romantic relationships. Austen herself proves the importance of dancing in Georgian society by suggesting, with supreme irony, its unimportance.
In Austen's world, balls were inevitably associated with courtship, just as the development of Werther and Emma is inevitably linked with love. The ballroom was a battlefield, the hierarchy between men and women in Georgian society once again highlighted by the fact that the latter had to wait to be asked by the former to dance. Dancing was indeed a dangerous weapon, as proved in Pride and Prejudice by Mr Darcy's saying to Bingley at the Meryton assembly, on his suggestion that he ask Elizabeth Bennet to dance, that she, 'is tolerable; but not handsome enough to tempt me' (Austen 51, ch.3). Similarly, when Elton snubs Harriet at the Crown Inn ball, although it is also a bitter, implicit rejection of Emma, since she has hurt his pride in rejecting his marriage proposal, primarily, it is a snub from both Eltons of Harriet, whom they vulgarly perceive to be an anomaly at the ball, because she is of a lower social status to them. Darcy's rejection of Elizabeth sparks off a love-hate relationship in which love eventually conquers in the form of marriage. In contrast, a microcosmic happy ending in Emma prefigures the macrocosmic happy ending of the whole book, for Mr Knightley, being true to his name, moderates Harriet's embarrassment by dancing with her himself, thus proving his humanity and that he is the ideal husband for Emma. For what better spouse awaits her than the prime example of what one critic has called the 'lover-mentor' (Spencer 157)?
The association, then, of dancing with courtship in Emma, is multifaceted. Indeed, despite the fact that, 'In Jane Austen's England [....] daughters had gained far more freedom of choice [than had previously been available]' and in the 'novels, while we are kept aware of the commercial view, heroines and heroes marry for love' (Bush 5), Emma both satisfies the more general conventions of her time - he is her equal both in class and fortune - and the more personal wishes of her family and friends - he is the son of her governess' husband - in displaying an attachment to Frank Churchill. Nowhere is this apparently mutual attraction, as well as its satisfying the wishes of those close to her, more evident than when the reader is told, at the end of Chapter 29, after the Westons' and Frank and Emma have been to inspect the Crown Inn, that,
Evidently, however, if one can doubt the sincerity of Frank's attachment to Emma, then one can doubt also that the activity of dancing is as superficial as it seems. We have seen that it may be used both as a weapon and as an act of kindness, in the case of Elton's snubbing Harriet and Mr Knightley's dancing with her instead respectfully, but there is a greater weapon behind dancing than cruelty or humanity, and that is irony. Clearly, Austen displays a tendency to didacticism in the context of relationships in her other novels, warning both her readers and her characters to be cautious in love. This is perhaps most evident in Pride and Prejudice, in which the hopelessly romantic and immature Lydia Bennet is charmed into an elopement with George Wickham, only to discover that married life is less exciting than her imagination promised it would be. Their marriage is ironic for two reasons - firstly, because Lydia has no knowledge of Wickham's mistreatment of Georgiana Darcy, and secondly, because Wickham had led Elizabeth to believe that his interests lie with her. However, this irony is neither as great nor as multi-layered as the irony associated with Emma's dancing with Frank. His choosing to dance with her may not be superficially ironic, for, as the reader will realise towards the end of the novel, he has had to hide his engagement to Jane Fairfax for fear of losing his aunt's favour - and, it is more than likely, his inheritance. Yet, Malcolm Mudrick has stated in his essay, Irony as Form:Emma
, 'The simple irony of Emma's flirtation with Frank Churchill rises, of course, from the fact that Churchill is in love with someone else and uses Emma as a decoy' (Lodge 126). Furthermore, Frank's deception of Emma creates a domino effect of ironies. Not only does he deceive her in his romantic attentions, but also, as we have seen, the Westons and, doubtless, the rest of the Highbury community, particularly with their 'flirtation' (Austen 382, ch.43) at Box Hill. In turn, the fact that, as Mudrick says in his above-mentioned essay, 'Emma is a perfect decoy for a man in love with someone else [as] [s]he enjoys and invites admiration' (Lodge 126) causes Mr Knightley to become jealous of what he supposes to be Emma's attachment to Frank, when, all the time, 'she had been entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant of her own heart - and, in short [....] she had never really cared for Frank Churchill at all' (Austen 431, ch.47), as she herself realises later. In addition, Knightley's paternal nature, in contrast to the cruelty Frank shows Jane, causes him to intervene at the Coles' when he fears Jane's health will be ruined by her continued singing, which, in turn, causes the irony of Mrs Weston's remark, 'I say that he is so much occupied by the idea of not being in love with her, that I should not wonder if it were to end in his being so at last' (Austen 297, ch.33). Thus, since irony presupposes an ironist and his victim, the reader's view of Frank's many-sided deception as ironic, rather than practical, shows how crucial it is that we view not only Frank's, but also the rest of the characters', words and actions with suspicion when they appear to show romantic interest. Moreover, although Austen's novels are traditionally known as comedies of manners, it is important also that we note the contrasting relationships of Emma and Knightley and Frank and Jane. For, while the former, as I have already briefly mentioned, is to a certain extent a natural pupil-teacher relationship, the latter depicts a different hierarchy - that of Jane, the submissive woman, responding to Frank's sadistic treatment with nothing but silence. Clearly, this comedy of manners has its tragic side in the context of love.
Dancing as an apparent expression of love occurs also in The Sorrows of Young Werther. In Emma, the narrator shows us Emma's point of view while she is dancing with Frank, suggesting, despite the irony, that his attentions to her justify her belief that he has a romantic attachment to her. However, Goethe's epistolary form, especially since, as Martin Swales has noted in his essay, Goethe's Prose Fiction, Werther treats his letters as 'not a dialogue but a monologue' (Sharpe 134), cannot help but indulge his protagonist by sending him further and further into the depths of his own subjectivity. Although Emma can rarely be accused of undertaking 'a subjection of the fancy to the understanding' (Austen 35, ch.5), throughout the novel she is berated by the personification of her conscience, Mr Knightley, until she finally does so; Werther, however, is aided by no such conscience, until it is too late to rescue him from his romantic delusions. While Frank Churchill's sadistic treatment of Jane Fairfax is never justified, even though he wishes to keep their engagement secret, one could say that, even purely in the context of the nineteenth century gender hierarchy, as his future wife, she belongs to him and must submit to his will. Werther's possessiveness of Lotte, however, evident at the dance when he has known her barely hours, not only has no basis in reality, but is also dangerous. Like Emma, we see Werther's essentially schizophrenic nature here, its alternating between self-loathing and narcissism entirely dependent on the words and actions of Lotte, just as Emma's self-image largely depends on Mr Knightley's view of her. While dancing with Lotte makes Werther feel as if he is 'no longer a mere mortal' (Hulse 41, 16 June), and therefore in unity with her, a unity which will provoke the beginnings of mutual love, he clearly envies her 'moment of privileged wholeness' (Swales 76) when she is dancing with someone else, for 'her body is all harmony' and such a contrast to his restless self, as he spends his time seeking that elusive moment of happiness which he believes only his heart, and therefore Lotte, can give him. As one critic has commented, he belongs to the set of
Indeed, Werther himself, although using the first person plural and seemingly talking in general terms, subconsciously identifies later that his obsession with Lotte stems from his increasing inability to notice his own talents.
In Emma, the subjectivity of the heroine's interior monologue and spoken words is balanced by the typically contrasting views of those around her on the subject of matchmaking, the possibilities of who may be in love with whom in their circle and the suitability of certain members for marriage. The Sorrows of Young Werther, however, is comprised mainly of Werther's letters, obviously written after an event and consisting of memories 'recollected in tranquillity' (Bridger par.3), memories, nonetheless, which cannot help but romanticise events of the past. This is exemplified by one critic, who, remarking on Werther's subjective reality, has said that
Clearly, he is condemned to this romanticism by his own hand, daring to describe his ownership of Lotte to Wilhelm by saying, 'I swore that a girl I loved and had a claim on should never waltz with anyone but me' (Hulse 41, 16 June), all the while knowing, and a few paragraphs later telling Wilhelm, that she is engaged to another. The extent to which he is in love with a fictional Lotte, a Lotte utterly separate from the real Lotte, is captured in the way he reacts to her telling him of her engagement:
Indeed, one could say that in writing these letters, Werther cannot help but fictionalise what he believes to be a mutual love between Lotte and him, for he is using an artificial instrument - language - to describe their relationship, and language, when used by an artist such as Werther, is never objective.
Both Emma and Werther show their misunderstanding of romantic situations through their misunderstanding, and misapplication, of language. Indeed, Werther creates Lotte through language, thinking that he is asserting his claim over her by proclaiming her to be his on paper, when in fact, he merely constructs a love for an 'angel' (Hulse 36, 16 June) whose feelings for him he can decide through the tyranny of language. Witness the dangerous change from feeling to fact when he writes to Wilhelm less than a month after first meeting her. Initially, he speaks a subjective truth, 'I can feel that she loves me!', but this is immediately followed by his transformation of this assumption into a fact, plain and simple: 'She loves me!' (Hulse 53, 13 July). Where, however, is the proof for this love? Yes, Lotte complemented his waltzing at the dance, she evidently cares for him and they are united by literature as Albert and she clearly are not - at least, Albert's 'tranquil evenness of manner' (Hulse 57, 30 July) does not imply this. But a fundamental difference in the importance of art in their respective lives is the key to understanding the purely platonic nature of Lotte's love. As one critic has argued,
Werther experiences life primarily through the sentimentalising lens of literature (Homer, the Bible, Ossian, Rousseau, Goldsmith, Klopstock) [and so] Die Leiden des jungen Werthers actually treats the problem of life as literature. Literature increasingly dominates as compensation for unlived life, so that Werther's narcissistic commitment to feeling turns inward, tragically to consume him (Sharpe 29).
Whereas Werther uses art to escape from reality, Lotte uses it to remind her of how contented she is with it. As she says herself,
Thus, both Lotte's and Werther's attitudes to literature reflect their attitudes to love. While Werther, ever the artist, sees the values of art, and therefore love, as absolute, sacrificing himself, in his suicide, not only to Lotte, but also to the absolute values of art, Lotte sees art as a pleasant diversion which she can turn to in times of distress in order to give her perspective. Her domestic responsibilities determine her love, and therefore, despite her appreciation of art, it is no wonder that is Albert, with his qualities of 'fidelity', 'tranquillity' and 'reliability', whom she marries.
Perspective in a crucial word to consider in the context of love in Emma. Like Werther, Emma's perspective is warped with regard to romantic relationships for the majority of the novel, but her rediscovery of her reason justifies the novel's ending with not one, but two weddings, in accordance with comedic tradition. Despite Emma's potentially tragic ability to embody that line of Cowper, quoted by Austen, 'Myself creating what I saw' (Austen 356, ch.41), for much of the text, there is much comedy to be found in her blindness. In contrast to The Sorrows of Young Werther, in which the Verfremdungseffekt of the interruption of the editor encourages the reader to maintain a critical distance between his views and those of Werther, in Emma, Austen's narrative persistently shows us Emma's perspective and persuades us to be as blind as she is with regard to love. Thus, Austen teases the reader by telling him that, 'The lovers were standing together at one of the windows' (Austen 92, ch.10), the phrase 'The lovers' not only subtly more economical than 'Harriet and Mr Elton', but also emphasising what the reader knows to be Emma's favourite pastime: matchmaking. Thus, although a first reading may render us as blind as Emma, a second reading encourages us to take a critical distance from her point of view and question the tyranny of her language here and its attempt to create a universal truth out of a forced perspective. However, the reader cannot deny, once at this critical distance, the comedy of the Emma/Harriet/Mr Elton love triangle. Like irony, comedy depends on a victim, and there is no victim more surprised and unwilling than Emma when Mr Elton proposes to her in Chapter 15. We cannot fail to laugh a little sadistically when 'it seemed all at once as if he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account, than on Harriet's' (Austen 127), or at the farcical nature of this proposal, in which, Mr Elton, surely the antithesis of the nineteenth century gallant young man, declares his 'violent love', that he is 'hoping-fearing-adoring' and, in a mockery of Werther's sacrificial suicide, that he is 'ready to die if she refused him' (Austen 132). However, our humour is tempered here by recognition, and because Emma is so wrong about the object of Mr Elton's affections and she herself eventually recognises her 'insufferable vanity' (Austen 431, ch.47), we are able to forgive her and are satisfied that Mr Knightley can do so also. Real love, after all, depends on the recognition of the one own as well as the other's faults, and not, as Werther would have us believe, the deification of another human being at the cost of one's own self-worth.
Both Emma and The Sorrows of Young Werther present extreme representations of love. Werther's masochistic love for Lotte begins at the ball, for he tells Wilhelm afterwards that he 'was slapped twice, and took great pleasure in supposing them heartier slaps than she gave the others' (Hulse 42, 16 June) during the counting game, and culminates in his suicide, representing a sacrifice to the deified Lotte he has created. Although he wavers occasionally from this masochistic tendency to sadistic notions, telling Lotte in his suicide note that he 'has often harboured furious thoughts of - killing your husband! - or you!' (Hulse 117, 20 December), his brutal words are nothing compared to the consistent sadism displayed by Frank Churchill, not only to Jane, but also to Emma. With immense cruelty, he describes her 'deplorable want of a complexion' (Austen 202, ch. 24) and 'repulsive' reserve (Austen 206, ch.24), both characteristics which he has worsened by wishing to keep their engagement a secret. His sadism is all the more powerful because it is that of a fiance who possesses exactly the knowledge needed of what can hurt her, fully in the knowledge himself that her love prevents her, ultimately, from breaking off the engagement. On more cynical terms, marriage to Frank would guarantee her social mobility and financial comfort, both things which never have been her privilege to enjoy.
However, just as sadistic as his treatment of Jane is Frank's treatment of Emma. Not only does he lead her to believe that he is in love with her, as Lotte never did with Werther, his 'little mercy' (Austen 247, ch.28), he encourages her love of romantic scandal, causing her to decide, with not a little smugness, that Jane is 'cherishing very reprehensible feelings' (Austen 249, ch.28) for Mr Dixon, despite the complete lack of evidence. Moreover, Emma inherits Frank's sadism when she insults Miss Bates at Box Hill, cruelly warning her before she starts to say dull things: 'Ah! ma'am, but there may be a difficulty. Pardon me - but you will be limited as to number - only three at once' (Austen 385, ch. 43). It is this blatant display of sadism which threatens Mr Knightley's love of Emma, but also, paradoxically, causes her to realise her own hubris and thus relinquish it so that he can justify confessing his love to her.
Although, as one critic has argued, one could say that, 'because her true feelings are barely discernible, Jane, like Harriet, gives rise to impolite fictions' (Armstrong 155), Jane's reserve is testimony not only to her unconditional love for Frank, but also, more admirably, her dignity. More importantly, this reserve does not excuse Frank's relentless sadism, which is perhaps epitomised by the fact that Jane and Emma are 'his two blinded companions' (Austen 360, ch. 41) not only literally in the word game, but also symbolically - Emma is blinded by his so-called 'gallantry' (Austen 360, ch. 41) and Jane is blinded by love.
On a lighter note, there are many elements of farce in the romantic relationships of Emma and The Sorrows of Young Werther. The creation of these farcical elements can mainly be attributed to what one critic has termed the 'triangulated desire' (Armstrong 144) common to both novels. This 'triangulated desire' works on several levels. In the case of Emma, Harriet and Mr Elton, it is purely comedic and suggests how the Georgian laws of decorum occasionally gave rise to miscommunications in courtship. There is a great chain of ironies in their love triangle. Emma is trying to match Harriet with Mr Elton, yet Harriet has never had an interest in Mr Elton, who is in fact confident that what Emma perceives to be romantic attentions to Harriet are directed unambiguously at Emma. Of course, from the reader's point of view, his attentions are decidedly ambiguous, and nowhere is this more apparent than when Emma is drawing Harriet's portrait in Chapter 6.
In contrast, the 'triangulated desire' of Werther, Lotte and Albert is unquestionably sinister. Inevitably, a love triangle implies that one member will be forced out so that true love between two people can prevail, but evidently, this particular love triangle continues for so long that nothing but tragedy can ensue. As Werther says about Albert and himself, 'nothing on earth is more ludicrous than our connection' (Hulse 59, 10 August), and indeed, as much as he is aware of Lotte's engagement to Albert, as much as she is innocent of any charges of love shown towards Werther, his strange admiration of Albert suggests that he is deluding himself about the significance of their engagement, and continues to doubt her love for Albert even after they have married. Why else would he call him a 'rival', or suggest that he is not 'entirely safe from that demon jealousy' (Hulse 57, 30 July)? Clearly, his possessiveness means that he cannot bear to share Lotte, and his determination to leave Wahlheim proves this. Tragically, however, when he realises that the reality he has created out of a romantic delusion exists 'only in relation to her' (Hulse 68, 30 August), and that she no longer wishes to be a part of his reality, since her reality consists only of Albert and her siblings, he sees no option but to commit suicide. As one critic has noted, Lotte's
Thus, the comedic love triangle of Harriet, Emma and Mr Elton, in which all three members delude themselves as to the romantic interests of the others, is in great contrast to the tragic love triangle of Lotte, Werther and Albert, in which no one is deluded romantically but Werther.
Love and marriage and love and reason are two concepts which influence each other in Emma and The Sorrows of Young Werther. At the end of Austen's novel, there is the sense that the union of Mr Knightley and Emma will be a marriage of true minds. The heroine herself remarks to her fiance that
However, the restoration of Emma's reason is a mental journey which lasts many months. In contrast to Werther, who keeps Lotte's portrait on his wall even after Albert and she have married, the Westons' marriage at the beginning of the novel is the catalyst to her maturation. It gives Mr Knightley the opportunity to supplant Miss Taylor, who was 'less a governess than a friend' (Austen 1, ch. 1), and to become mentor to the 'fair mistress of the mansion' (Austen 20, ch. 3). Until he becomes her husband, however, he can exert his control only in the form of advice from a family friend, which Emma may choose either to take or to disregard, for, as Malcolm Bradbury has remarked in his essay, Jane Austen's Emma
, the unmarried population of Highbury exists in a 'state of uncertainty' (Lodge 219), and no fate is more uncertain than Emma's. In terms of class, beauty and fortune, she is as much mistress of the choice of her husband as she is of Hartfield, as the very first sentence of the novel confirms, 'Emma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich [....] seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence' (Austen 1, ch. 1). However, although she may be Knightley's equal in prosperity, social status and intelligence, he is far superior to her in reason, and until she becomes his equal in this respect, he cannot truly love her. Aptly, it is in matchmaking others that Emma displays such inferior powers of reason, preventing her from deserving being matchmaker herself, and the major victim of these inferior powers of reason is Harriet Smith. Despite Bradbury's remark in the above-mentioned essay that the ambiguity of Harriet's origins is a 'dramatic delaying device' (Lodge 225), the usefulness of this ambiguity to the plot does nonetheless not excuse Emma's complete irrationality when dissuading Harriet to accept the proposal from Robert Martin, whom she describes as nothing more than 'a completely gross, vulgar farmer' (Austen 31, ch. 4), although she is fully aware of Harriet's dubious birth. Her snobbery here makes her no better than Mrs Elton, and yet her moments of sense throughout the novel, particularly concerning matchmaking redeem her, as she later thinks that, 'It was foolish, it was wrong, to take so active a part in bringing any two people together' (Austen 140, ch. 16). More importantly, it is her increasing humanity towards such socially inferior characters as Jane Fairfax and Miss Bates which marks her suitability for marriage to Mr Knightley, whose constant kindness to the Bates family proves him to be the personification of humanity. Thus, love restores Emma's reason but robs Werther of it.
In conclusion, despite the decidedly different content and conclusions of Emma and The Sorrows of Young Werther, in the context of love, the two novels both depict the importance of dancing in courtship, the affect of narrative perspective on the critical viewpoint of the reader regarding the central relationships, the impossibility of the love triangle, the importance of unambiguous language in matters of the heart, the stability of marriage in contrast to the masochistic uncertainty of unrequited or secret love, the element of deception, both of the self and others, in romantic attachments, the presence of farce which arises when amorous boundaries are unclear and the inevitable part which reason and its loss or gain plays in affairs of the heart.