The Age of the Enlightenment in Germany was followed by a radically different movement. Romanticism rebelled against the notion that one could rely on science and religion for answers. Rationality was abandoned in order to portray 'an image of nature in which man is caught up in the tragic dichotomy between human existence as the sad reality it is and the inspired reality it should be' (Taylor 9). E.T.A. Hoffmann recognised this 'dichotomy', and it is his Der goldne Topf which perhaps best embraces that Sehnsucht for a greater existence characteristic to the work of all the Romantics. However, the 'Maerchen aus der neuen Zeit', as Hoffmann himself called it, is preoccupied more specifically with another dichotomy - that is, the realm of the supernatural and the dominion of the real. It is the relation between the supernatural and the real in Der goldne Topf which I shall examine in the following essay.
Hoffmann's many tales often begin with a precise geographical and temporal description. In Die Jesuitkirche in G. , the story begins as the narrator arrives in front of an inn at the market place in Glogau, Silesia (Taylor, 60). The real and the fictional are literally juxtaposed in the protagonist's geographical proximity to a theatre while in his hotel room, establishing a mood of theatricality for the remainder of the story, in Don Giovanni: A Strange Episode in the Life of a Music Fanatic (Taylor, 50). This sets the scene, a tradition adhered to in fiction in order to allow the reader to separate himself from his own life and enter absolutely into the world of the story. Paradoxically, the journalistic beginning, 'Am Himmelfahrtstage, nachmittags um drei Uhr, rannte ein junger Mensch in Dresden durchs Schwarze Tor' (Hoffmann, 5), gives the reader the false impression that this will be a reading experience rooted firmly in the territory of the real. For just as Anselmus 'rannte....geradezu in einen Korb mit Aepfeln hinein' (Hoffmann, 5), so does the reader simultaneously trip up and find himself removed from the real into the realm of the supernatural. This mirroring of events in the real life of the reader and the imaginary life of Anselmus allows Hoffmann to establish empathy immediately in the reader for his protagonist, despite the fact that, until the bottom of the first page, Anselmus is known only as 'er' and 'der junge Mensch' (Hoffmann, 5). From Anselmus' fatal fall onwards, the reader's knowledge that this is a 'Maerchen' forces him to address objects and people, which and who would ordinarily have no significance in the context of the real, in view of their received symbolic values. So, just as Anselmus becomes more real to the reader when he is able to empathise with him, conversely, everyday objects acquire intertextual and, often, supernatural significance. Thus, 'ein haessliches Weib' (Hoffmann, 5) embodies the mystical world, her ugliness a distortion of the security of the everyday. Intertextually speaking, she recalls figures from other fairy tales such as the stepmother offering apples in Snow White and the witch whose house is made from cake in Hansel and Gretel. Yet the most significant received symbolic value is held in the 'Aepfeln'. It is the apple which tempts Eve in Genesis, and the tempting realm of the supernatural with which Anselmus literally collides here. Apples and cookies, tempting purely for their sweetness in the real world, are personified and mock his being fettered to a chain of supernatural events, ironically, through the very embodiment of joyful human expression, as, in his hallucination, 'Aepfel und Kuchen um sich tanzen' (Hoffmann, 6). Thus, the instruments of the real world become, in Der goldne Topf, the tools of the supernatural. Its beginning, so reminiscent of a report of an actual event, in fact establishes how precise the work of fate will be in its endeavour to tear Anselmus away from his life on Earth and lead him to a supernatural existence in Atlantis.
The 'fatalistic forces beyond [man's] influence' (Taylor, 14) are indeed precise. At the beginning of the story, their task arrives in the form of a paradox - that is, in order to destroy his lifelong conflict with these fatalistic forces, Anselmus must continue his life of conflict until fate sees fit to unfetter him and release him to a life of happiness. In one sense, he is utterly at the mercy of the work of fate. His melancholy outburst which takes place while he is sitting beneath the elder-tree and smoking a pipe is abundant with visual humour. Yet the reader's laughter is always intermingled with a note of empathy. What we term mere bad luck is evidently something more sinister when Anselmus reminds us of the eternal hiatus between his effort to impress his superiors and the forces conspiring against him when the meeting actually occurs, ensuring that he fails utterly to do so. Indeed, this mere bad luck is personified in the very figure who defies all good forces: the Devil.
This idea of fate personified in the figure of the Devil recurs throughout the text. Yet in the majority of these instances, he operates in league with, rather than separate from, earthly creatures, suggesting that, at least in the arena of fiction, the material and supernatural realms are forever intertwined. In the event quoted above, by way of his suffering the loss of his queue, like Belinda in The Rape of the Lock (, he attains, simultaneously, a doubly inferior position to the rest of mankind: not only is he reduced, through this intertextuality, to the status of a woman, he also experiences this misfortune at the hands of a mere animal, 'ein munterer Mops'. Fearing that he has been talking merely to himself and not to the golden snakes or the elder tree, the reader learns, 'dass er unter dem Holunderbaum allerlei tolles Zeug ganz laut geschwatzt, was ihm denn um so entsetzlicher war, als er von jeher einen innerlichen Abscheu gegen alle Selbstredner gehegt. "Der Satan schwatzt aus ihnen", sagte einen Rektor....' (Hoffmann, 16). Earlier, he absolves himself of blame for his clumsiness "weil mir der Teufel in den Kopf setzt" (Hoffmann, 8) and pleads that "da fuehrt mich der Satan in den verwuenschten Aepfelkorb" (Hoffmann, 10). Although these are clichd expressions which operate merely metaphorically, they nonetheless convey the strong physical presence of fate in Anselmus' everyday life.
In contrast, other instances referring to fate encourage the reader to ask an important moral question - that is, if the Romantic espouses belief in the supernatural, and yet simultaneously allows the supernatural to work on earth, then evidently mankind works with and not against these paranormal forces, and therefore, surely fate is character? This idea is upheld both by what the other characters say about Anselmus' own words and actions. Not only does the Councillor comment on his alleged alliance with the Devil, but the steersman on the Elbe repeats his words almost exactly: 'Ist der Herr des Teufels?' (Hoffmann, 17). Anselmus condemns himself on two levels in the text - firstly, by announcing his ineptness, and secondly, by displaying it continuously from the beginning to the end of the text, starting by knocking over the basket of apples and, at the climax of the story, becoming a slave to his impatience and damaging Archivarius Lindhorst's original manuscript. The Greeks spoke of the Fates in their tragedies, personifications, as the Devil is here, of the word of destiny. Although, arguably, Hoffmann the Romantic artist espoused the idea that fate governed mankind, Hoffmann the man realised that the superior society surrounding Anselmus had to be depicted as inheritors of the Enlightenment's legacy in order to make them as real as possible. In turn, in order to show Romanticism as the polar opposite of the Enlightenment, fate has to govern the Romantic's - Anselmus' - vision and be dismissed utterly by the other characters. The conflict between Art and Life, between the romantic and the rational and thus between the supernatural and the real is encapsulated in the comedic episode at the beginning of the Second Vigil.
Conversely, we sympathise with Anselmus in his plight here, and resent the class issue raised by the idea that 'eine ehrbare Buergersfrau' sentences him to the state of madness. On a more positive note, it is implied that the supernatural has chosen the outsider of society, who is nonetheless an artist, because only he possesses the insight and the imagination needed to give the positive personification of the supernatural, Serpentina, the 'glaube, liebe, hoffe' (Hoffmann, 107) for which she asks in the Tenth Vigil. Her words, echoing St Paul's, are not the only religious legacy of the text. Just as Jesus was mocked for his declaration that he was the Son of God, so is Anselmus proclaimed as irrational for his 'hallucinations', because society refuses to accept the visionary, condemning anything which cannot be explained by rational thinking. In turn, the witch has a burn mark on her cheek, showing that she has been branded an outsider quite literally. However, in the reader's critical distance from the novel and its events, his sympathy is tarnished by his rational upbringing. He too, paradoxically, is subject to the same satirical treatment which Hoffmann gives the society of the novella, his 'ehrliche Buergersfrau' epitomising the inverse philosophy that the higher the class, the lower the breeding, challenging the reader to admit how quick mankind is to class someone a lunatic rather than a visionary and perhaps even shaming him into an acknowledgement of his own labelling of society's outsiders. Unlike the flat, politically incorrect characters of Conrector Paulmann, for instance, Hoffmann asks the reader to abandon the cult of critical, objective thinking and to relish the unknown and the uncertain from the humble position of mortality. Like all writers, he seeks the perfect reader who will willingly suspend his disbelief and believe in Anselmus' visions, unlike the story's society, who, afraid to imagine anything supernatural, see nothing more than a madman shaking an elder bush. Thus, the supernatural is a vehicle Hoffmann uses to allow the re-education of the reader.
Conversely, despite the reader's re-education, throughout the novella, the characters embody the conflict between taking responsibility for one's supernatural fantasies and blaming fate for them. Quick to hold the 'boese[n] Verhaengnis' (Hoffmann, 17) responsible, even Anselmus shuns responsibility for his visions, and both his smoking a pipe whilst sat under the elder tree on first seeing the snakes and the drunken orgy at Conrector Paulmann's in the Ninth Vigil, during which the Paulmanns, Registrator Heerbrand and he behave like 'Besessene' (Hoffmann, 99) apparently only because they have drunk 'eine Flasche Arrak' (Hoffmann, 96) und 'ein koestlicher Punsch' (Hoffmann, 96), encourage the idea of a victim culture, of the real world held prisoner by the forces of the superior supernatural sphere. Yes, Archivarius Lindhorst does use magical powers to hold him literally prisoner in 'einer wohlverstopften Kristallflasche' (Hoffmann, 103) at the end of the Ninth Vigil, but this is purely the consequence of his failure to heed not one, but two warnings, from supernatural messengers. The witch warns him in the very first vigil, 'Ja, renne - renne nur zu, Satanskind - ins Kristall bald dein Fall - ins Kristall!' (Hoffmann, 5), yet, although there is the implication that his fate may have been determined right from the start, he could have made the effort at least to listen to Lindhorst when he tells him in the Eighth Vigil to take 'die groesste Vorsicht und Aufmerksamkeit' (Hoffmann, 81), for 'ein falscher Stich oder, was der Himmel verhueten moege, ein Tintenfleck, auf das Original gespritzt, stuerzt Sie ins Unglueck' (Hoffmann, 81). Clearly, caught between the worlds of rationality and supernaturalism, he must decide which to abandon, and abandon them wholly, just as Hoffmann and indeed any artist must choose between the 'irreconcilable polarities' (Taylor, 15) of art and life. Thus, a paradoxical relation between the supernatural and the real is communicated here, for to enter finally the supernatural paradise of Atlantis and live in eternal bliss with Serpentina, Anselmus must adopt the rational values of scholarly diligence and patience when copying the manuscript. Evidently, the supernatural world operates under the conditions of the real world, in which a happy fate is the just reward of human endeavour.
However, to suggest that the supernatural machinery of fate adheres to the human, rational values of hard work as opposed to pure good luck is clearly problematic. Once again, a religious reading of the text is possible here. Anselmus, in comparison to the misunderstood Jesus figure he portrays in the earlier vigils, succumbs to his impotence in his 'glaeserne Gefaengnisse' (Hoffmann, 105), and, as God asks of mankind when he has strayed from his moral guidance, apostrophises Serpentina in place of God, humbly bemoaning his own actions, rather than the word of fate.
Thus, despite his mistreatment of Lindhorst's manuscript, he is allowed to live in eternal bliss in Atlantis with Serpentina. So it is clear that although working hard should be at the root of his transportation to the world of the fantastical, it is his admission that he has not done so which redeems him. He personifies, therefore, the polar opposite of hubris, humility, and in his genuine display of this quality, allied with his consistent belief in the extraordinary, unites the real world with the supernatural realm, elevating himself above the former and thereby gaining access to the latter.
Not only is fate inevitably linked to character in Der goldneTopf, but also to class, as I mentioned briefly earlier. The text is ambiguous with regards to Anselmus' background. Certainly, we are told that he is a student, wears attire which is 'ganz aus der Gebiete aller Mode' (Hoffmann, 6) and that he has ambitions to be 'der Geheime Rat' (Hoffmann, 9). Evidently, then, his aspirations and intelligence elevate him above the common man, even if his misfortune has so far left him apparently doomed to a life of obscurity and to being labelled mad by those superior in station to him. However, an extraordinary ability to fantasise prevents him from being poisoned on too regular a basis by delusions of social mobility. For although he hopes, as I have already mentioned, one day to rise to the position of 'der Geheime Rat', and Registrator Heerbrand declares, in the Fifth Vigil, that he has the potential to be 'ein geheimer Sekretaer oder wohl gar ein Hofrat' (Hoffmann, 45) , as Konrektor Paulmann says, 'er will sich ja zu gar nichts applizieren' (Hoffmann, 45). Indeed, his overactive imagination seems to cancel out an active body, in contrast to such characters as the fiance of Veronika Paulmann's friend Angelika, who, in proving his physical heroism in battle, will soon be promoted 'zum Rittmeister' (Hoffmann, 50). Likewise, the picture of Veronika lying 'winselnd vor Jammer und Schmerz auf dem Sofa' (Hoffmann, 99) after the Ninth Vigil's drunken orgy both satisfies and contradicts the stereotypical picture of the nineteenth century damsel in distress. For she surrenders not only to the expectations of society at the end of the novella in accepting Registrator Heerbrand's proposal of marriage, but also to her own real desires, described by the narrator, in the Fifth Vigil, with much condescension but certainly more than a glimpse of reality.
This fantasy in which she is Hofraethin to Anselmus' Hofrath is, therefore, false for two reasons. Firstly, because it is neither Anselmus' real desire nor his true fate to be Hofrath - this is proved both by the fact that he declares his love for Veronika only once and that he personifies that character required to marry one of Lindhorst's three daughters and which one often finds "bei Juenglichen, die der hohen Einfachheit ihrer Sitten wegen und weil es ihnen ganz an der sogenannten Weltbildung fehle, von dem Poebel verspottet wuerden" (Hoffmann, 89), as Serpentina explains in the Eighth Vigil. Secondly, because fate will decree rather rationally, at the end of the novella, that Veronika marry Registrator Heerbrand who has been promoted to Hofrath. Clearly, one's class determines one's character, which, in turn, determines one's fate. Thus, in the conflicting romantic destinies of the Heerbrands and Anselmus and Serpentina, Hoffmann once again proves that, ultimately, supernaturalism or rationality must reign wholly over our lives and cannot be united.
Since I have just mentioned the links between the mortal concepts of class and character and how they inevitably influence the supernatural concept of fate in Der goldne Topf, it would seem appropriate to discuss now how the various conflicting depictions of women show the link between their real and their supernatural aspects. In sharp contrast to Veronika, the witch deviates entirely from rational values, embodying those of the supernatural. Just as the apples and the snakes are subject to the burden of being read in terms of received symbolic values, so does the witch suffer the stereotypical insults inflicted on women associated with the supernatural. At the beginning of the story, Anselmus' upsetting her basket would mean, in the real world, that our sympathy lies entirely with her character, especially since she is introduced to us as 'ein altes.... Weib' (Hoffmann, 5). However, juxtaposing the word 'altes' in this introductory description is the word 'haessliches'; her physical deformities are highlighted in greater detail when she meets her opposite, the earthly personification of beauty, Veronika, in the Fifth Vigil, for the latter encounters
Her deviation from received ideas of beauty is mirrored not only by her deviation from bourgeois society, emphasised by the early description of her by a member of the surrounding crowd as 'das verdammte Weib' (Hoffmann, 6), but also from her more specific rebellion against the limited roles which the real world provided for nineteenth century women. At the end of the Fifth Vigil, Veronika almost leaves the witch's abode when the latter's decent, human honesty is rewarded with the former's mortal sin of pride, refusing to believe her 'tolle[n], unsinnige[n] Geschwaetze' (Hoffmann, 55) about Anselmus. Veronika's rejection of the first supernatural imperative mentioned by Serpentina in the Tenth Vigil, 'glaube', is a rejection not only of supernatural values in favour of earthly rationality, but also of the supernatural side of the witch. However, it is clearly crucial that the latter must reject this supernatural side, and the supernatural concept of her dual nature, in order to persuade Veronika that she can help her to win Anselmus. In revealing her real identity to her, rejecting, in a single moment, the idea of the German 'unheimlich' as meaning something 'secret and hidden' (Royle,2), she acquires not only a touchingly human vulnerability, but also a name, placing her firmly back into the real world, whose habit of naming people and things gives mankind a sense of security.
Thus, paradoxically, in revealing herself to be a human figure who has been forced to resort to supernatural measures in order to save her 'Soehnlein' (Hoffmann, 54) from the selfish ways of mankind, the witch is able to convince Veronika of her supernatural ability to make Anselmus fall in love with her. This unites her real, human qualities with her magical abilities.
Despite the lack of explanation in the text as to why Liese abandoned the comfortable domesticity of being Veronika's nurse in order to devote her life to the so-called 'Satanskuensten' (Hoffmann,120), the text implies, at first, that the supernatural realm has provided her with far greater power than the real world ever did. For if she fails in her magical attempt to make Anselmus marry Veronika, then this is not diminished by her obvious gift of prophecy, as she predicts correctly that Anselmus 'wird niemals Hofrat werden' (Hoffmann, 55) and that he will end up in a crystal bottle. However, her magical acts of revenge in response to the cruelty inflicted on her 'Aepfelchen mit den roten Backen' (Hoffmann, 54) amount to nothing more than metamorphosing into Lindhorst's doorknocker and Veronika's kitchen appliances. Clearly, she can do no more than prophesy supernatural events or mock those on earth, particularly Anselmus and Veronika, whose lives revolve increasingly around such events. In contrast to the omnipotent Lindhorst, who gives Anselmus some liquor to put on the nose of the doorknocker so that the witch is powerless to threaten him when inhabiting it, and then later turns on him by imprisoning him in the crystal bottle, Liese, despite her forsaking of the real world for the supernatural realm in becoming a witch, fails to overcome society's stereotype of the fairer sex. On the one hand, her becoming a witch utterly contravenes her previous mortal role of being nurse to Veronika. Yet, she is never shown as possessing sufficient power to conquer the supernatural world, the cruel nonchalance of her imperative to Anselmus, "So sitze denn und verderbe" (Hoffmann,109), violently contrasting with her affirmation of only a few moments before, "...bin ich dir gut" (Hoffmann,108). Therefore, she is fittingly vanquished by Lindhorst when she becomes nothing but 'Dicker Qualm' (Hoffmann,111). Evidently, she is the only character in Der goldne Topf who does not, ultimately, embrace either earthly or supernatural values absolutely, and so, in the context of a text which advocates choosing between the two, is an anomaly who must be destroyed in order to make the text real. Thus, once again Hoffmann presents the reader with a paradox. The supernatural becomes significantly real when its female and male characters correspond to the typically weak and powerful (respectively) nineteenth century women and men.
Just as Veronika's discovery of the witch's name in Der goldne Topf is crucial to the former's acceptance of the latter's supernatural attempts to win her Anselmus' love, so is our analysis of the names of the other characters vital to understand the relation between the real and the supernatural in the world of the text. Konrektor Paulmann and Registrator Heerbrand's characters do not particularly develop as the text proceeds, and the limits to their personalities are decided by their names at the start of the novella. Defined, as they are, by their professional - and therefore social - status, they are destined to remain solely in the real world and visit the supernatural briefly through the aid of intoxicating substances. Brought up to reason and to use this reason, rather than their emotions, to guide them in marriage, it is not surprising firstly, when Heerbrand asks Veronika to marry him in the Eleventh Vigil, realising their suitability as Hofrath and Hofraethinn (his declaration of love appears to be a mere authorial formality in order to make the happy ending more real), and secondly, when the narrator declares cynically, 'es war, noch ehe die aufgetragene Suppe kalt worden, die foermliche Verlobung geschlossen' (Hoffmann,121).
In contrast, a duality, characteristic to Romantic literature, is implied by the name Archivarius Lindhorst. Lindhorst personifies the unity of the real and the supernatural, for he is both an archivist in the real world, and therefore a man of scholarly reason, and a salamander in the supernatural realm - hence his surname, which derives from the German word 'Lindwurm', meaning snake. Likewise, his library is both the seat of learning and the arena in which the crucial supernatural events occur - Anselmus' being imprisoned in a crystal bottle, his entering Atlantis and Hoffmann 'meeting' him in order to write the end of the novella. Anselmus himself shares his title with the saint and bishop who provided proof of the existence of God. This reflects not only his being consumed with 'Sehnsucht' for Serpentina, proven in the text by the sheer repetition of this word no less than fourteen times, but also the idea of Hoffmann himself longing for the poetic inspiration unlikely to be found in his material occupation of a lawyer. For, unlike Anselmus, whose purpose in life is double-sided, as it involves both the real occupation of making a copy of Lindhorst's manuscript and the supernatural quest for Serpentina's love, Hoffmann's experience of Atlantis, the embodiment of poetic paradise, is brief and, as he humbly implies, 'invitation only'. Lindhorst's letter to Hoffmann, bidding him to enter his library and to visit Atlantis with him, is a classic example of the novella's 'Verfremdungseffekt.
This excerpt from the letter reminds the reader not only that the supernatural world of Der goldne Topf is far removed from his reality, but also that the very artifice of creating a work of fiction makes it far removed from the real world. Thus, the naming of the characters, like the symbols of the apple and the serpent which force the reader to analyse them both in terms of their received symbolic values and their supernatural context, reinforces their identity as inhabitants of two supernatural worlds - the supernatural realm in Der goldne Topf and the fictional world in general. Paradoxically, then, the more we discover about these supernatural characters, the more they become real to us, and the more, in turn, Hoffmann can achieve the desire, which he mentions in the Fourth Vigil, 'den Student Anselmus recht lebhaft vor Augen zu bringen' (Hoffmann, 35).
After losing his job as a lawyer in Warsaw, Hoffmann held the positions of theatre composer, musical director and singing teacher in Bamberg for several years. This explains the predominance in Der goldne Topf of musical imagery which serves to reinforce the sense of Anselmus' gradual separation from the real world in order to enter the realm of the supernatural. The best example of this is in the First Vigil, in which, after, running from the witch and her threats, Anselmus finds himself lingering around the entrance 'des linkischen Bades' (Hoffmann, 6).
In just a few sentences, Anselmus departs from the real world with its traditional celebration of Ascension Day to enter a world of solitude and isolation. However, this is evidently only temporary, for soon, the supernatural realm and its different kind of music descend on him to displace the real world. The several examples of onomatopoeia - 'fluestern', 'lispeln', 'Gelispel', 'Gefluester', 'Geklingel' (Hoffmann, 10) - which occur in this passage contrast greatly with the sound of Anselmus' complaining about his bad luck in the real world and create the impression that the supernatural, when united with the peaceful world of nature, is comforting at this stage to him. The snakes are diminutive and have 'holdseligen Augen' (Hoffmann,10), thus rendering any received symbolic value insignificant. Anselmus, however, remains the rational student, declaring, 'Das ist denn doch nur der Abendwind, der heute mit ordentlich verstaendlichen Worten fluestert' (Hoffmann, 11). Like mankind, the elder bush, the evening wind and the sunbeam ask for love and understanding. Messengers of the imagination, they ask not only Anselmus, but also the reader, to use his and not to try to explain everything with learned rationality.
In conclusion, the relation in Der goldne Topf between the real and the supernatural is explored through duality - the duality of objects, which become highly significant symbols in the supernatural realm, the duality of characters who may exist both in the real and the magic worlds, the duality of the terms by which Anselmus may enter Atlantis (he must possess the human, real qualities of love, understanding, humility and patience in order to do so) and the duality of fate, at times determined by character and at others a force beyond the control of the real world. Clearly, the unity created between the real and the supernatural worlds prevails at the end of Der goldne Topf. For, despite Hoffmann's conviction that the values of Art and Life are absolute and require one to be devoted to wholly to one and to abandon the other, Lindhorst reminds him at the conclusion that the only thing which separates his 'real', everyday life from the supernatural world of Atlantis is his imagination.