The whole of Oscar Wilde's writing, like the man himself, is a contradiction. John Sloan, calls England Wilde's 'mother country', and his society plays are set in the upper class echelons of England, supporting the general public's view that he was a born Englishman. And yet, Wilde spent much of his life in homage to that well-known Anglo-Irish villain, Count Dracula. Like the Count, whose knowledge of English geography surpasses that of his English guest's, Wilde was able to be 'more English than the English themselves' due to his position as an outsider, an Irishman who said himself that he was 'not English', but 'Irish which is quite another thing'. Not only did he classify himself as Irish, but also his work; as Sloan states, 'In artistic matters, Wilde consistently identified himself with a new 'Celtic School' of literature'. Hence, there is clearly a paradoxical discussion occurring in the criticism concerned with Wilde's nationality, implying that an appreciation of his work and his themes cannot ignore the 'Irish Question' of the man himself and the influence that his schizophrenic cultural background had on his writing. In investigating this influence, I will examine to what extent Wilde approaches Ireland, whether directly or obliquely, in the following essay.
It is not surprising that Wilde is considered to be one of the greatest English authors of all time. His transformation into a dandy at Oxford, along with his promotion as a typical English aristocrat by the tourist industry, have helped to sustain this myth. Moreover, there are only two direct references to Wilde's country of birth in The Works of Oscar Wilde (this does not include lectures or letters). Mrs Cheveley, in An Ideal Husband, briefly mentions her desire to 'teach the English to talk, and the Irish to listen', and the narrator of A Portrait of Mr. W. H. tells the reader that he has been discussing 'Macpherson, Ireland, and Chatterton' of late. Yet many critics have recognised that, despite the lack of direct references to Wilde's native country, Ireland is a dominant albeit subtle theme throughout Wilde's work. This is most apparent in Wilde's indirect treatment of Anglo-Irish relations. The Great Famine took place just before Wilde was born, engraving the image of his suffering fellow countrymen on the family conscience; indeed, his father wrote a report on the 'devastating effect of starvation and mass immigration' on Ireland. It was the 'English insular unawareness of the realities of Irish life' which proved fatal during the Famine Years, and was frequently the catalyst in Wilde's work and life to convince him to assume the 'pose of an Englishman', 'a clever strategy for challenging English prejudices about the Irish'. However, in some writings, Wilde used no such pose and focused on specifically Irish themes, which one critic has described as 'anarchy and socialism, poverty and privilege, feminism and gender [and] imperialism'. The theme of 'poverty' is especially apparent in the abundance of famine imagery throughout his work. Sloan mentions only one portrayal of famine in Wilde's work, saying that 'The terrifying vision of the famine in 'The Young King'... is seen to allude to Ireland during the Great Hunger'. However, there are several other veiled references to this key event in Irish history. As Brecht's The Resistable Rise of Arturo Ui attacks contemporary German politics, thinly disguised by moving the action to America, so is Mother Russia in Vera 'a barely suppressed political correlative for Mother Ireland'. Indeed, in revolutionary literature, the country for whose fight for freedom on is documenting is often referred to as 'Mother' (witness Brecht, again, in his poem, Deutschland), and nowhere is this more true than in Vera. Michael, one of the Nihilist revolutionaries, says, in a Hamlet-esque metaphor, that 'there is one who lies sick [he] would fain cure', depicting the invalid as 'Mother Russia'. Russia is once again referred to as 'mother' on the next page, and Alexis, the Czar's son, symbolically rejects his royal status for socialism in saying, 'I have no mother now but Russia'. Nonetheless, the implied image of Ireland as the sacrificial, selfless, mother reaches its peak when Vera apostrophises Russia twice within a few lines, exclaiming, 'O crucified mother'. In equating Ireland with Christ's crucifixion, Wilde elevates his native country's history, suggesting that future generations will prosper due to past sacrifices. This is supported by O' Donoghue's view that 'sacrifice as an idea pervades the Irish cultural tradition'.
These religious allusions to the suffering of the poor continue in Wilde's story, The Young King, which I have already mentioned with reference to Sloan. Concentrating on the eponymous character's struggle with his place in society, the theme of famine is portrayed much more literally here in his biblical-inspired dreams. In the vein of Joseph, the King dreams of 'faces pinched with famine' in a weaving factory, representing the Irish, who are turned into 'slaves', wearing 'chains, though no eye beholds them', by and to the wealthy English, who could have helped the Irish much more during the Famine, had it not been for their ignorance of Ireland's out-of-date society (McConville tells us that, 'In the areas worst affected...many...had never in their lives seen money'). Here is where Wilde's fine motif of greedy appetites in the upper classes, representative of capitalist England's avarice and particularly prevalent in the society plays, has its roots. In a telling example of dramatic irony, one of the workers describes the King to the King himself without knowing it.
Wilde's portrayal of the literal greed of the English reaches its apex in The Importance of Being Earnest. The character of Algy is obsessed with eating to the extent that he has a rather farcical argument with Jack about muffins, causing the latter to say to him, 'How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this horrible trouble, I can't make out. You seem to me to be perfectly heartless." Many of the conversations and friendships in the play, as well as in The Picture of Dorian Gray, seem to revolve around the importance of dining out. This foreshadows Wilde's depiction of Lord Alfred Douglas, in De Profundis, as a 'coarse English aristocrat' ultimately destroying Wilde, the personification of Ireland, with his taste for 'reckless dinners' at which 'too much was eaten and too much was drunk.'
On a more symbolic note, Wilde's medieval-style personification of Death and Avarice in The Young King approaches Ireland's negative history and future by showing the power of these abstract qualities, in the context of the numerous famines the country suffered and the yoke of English rule, to destroy Ireland at the lifting of a finger. Both emigration and an increased mortality rate dramatically reduced the Irish population, and the 'socially disgusting' policies of the English in the post-Famine years, which included evicting 'thousands to raise lifestock', are reflected in the selfish attitude of Avarice, representing capitalist England, to the death of 'a third of her servants'. Death's sweeping actions are ultimately shown to be only the consequence of Avarice's self-centred refusal to give Death a grain of corn, symbolic of Robert Peel's refusal, during the Great Hunger, to give corn directly to the hungry.
The phenomenon of the Big House and English absenteeism from Ireland plays a large part in Wilde's writing. Introduced in the latter half of the nineteenth century, Gladstone's Land Acts were largely inadequate, and this is reflected best of all in two of Wilde's stories, The Selfish Giant and The Canterville Ghost. In the latter, an ideal American family, comprised of a minister for a father, a 'New York Belle' for a mother, one son and one daughter, descend on Canterville Hall, representative of the Big House, and become its temporary landlords. As an Irishman, Wilde has his revenge on the English by casting them in the part of the colonized, symbolized by the character of Sir Simon, but also gives England a chance to repent for its interference with Ireland by allowing them to empathise with the Irish position. Thus, Sir Simon is a representation of both the colonized and the colonizer. Presented as the personification of the Irish Question, the ghost is discussed at breakfast, an echo of my view earlier that the English merely considered Ireland, at a distance whilst appeasing their greed by eating, as a problem to solve. Sir Simon's refusal of the Rising Sun Lubricator corresponds to England's patronising, inadequate attempts to mollify Ireland, such as the Catholic Emancipation Act of 1829, and is met with clear dismay by the Otis patriarch. Paradoxically, relieving Sir Simon of his chains (that is, Ireland of her total slavery to England in matters of government), which are symbolic of his prison term as a ghost, only makes him more a slave than ever, which is reminiscent of the phrase from The Young King, where the slaves are in 'chains, though no eye beholds them'. Like Sir Simon, Ireland could only look to England for her release from her 'prison term'. In her case, she depended on England not only politically, but also financially, and, despite several bloody rebellions, independence could only truly be granted in the civilised form of a treaty.
The spirit of Sir Simon, however, proves to be invincible. His spirit is, in turn, a pun signifying the spirit of Ireland - that is, the unassailable determination of the Irish people whose rebellions eventually resulted in their independence from England. Resolved to scare away the Otis family, representing the English, Sir Simon betrays the Irish love of spectacle, teasingly asking for the reader's permission to speak of the theatre rather than supernatural mysteries.
As Owen Dudley Edwards says, ''The Selfish Giant' in particular suggests...the Giant as owner of the Big House with the little children as peasants and, presumably, Catholics." Denying the children permission to play in his garden, a place which evokes the idea of the 'Garden of England', Wilde pokes fun at the bureaucratic English government's creation of laws concerned with Ireland by building a 'high wall' around the Giant's garden and erecting a sign stating, 'TRESPASSERS WILL BE PROSECUTED'. Soon, however, a Utopia is created in which the children play happily in the Giant's garden with his permission, reminiscent of Wilde's suggestion that 'England [should] adopt some Irish qualities while shedding Irish territories." Only when the 'high wall', which perhaps foreshadows the tyrannical grip of the Soviets on Berlin, is knocked down with a 'great axe' can the children play in beautiful surroundings. This mirrors Wilde's views on revolution in Ireland, implying that he supports violence as a means of gaining freedom for the next generation. On the one hand, this contradicts the quote in the title, and therefore the romantic image of the eternally-struggling, socially inferior Celt, epitomised in Wilde's aphorism, 'we are in all the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars'. On the other hand, however, it is important to remember that there have been not one, but eight Irish rebellions in less than four hundred years, the Easter Uprising of 1916 leading to the Anglo-Irish War of 1919-1921, resulting in the creation of the Irish Free State in 1922. In other words, Wilde may have said that, 'The creative instinct is strong in the Celt, and it is the Celt who leads in art', but he also acknowledged the necessary release of the Irish violent streak in order to achieve independence. This is clear in his The Soul of Man Under Socialism, in which he says, 'It is through disobedience that progress has been made, through disobedience and through rebellion' and that , 'The very violence of a revolution may make the public grand and splendid for a moment'. However, his defence of revolution, unsurprisingly, is most apparent in Vera, his play about revolution. The literal translation of the Nihilists' J.K. Rowlingesque Latin password, 'Per sanguinem ad libertatem', epitomises this defence. Moreover, pre-empting Theodor Adorno, who said that, 'After Auschwitz, writing poetry is barbaric', Wilde ironically rejects the idea that art can ever be useful (as he says in the preface to The Picture of Dorian Gray, 'All art is quite useless'). Reading can only ever be 'a rehearsal for revolution', never a revolution in itself. For he states, implicitly referring to Ireland's future, that action is the one true weapon: 'I think little of pen and paper in revolution. One dagger will do more than a hundred epigrams'.
On the subject of revolution, Wilde's writing promotes not only physical, but also vocal violence. His characters often engage in verbal duels designed to display the Irish love of talk for talk's sake; as I mentioned previously, Mrs Cheveley notes in An Ideal Husband that the Irish need to learn 'to listen', implying that their loquaciousness is both a curse as well as a blessing. Humorously mocking the Irish 'gift of the gab', Wilde tells us of the Selfish Giant's 'visit [to] his friend the Cornish ogre', noting the fact that he 'stayed with him for seven years' and that 'After the seven years were over, he had said all that he had to say, for his conversation was limited'. In addition, two of the most comic battles are the muffin quarrel, which I have already discussed, in The Importance of Being Earnest, and the oral tennis between the Rocket and the Frog in The Remarkable Rocket. Their farewell conversation both sends up the English stereotype of the talkative Irishman and reveals the egotism of the aristocratic Englishman dominant throughout Wilde's work.
This satirical episode anticipates Kiberd's view that Wilde 'question[s] the assumption that, just because the English are one thing, the Irish must be its opposite' and introduces the major theme of the double in Wilde's work, a topic to which I shall return later.
For a writer whom Joseph O'Connor considers to be a 'revolutionary socialist', style over content is one of Wilde's paramount concerns. In contrast to his declaration in Vera that 'One dagger will do more than a hundred epigrams', Deirdre Toomey notes that 'Wilde's love of the aphorism (and his elevation of aphorism above narrative in The Picture of Dorian Gray) is also typical of the oral mode'. Furthermore, Wilde's multi-layered stories, many of which are, in fact, stories within stories, reflect the fact that storytellers had 'trudged the countryside for twenty five centuries' in Ireland. For example, the Sparrow in The Happy Prince narrates his adventures to the eponymous character, as do the Soul and the Mermaid in The Fisherman and His Soul. He even goes as far as giving advice to the prospective seanchai (Irish storyteller), saying that 'Every good storyteller nowadays starts with the end, and then goes onto the beginning, and concludes with the middle." His repetition of phrases is reminiscent of Frank Delaney's storyteller, who theatricalises storytelling and performs his own particular ritual at the beginning of a tale.
However, as is proven in Ireland: A Novel, storytelling, the greatest Irish talent, is hardly lucrative and often gruelling. The storyteller here personifies the eternally starving Ireland of the Famine years and Wilde's lifetime, hungry for both food and freedom, yet often subject to 'ignorant people' who have 'no use for stories' and give him 'no food'. Wilde echoes this realistic depiction of the storyteller's plight in The Remarkable Rocket when the Page describes the Princess.
Clearly, storytelling is a 'profession' which requires talent and yet rewards nothing. The stereotypical English view of the Irish means that the latter constantly play court jester to the former, and the Irish disgust at having to play a part is exemplified by Lord Arthur Savile's thoughts, who implicitly compares the Irish to unpaid actors, fated to live out future tragedies because of the actions (or lack of action) of England.
Another story which demonstrates the fact that the English were only interested in the Irish as a submissive colony who performed at their will, changing their religion and language to fit in with English habits, is The Birthday of the Infanta. Witness the eponymous Infanta's incessant commands to the Dwarf to dance with her, despite his being prostrate with grief at his ugliness. Evidently, the Irish are welcome to take the stage, as long as the play is not a tragedy, for, as soon as it is, the stereotype of the spoilt English brat returns, intent on every day being his or her 'Birthday'. This is shown in the Infanta's response to the Dwarf's dying of a broken heart: 'For the future let those who come to play with me have no hearts'. This image of the heartless English people, demanding that the Irish emulate their callousness and 'jump through hoops whenever [they] ask them', is brilliantly condensed in the following ironical sentence from The Canterville Ghost: 'Lady Barbara died of a broken heart at Tunbridge Wells'. Tunbridge Wells is famously the home of the 'Disgusted' middle classes' stiff upper lip, so this phrase, in its brevity, implies that the English are just as brief in their grief, in contrast to the Irish Catholics and their tradition of mourning the dead for a certain length of time in the form of singing and a wake.
The idea that the English want the Irish to be duplicates of themselves is continued in The Importance of Being Earnest. Although Cecily is a member of the aristocracy, her prescriptive education from a strict governess mimics England's attempts to limit Catholic Education in the Penal Laws of 1695. As Miss Prism says, 'The fact is, you have fallen lately, Cecily, into a bad habit of thinking for yourself. You should give it up. It is not quite womanly... Men don't like it'. Matthew Arnold's 'essentially feminine' Ireland being denied, just as the nineteenth century woman was, the civil right of education, is also depicted by the Colonel in Vera, who, in turn, represents the oppressive reign of English imperialism.
The Colonel's use of the adjective 'dangerous' echoes the maxim, 'A little knowledge is a dangerous thing' and also anticipates 'what one critic has called the 'colonial calibanisation' of the Irish'. Clearly, in focusing on Ireland, the English forgot Shakespeare, for, having forced English on the Irish, the latter used their linguistic skills in order to highlight the prejudice of their colonizer, becoming in the process, as McCormack noted, 'both colonizer and colonized'.
One of the ways in which Wilde himself, having been 'condemned to speak the language of Shakespeare', takes revenge on the English through their own language is to satirise their views of the Irish, in order to show just how narrow-minded a race they were during his lifetime (observe 'Tenniel's Punch cartoons of ape-like Paddies'). The 'image of the stage Irishman' is reversed in the presentation of the stereotyping, stereotypical Otis family, whose view of Ireland is limited to an interest in its history, rather than its future. This view of Ireland as a myth-making nation is satirised in Wilde's humanisation of the paranormal. Not only are we shown the inner monologue of the ghost, indignant because the Otises offer him 'the Rising Sun Lubricator, and throw pillows at his head', but the sense of routine in his 'life' humorously undercuts his supernatural existence: 'It was his solemn duty to appear in the corridor once a week, and to gibber from the large oriel window on the first and third Wednesday in every month'. In addition, the recurrent blood stain both foreshadows the bloody battles of future Irish generations and, on a lighter note, mocks the eternal rationalism of the English in contrast to the romantic myth-making tendency of the Celts.
Despite the comedy within the oxymoronic military language Wilde uses to portray the Otis twins' battle against Sir Simon, the scenes of mock warfare seem to re-enact the violence perpetrated by the English towards the Irish. On one occasion, he finds 'Washington Otis waiting for him there with the big garden -syringe; and being thus hemmed in by his enemies on all sides...he vanishe[s] into the great iron stove'. This episode echoes the fairy tale Hansel and Gretel and the children's escape from the witch by throwing her into the oven. In Wilde's version however, our sympathies are reversed, and it is the 'witch', Sir Simon, representing Ireland's persecuted Catholics, for whom we feel sorry.
The Otis twins' symbolic murder of Sir Simon reflects Wilde's major motif of the double. Represented often in Victorian literature, appearing in both Frankenstein and Dr. Jekyll and Mr Hyde, the Doppelg(nger is the personification of another character's evil thoughts and intentions, and frequently exists only to be destroyed. As McCormack suggests, 'the colony is a repository for the 'other', a mirror-image which reverses the colonizer's vision of himself'; thus, in the case of Wilde, his doubles are a clear representation of England and Ireland. This is especially evident in The Importance of Being Earnest, in which there is a fabulous mirroring of language and actions. Ernest and Algy are doubles, as are Gwendolen and Cecily, as well as Miss Prism and Chasuble, reflected in the echoes in their speech.
On the other hand, Wilde also implicitly illustrates just how different the 'distinctively and mystically 'Celtic'' Ireland was from the home of 'Victorian materialism', England. The character of Mr. Podgers in Lord Arthur Savile's Crime not only exhibits what Wilde's fellow writer and Irishman, Yeats, would have called a Celtic quality of mysticism, but also embodies the English pressure on the Irish to look and act in accordance with their wishes (for example, see Ford Madox Brown's The Irish Girl). Thus, Mr. Podgers is expected to display his skills in chiromancy, while at the same time satisfying the English stereotype of how a chiromantist should look.
The state of affairs turns sinister, however, when Lord Arthur Savile, whom Mr. Podgers informs that he will commit a murder, murders Mr Podgers himself. This is clearly an extreme metaphor for the long slow murder of Ireland by England - the murder of their independence, of their religion, and of their rights. Clearly, England's happiness lies, in their opinion, in the destruction of anything which attempts to show them the repulsiveness of their imperialism. Hence, Mr. Podger's murder represents England's suppression of her negative qualities. This suppression of the 'other' is a theme which also appears in The Canterville Ghost. As one critic has noted, 'The resident ghost is the ultimate commodity, who is released into death in exchange for a box of jewels. The ghostly is contained and repelled'. Thus, Wilde contrasts Irish sacrifice with English profit. Ultimately, however, rather than viewing this conclusion as a cynical view of English materialism, it is possible to see it as an echo of Patrick Pearse's nationalistic 'aesthetic', which 'frequently celebrated the beauty of boys dying bravely in their prime, rather than growing into the compromises of adulthood'. Yet this is an echo with a happy ending, for Virginia, the 'little child' representative of Ireland's saviour in allowing the Angel of Death to come for Sir Simon, only goes missing briefly, and is not sacrificed. So although Wilde, as I have already argued, espoused the idea of a rebellion in Ireland in order to win independence, he evidently also did not believe that that rebellion should involve the sacrifice of youth.
Wilde shows a curiously Irish prizing of youth in his work, particularly in The Picture of Dorian Gray. As Owen Dudley Edwards has observed, 'The preservation of youth in The Picture of Dorian Gray [is an] echo of Tir na n-Og', the eponymous place being the Land of Youth. In this myth, the king asks a Druid how long he will rule, and the latter tells him forever, unless his son-in-law takes the crown from him. Yet Wilde not only echoes Irish mythology in his work, but also the writing of his Anglo-Irish contemporaries. His only novel takes its inspiration from both Yeats's The Stolen Child, in which 'the 'real' person spirited away by fairies remains youthful and carefree, while the simulacrum ages and withers away', as well as his highly nationalistic play, Cathleen ni Houlihan, in which the 1798 Rebellion is re-imagined. Yeats personifies Ireland as a 'Poor Old Woman', who needs the young men's blood in order to become a 'young girl' again. This rather vampiric image suggests a major theme of many of Wilde's works, in which 'the erotic animated female threatens to reify or emasculate the hero', and also hints at the major theme of vampirism in another Anglo-Irish author's - Bram Stoker - most famous work, Dracula. Evidently, Wilde's tone in writing about youth demonstrates much more than the purely aesthetic interest with which so many critics are concerned. Dorian Gray's end, 'with a knife in his heart', 'withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visage', serves as a warning not to become vainly obsessed with one's youth, as does the 'beautiful boyish insouciance' of Lord Arthur Savile, who becomes fixated on murdering anyone after Mr. Podgers warns him of his future as an assassin.
In conclusion, Wilde's writing may barely touch on the subject of Ireland directly, but it is certainly concerned with his native country in an oblique sense. Defying the narrow-minded English view of the Irish as a people existing only to be conquered, Wilde instead attempts to realise, in his work, George Bernard Shaw's witticism, 'England had conquered Ireland, so there was nothing for it but to come over and conquer England'. He does this in challenging English prejudices concerning Ireland, evaluating what he believes to be the true characteristics of the Irish, such as their loquaciousness, their unassailable spirit and their prizing of youth, examining Anglo-Irish relations, particularly in the context of the Great Famine and placing himself firmly in the Anglo-Irish tradition by echoing other Anglo-Irish writers. Most significantly, however, he demonstrates that to be English and to be Irish is often one and the same thing.