What is a psychological disorder? A psychological disorder can be defined as a dysfunction within an individual that is associated with distress or impairment in functioning and a response that is not typical. The behaviourist approach in psychology understands human behaviour as a consequence of conditioning. This approach claims that all human behaviour is shaped by reinforcement from the environment and the consequences of actions. Humans become conditioned to respond to our environment as a result of leaning by association or operant. Learning by association or classical conditioning is attributed to Ivan Pavlov and his theory of classical conditioning, while operant conditioning, or learning by way of reward and unpleasant consequence, is credited to BF Skinner. Operant conditioning states that all behaviour is a result of learning, of positive reinforcement, negative reinforcement and punishment. (Skinner, B. F., 1974) Perhaps a person has been rewarded for doing exhibiting certain behaviour in the past and these acts as positive reinforcement and helps sustain the behaviour. Similarly, a person may have been told off for exhibiting a certain type of bad behaviour and these acts as punishment and a deterrent of such future behaviour. Classical conditioning is "a form of learning in which a hitherto neutral stimulus, the conditioned stimulus is paired with an unconditioned stimulus regardless of what the animal does." (Gleitman, H., Fridlund, A. J., Reisberg, D.J., 1999, Pg C5)
The behaviourist approach is useful as it attempts to isolate past events that have produced certain behaviour. The advantages to the behaviourist approach are that it fits in with general scientific approaches and is based on a considerable amount of research evidence. This approach shows how reinforcement from the environment can shape behaviour. For example, being rewarded for displaying a certain behaviour means that this behaviour is likely to continue. Behaviourists look to establish cause and effect relationships seeing exactly how, for example, reward and punishments produce and shape behaviour. It is one of the few approaches in psychology that leads directly to successful treatments of various psychological disorders. (Mackenzie, B. D.1977)
On the other hand this approach is deterministic as it suggests that people have no choice in their actions and passively experience their environment i.e. they have no free will. A major limitation is that this fails to consider cognitive processes that may explain certain types of behaviour. Humans have been known to display irrational behavior when in extreme emotional pain. In this case, there is a cognitive reason for their behavior. Additionally, in situations of danger, the body engages in a flight or fight reaction which is purely physiological. The behavior of a person in a dangerous situation is not subject to any form of conditioning but merely a specific physiological reaction.
The behaviorist approach also fails to consider other factors such as those described by the psychodynamic and biological approaches. It has been proven that genetics can have an effect personality. Twin studies have shown that genetics are a major influence on personality and this should be considered when treating psychological disorders. This suggests that behaviourism is over-simplistic and too reductionist as it only considers stimulus-response.
There are many different methods of treatment that encompass the behaviorist approach to psychological disorders. One of which is systematic desensitization. Systematic desensitization is a common method used to treat a patient with a phobia. This technique was developed by Joseph Wolpe and involves understanding what provokes least and most anxiety, learning relaxation techniques, then associating relaxation with the least provoking stimuli. With this method, patients are allowed to gradually overcome their phobias. They are allowed time to understand and learn an independent method of dealing with their "irrational" fear and feel anxious about and anxiety. This will lead to a sense of accomplishment of battling their phobia and also prevent a relapse as they have the knowledge that they are capable of controlling their fear and feel anxious about and anxiety. On the other hand, the process is slow and patients might find it difficult or unrealistic to visualize appropriate situations. Furthermore, the transition from the session to real-life experiences is not easy to accomplish as there has been a shift in reality. Another demerit of this method is that it is limit to verbal communication and as one of the main components of systematic desensitization is positive self-talk, a mute may not be able to benefit from this treatment. (Hull, C.L., 1951)
A method that is similar to systematic desensitization is In Vivo Exposure. With In Vivo Exposure the patient is subjected to the actual anxiety-producing situations. The patient is slowly put in the situations starting with the least feared one with the help of their therapists. Eventually, the patient will have to physically face their fear and feel anxious about and anxiety. This is effective as there is a constant sense of reality throughout the treatment. In addition, it allows the patients to gradually get used to their fear and anxiety. A problem with this method is that unless the patient is willing to let themselves be in their feared situation, it is very difficult to implement this method. It is also a lengthy process and patients may not be willing to follow through with all the required sessions. (Atkinson, R. L., Atkinson, R. C., Smith, E. E., Bem, D. J., and Nolen-Hoeksema, S., 2000)
Avery effective method of In Vivo Exposure is flooding. Flooding is a process by which the patient is exposed to their feared object or situation for an extended period with no break from it. It has been found to be very effective but it is almost impossible to find patient willing to be put through this kind of treatment. There are also ethical issues involved in whether it is ethical to put a person in a situation which can cause physical and mental harm to the patient. (Atkinson, R. L., Atkinson, R. C., Smith, E. E., Bem, D. J., and Nolen-Hoeksema, S., 2000)
Modeling is another effective means of changing behaviour. It is the process by which a patient observed someone's behaviour and learning and imitating it. Perhaps one of the most evidentiary supports for this method comes from a study by Bandura, Ross and Ross in 1961. They did a study on transmission of aggression through imitation of aggressive models. It was concluded that humans learn from imitation and therefore it provides grounds for this method to be used. An advantage of this method is that as the patient is watching someone else in the feared situation, they are being exposed to it without being actually in the situation. They are not physically being hurt unlike In Vivo Exposure. A disadvantage is that the patient may be comfortable watching someone else in the situation but may not be able to handle being in the actual situation themselves. Additionally, this method is basing on people who are easily influenced into imitating. If this patient has a very strong sense of self, they might not be so susceptible to this method. Furthermore, if there is a reason for this fear and feel anxious about and anxiety, it might have cognitive reasons behind it and by not addressing it, this form of therapy might merely be suppressing it. (Gleitman, H., Fridlund, A. J., Reisberg, D.J., 1999)
Avoidance learning is instrumental learning in which the response averts an aversive stimulus before it occurs. It is a type of therapy that that combines classical conditioning and operant conditioning. Classical conditioning predicts the aversive event that will follow a certain behavior and operant conditioning "teaches" through negative reinforcement, how to prevent the event from occurring. (Skinner, B, F., 1974) This method teaches patients how to avoid situation which they fear and feel anxious about. However, this is merely avoiding the situation and not addressing the real issue behind the fear and feel anxious about. Conversely, this method only works on selective disorders. For example it does not work on sociopaths as they have chronic under-arousal.
Behaviour therapy is often used in the treatment of psychological disorders. There are many merits to this method. It teaches patients how to prevent themselves from being in situations that they fear or feel anxious about. It also arms patients with the knowledge of what to expect. Knowledge is power and having this knowledge means the patients are better equipped with their fear and anxiety. However, this method is also reductionist and deterministic as it does not consider other factors such as biological, psychodynamic and cognitive factors. These factors might play a big part in the patient's fear and feel anxious about or anxiety and by excluding such therapies, behaviour therapists might not be really addressing the problem. They might merely be teaching their patients how to repress their fear and anxiety.
It is important to note however, that behaviour therapy has a very high success rate and whether the reasons behind the feared issue are truly addressed or not, the treatment is effective.