This essay argues that familial obligations are relevantly similar to some political obligations. I proceed from a comparison of the family and state to an account of how these obligations can be understood, and how they can have the moral requirements that they are sometimes denied. How this can be accomplished involves the use of the principle of "reflective acceptance", which I analyse and modify, so as to ensure it can generate the aforementioned moral requirements.
In this section I shall explain how the membership of a political community and membership of a family are, in some ways, similar. I shall also express where the two cases diverge. This section is an attempt to separate the parts of the comparison that can be disregarded. I wait until a later section to draw out the significance of the analogous properties shared by both cases. It is important to note that, throughout this essay I shall be concerned with the general cases (or what I take to be the general cases) of familial relationships and political communities. Horton expresses explicitly his intention to use only the "standard, or paradigmatic" cases of the aforementioned groups and I agree with him that we should not concern ourselves with cases that differ from this standard example.
An individual's membership of a family does seem to share some things with membership of a political community. The most immediate property that both have in common is that neither are cases in which an individual chooses to belong to a group. People do not choose the state they are born in anymore than they choose who their parents or siblings are. Clearly there are examples such as emigration and immigration and adoption in which this claim is inapplicable, but these are deviations from what I take to be the standard case. It is clear that we do not choose our family or our state; rather we are born into it. Following from this, it seems fair to accept that we have obligations to certain other individuals, because we belong to these groups. We have obligations to the members of our families, and to the members of our political community. That we have the latter kind of obligation is something that this essay must take as a premise. If I did not assume there were such things as political obligations, neither considerations about the analogy of political communities with the family, nor anything else could tell us anything about them. This essay aims to establish that there is something to be learned about political obligation from this comparison, it is beyond the scope of this essay to also provide a justification for the (assumed) ontological status of political obligation itself. In the case of the assumption that we have obligations because we belong to a family it seems clear that we do at least think we have these obligations. Hardimon terms the belief that we have these obligations "one of the most salient moral beliefs we have". I think it is a fair assumption to make that we do have these obligations, but as Simmons notes, possession of an obligation does not entail possession of a corresponding moral requirement. I shall deal with the issues Simmons raises in greater depth in the following section. At this point, I will simply posit that we do have obligations by virtue of belonging to families and states; whether or not these obligations are morally requisite I shall deal with later.
The most important differences between the two cases involve considerations about authority relations and issues pertaining to legitimacy. While the individual stands under the authority of the state, it does not seem that this sort of authority relation holds amongst members of a family. It could be objected that the family, when young children are involved, does possess an analogous authority relation. However, I follow Horton in that I do not think that this family exhausts the range of families that can have the obligations I am concerned with. Our obligations to other members of our family are independent of the time when our family contained children. In fact, there seems to be a difference in the obligation that young children (may) have to obey their parents, and the obligation adult sons and daughters have to their parents. In the former case, obligation seems to stem from the authority of the parents, whereas in the latter case there is an absence of any authority relation, thus the obligation cannot stem from any such relation. As I said above, I am not concerned with the case of the family with young children, as this seems unnecessarily dissimilar to the case of the political community. The difference that I am concerned with is the lack of an authority relation in the case of the family, and the presence of an authority relation in the case of the state. It is important, though, to remember that this essay is not an attempt to explain all political obligations. The whole purpose of using the analogy of the family is to attempt to discover if there are any similar obligations in the realm of the political community. So, while it is true that there is a difference in authority relations in the two cases, it is false to claim that this causes the analogy to fail. This claim is false because the analogy (or at least my argument from it) is not concerned with providing justification for obligations that may arise from the fact that the state stands in authority over the individuals that comprise it; rather I am concerned with providing an explanation of the obligations (if any) that we possess because we are born in a certain political community, as we are born into a certain family.
A similar argument can be made for considerations of legitimacy. It is clearly the case that governments and rulers are subject (or at least could be subject or should be subject) to judgments of legitimacy. The same cannot be said, for example, of a father. It does not make sense to apply the term legitimate to a father in the same way as it is applied to a government. Of course, a father may not be an actual biological father, and so (arguably) may not be legitimate in this sense. A government however is legitimate or otherwise in a different sense. If all the relevant facts are known about a father it is a matter of scientific fact whether or not he is a legitimate father (as described above). In the case of a government, however, if all the relevant facts are known, there is still room for debate and disagreement over its legitimacy. There is only one condition for being a biological father, and everyone (to my knowledge) agrees what it is. The same cannot be said of political legitimacy. As with the previous consideration (of authority), however, it seems clear that this difference is not relevant to the argument I present. As I am concerned with the obligations incurred through no action, considerations of how legitimacy affects obligations are not relevant.
So, despite the evident differences between the two cases, they are still relevantly similar; the analogy can potentially aid an explanation of some type of political obligation.
Simmons argues that what he calls "positional duties" are distinct from "the moral requirement to fulfil positional duties". To provide an example, in the case of the family, simply belonging to a family does not entail that we have a moral requirement to care for our parents. Simmons accepts that we may well have an obligation to so care, but he denies that this obligation can ground a moral requirement to so care. In the case of the family, it may be something like deep care and love for each other that provide the moral grounds for the fulfilment of the obligations. It would be natural to think that this care and love was felt simply because of the relation we stand in to other family members. This is clearly false, however, as is immediately demonstrable by a counterexample. In the case of a child who is abused by their parents, the care and love that provided the moral grounds will not (in this case anyway) be felt. The position of the child to the parents is identical, they are still in the same family relations, but the feelings are not present. This supports Simmons' claim that there is a distinction between positional duties and the moral requirements to fulfil these duties. I accept this distinction. My argument can, however, take Simmons' objection and still be coherent. As I mentioned in the previous section, this essay is not concerned with all obligation. For this reason I would be justified in claiming that Simmons' objection is inconsequential, as he admits that there are the obligations I refer to, he just argues that these obligations are unmatched by a moral requirement. I will also, however, attempt to give the obligations I am concerned with moral weight. This is the aim of the next section.
Hardimon uses the term "role obligations" to mean what Simmons does by "positional" obligations. He claims they are the "obligations we have (or take ourselves to have) as occupants of social roles". Hardimon seeks to give these role obligations "genuine moral force" by introducing a notion of "reflective acceptability". The rest of this essay is devoted to an analysis and criticism of this notion, as it applies to role obligations. The principle is defined thus:
This principle is distinguished from what Hardimon terms the volunteer principle. The principle of reflective acceptability entails only hypothetical acceptance; something is reflectively acceptable if, upon reflection, the individual would choose to accept it if he had the choice (which, of course, he does not). The volunteer principle entails that we actually choose to take on some obligation and so is not hypothetical. In order to ensure there is room in his theory for the volunteer principle, which seems to fit well with our commonly held intuitions of how we acquire obligations, Hardimon claims that the volunteer principle should apply to what he calls civil society, whereas the principle of reflective acceptability applies to the family and the state. So the argument is that the notion of reflective acceptability can provide a basis for certain noncontractual obligations to possess moral force. I say certain noncontractual obligations as opposed to all noncontractual obligations because, as Hardimon argues, it is not the case that all such obligations are reflectively acceptable and thus not morally binding.
The first potential objection to the notion of reflective acceptability I wish to consider claims that Hardimon fails to distinguish between reflective acceptability and reflective acceptance. The difference being that the only the latter entails that there has actually been any reflecting done. There seems to be a difference between claiming that someone would agree to accept a social role upon reflection and actually accepting it upon reflection. However, I think that this is, in fact, a strength of the principle of reflective acceptance. The aforementioned difference is in fact not an important one. It matters whether or not a role is reflectively acceptable, not whether it has actually been reflected upon. It is the fact of acceptability that gives moral force to the obligations entailed by the social role, not the fact that it has been accepted. This is a strength because no objections can be made that argue that because no one (or not everyone, or some people) has reflected in this way about their state or their family there is no moral force to these obligations that the social role possesses. Hardimon seems to have found a way to build in moral force to obligations we have that we do not choose, by positing that the fact that we would choose them (under suitable, reasonable conditions) carries moral weight.
To extend slightly what Hardimon says I would argue that there is evidence of his arguments in our intuitions about the relative strength of family and political bonds. Few people would deny that we feel more strongly about our parents and children and siblings than we do about others in our society generally. This is explainable, on Hardimon's account. If we consider the "abstract structure" of both family and political roles it is clear that the latter is more complex. It is also true that at the next stage of reflection, the "particular instantiation" of family or state, again, the latter seems more complex. This relative complexity would explain why we feel stronger bonds with our family than the state. The moral force would be fettered, because in the case of the state, it is much less clear that the abstract structure we accept is being instantiated as we would accept.
Another concern I have is that Hardimon puts his principle in terms of would be accepted, rather than what would not be rejected. Here I follow Scanlon who says "it is the reasonableness of rejecting a principle, rather than the reasonableness of accepting it, on which moral argument turns". This may seem a trivial point, but it does have an application here. To slightly change the terms Scanlon argues in, I would claim that someone may reasonably accept a role that causes him unnecessary hardship (for whatever reason), but could also reasonably reject this role in order to avoid this hardship. With this slight modification, the principle of reflective 'non-rejectabilty' is capable of doing the work that Hardimon claims it can. In this way, Simmons' objection can be answered.
I have attempted to demonstrate that considerations of the family can inform discussion about certain kinds of political obligation. It is tautologous, but as I argued earlier in this essay, the types of political obligation that consideration of the family can inform are just those types in which the state is relevantly similar to the family. I raised an objection made by Simmons, and attempted to show that there was a way of understanding noncontractual obligations in such a way as to give them the moral force Simmons denies they possess.