Man's function is the attempt to live well. In this essay I shall describe how Aristotle conceives living well as living towards the end (telos) and how that end is presupposed in the human beginning. For Aristotle, the formal cause of the human being contains within it the end to which it properly aims. After outlining Aristotle's conception of man's function, I shall raise the question whether man is the only creature who can fail to exercise his function, and show that man's function is essentially ethical, although with the emphasis on a process of self-overcoming.
Aristotle's conception of the relation between the formal cause and the final cause can fruitfully be thought of in organic terms. As the seed contains within it the full-grown plant, so the initial organic matter contains within it the full-grown human being. The critical aspect of Aristotle's analysis of the human being is that reason is to be considered as an organic property of the human organism, so the initial organic matter contains within it in potentia the rational human being. The irrational and rational parts of the soul,
Man is indeed, the zoon logon exon. The formal cause is that by virtue of which the end is imprinted on the beginning. The two 'causes' are two aspects of the same thing, one aspect expresses the character of a blueprint, while the other the character of the building, a building in a constant state of construction.
To take the analogy further as a first step to incorporating reason within the picture: the blueprint is not fully surveyable at any time. The building is constructed with only a broad grasp of the end to which it is heading, a grasp given to it by practical reason (phronesis). Nonetheless, the end is the target of human life. The formal cause is that which determines the end of human life and provide the capacities for its pursuit.
The formal cause of man is thus the form of man, and the final cause is the form instantiated in the living man, understood as something always to be aimed at, something which withdraws as we pursue it. We can note in passing that this represents the recalling of man's form from a Platonic other-world to an existence immanent in man's organic nature. This said, we can now situate man's function in this picture before turning to the role of reason and the ethical consequences of Aristotle's schema.
Man's function (ergon) consists in living well. The ultimate end of human action is eudaimonia, better translated as living-well or correct-living than happiness. Man's function is that which binds him to his purpose. His purpose, his end, is to live well, and the end result achieved by that is living well.
We are presented with a picture of what we might call - to use a Hegelian expression out of context - an organic unity, a temporally extended unity. Man's nature is to be an organic being like any other: that is to say he possesses a telos which gives a function to his nature, and his nature as a temporal being in a state of flux is to be grasping for that telos all his life. In the process of aiming at this telos man is fulfilling his function, but never as a completed achievement. Man's function is to work on himself ethically:
The function of man is what determines the good for him, as the good for anything with a function consists in the performing of the function. After dismissing the orders of life possessed by plants and animals as providing man's function - nutrition and growth for plants, sensation for animals - Aristotle seeks the function in activity which distinguishes man from those two orders: rationality. The assumption behind his analysis is that man's function should be unique to all creatures that share his capacities of the soul, no more and no less. Aristotle's thinking must surely be that the function of a soul must be grounded in its full nature. The higher capacities of the human soul thus give man his unique function, despite his sharing of the lower capacities with the animals and plants. This function is essentially ethical, since,
It is practical reason (phronesis) which provides man with the capacity to grapple with himself and his world, which provides the means to aim towards his telos.
This notion of a function has been criticised on two grounds outlined by Jennifer Whiting. I shall now discuss these and Whiting's responses to conclude the presentation of Aristotle's notion of a function.
The form of man is for Aristotle the source of ethical prescription. This runs against a very deep trend in philosophy that teaches one cannot derive an 'ought' from an 'is'. That is, from a description of the way the world, or our nature, is, one cannot derive ethical judgements about what one should do. Aristotle does this through the claim that what it is to be a good man is to be understood analogously to the way we understand what it is to be a good object. We consider a good car to be one that successfully carries us from A to B while not draining our financial resources too much. The function of a car is to transport us, and to do so economically. The function of man cannot be related to an outside agent's designs as the function of a car is; Aristotle's critics have argued that his use of the term function is thus misguided. However, for Aristotle, the function of man is related to his self. We have seen that it is the process of attempting to live well, and that living well is living towards the final form. The function of man is thus of concern to each and every man, since his function is essentially self-directed. Man is concerned with the exercise of his function since it is beneficial to him.
The criticisms of the notion of a function as providing proscriptions take two specific forms: (1) one cannot move from what it is to be a man (the function of man) to what it is to be a good man (in the sense of competence rather than morality), and (2) one cannot move from what it is to be a good man to what is good for man. The second point is the naturalistic fallacy proper, the first one closely related.
(1) The argument here says that one cannot move from a description of the capacities of the soul - of what it is to be a man - to the idea that the exercise of those capacities is to be commended. Thus prostitution, money-laundering and the development of nuclear weapons are all human capacities, which does not make anyone who exercises those capacities a good man (in the sense that a watertight boat is a good boat). However, Aristotle only takes certain capacities to be essential to the organism. Those that are essential are so as they provide the capacities that direct towards the final cause. As Whiting writes,
There are deep epistemological as well as ontological questions here beyond the scope of this essay; it will suffice for our purposes to state that the capacities that are needed to be activated for man to live in accordance with his function are those which belong to man's essence, and,
(2) Aristotle's schema also defines that it is good for a man to be a good man. Although we are to understand 'good' here as competence, we have seen that competence - the performing of man's function - means living in accordance with virtue. This can therefore be seen as a recapitulation of the Platonic idea that virtue is good for the health of the soul. Given that man's function consists of using practical reason to introduce virtuous living into his life, we have a similar dynamic: man should want to be good (in the moral sense), as that will be good for him. We can see the problem if we examine an example. The function of man is presented as analogous to the function of a flautist. What it is to be a good Flautist consists in tactile and oral dexterity, and presumably some as yet not understood mental appreciation of music. None of these things are necessarily good for the flautist. One could be a great musician and be made miserable by the whole process. As he introduced the notion that the function of man is beneficial to man to cope with (1), how can Aristotle answer this problem? As Whiting states, here we can see that Aristotle is, "normative all the way down." The answer to this problem lies in the analysis we earlier gave of the formal cause and the final cause. The formal cause as a blueprint for a rational creature proscribes a process of growth that with man includes the development of the capacity of phronesis and consequently that of judging.
The formal cause and the telos just define what is good for a man, and therefore one is in error if one believes the pursuit of man's telos is not living well.
We have related man's function to the pursuit of the telos, that which is defined by man's form, his essential nature. We have seen that man's function is the attempt to live in accordance with his essential nature. Moreover, man's essential nature makes demands on him. It is from the knowledge of one's essential nature that swells the demand to live in accordance with virtue as the means to pursue the telos. I now wish to examine more fully: the role of reason to answer the question I raised in my introduction, and the ethical nature of man's function. I shall then conclude.
Can man fail to perform his function? We have here a problem that relates essentially to our last topic: to what extent does man's nature make a demand he can choose not to answer or fail to answer? In answering this question we shall be also examining the ethical nature of man's function.
The link is the normative role of phronesis. 'Practical wisdom' is to be discriminated from reason per se. It is practical reason that concerns us in determining how we should live, given that,
The possessing of practical wisdom is itself virtuous, given that if one makes a mistake in practical reasoning one is rated lower if one does it voluntarily rather than involuntarily. 
Phronesis is the virtue of the calculative part of the soul, that part that is concerned with the flux of the world and the adaptation to it. We can also see that it is not merely rational, as a rational state can be forgotten whereas such a state as we are concerned with cannot: phronesis is a state of the organism that develops over time and is not lost in an instant. Similarly, one does not become 'imprudent' when one makes mistakes in phronesis. Just as
The judgement of whether a man is ethical and virtuous - whether he is living towards eudaimonia as his  telos by exercising his ergon in accordance with  phronesis - is a judgement that we have to make when considering the whole of a man's life. If one deliberately goes against phronesis - the guiding light of man's function - one is being unethical (unvirtuous). Further, phronesis is implied by the presence of the virtues, given that virtue is acting in accordance with the right principle at the right times, and phronesis is that capacity which allows man to make such judgements.
Man can perform his function badly to the extent that he fails to develop phronesis - or is not blessed by nature with it. We must believe that for a man to be entirely without virtue is certainly possible, and that man would not be pursuing his telos and thereby not performing his function. Whether one could deliberately not choose to pursue one's own good is another matter, since the notion of doing it on purpose implies deliberation and therefore phronesis, albeit badly, even peculiarly, directed.
Man's function is ethical essentially. Phronesis is that virtue which man uses to decide on what conduct to pursue and what is good for him. Phronesis is that which man uses to pursue his function: living well in accordance with his form, as a creature possessing reason. However, given that man's end - telos - is not realisable, but forever advancing before him, the exercise of phronesis is an organic process whereby the capacity is developed and refined. The ideal, the end, is not a part of this picture except in so far as it motivates the process of becoming that the ethical life consists in. Phronesis is thus self-regarding as well as being directed towards ethical life and hence others. Man works on his capacity for virtue as a work that is ever in progress. Man changes himself by virtue of his very nature. The form of man is his end, his end is an ideal that man forever pursues, and man's function is to pursue it. Therefore his form, his essence, demands that man be in a state of flux. Man's form records that man is a part of a world of becoming, and the exercise of practical wisdom is the virtue appropriate for living in and changing the world man finds himself in.
We saw that the final cause of man is the form instantiated in the living man, understood as something always to be aimed at. We can now see that the ethical life consists in the exercise of practical wisdom and that practical wisdom is that which man uses to pursue this final cause. Therefore man's function is essentially ethical. We also saw that although man's possession of reason allows him to think the possibility of not pursuing his good, his end, the location of man's function in the exercise of practical reason makes it difficult to conceive of man making a choice to avoid his own good, given that that exercise of choice about man's relation to the world is dependent upon man's possession of phronesis. Only the man denied any practical reason by nature could fail to live the ethical life, to live towards the realization of his form. Finally, we saw that man's function requires that he work on himself, that he develop the virtue of practical wisdom. We thus saw that the ethical life consists in a process of what we might bombastically term 'self-overcoming'. We have not examined the exact ethical nature of the life Aristotle believed was virtuous, we have merely outlined the structure of man's ethical life. We can thus conclude that man's essential nature demands that he develop himself towards his ever-receding end; this process is his function, it is what living well consists in, and it is an ethical process.