I am going to discuss Berkeley's contention that the above question cannot be answered positively in a way that is not either contradictory or nonsensical. I shall outline Berkeley's discussion of how this is so before examining the so-called 'Master Argument'. The force of Berkeley's argument derives from his imagistic theory of understanding. I shall cast doubt on the success of Berkeley's argument by attacking the imagistic approach to the understanding it rests on. I shall then suggest how a theory of understanding could be emended to give a positive answer to the title.
Berkeley believes that all talk of material objects is unintelligible. The foundation of all our knowledge is perception; all perception has ideas as its objects; for all the objects of perception, esse est percipi. For Berkeley, ontology is exhausted by such ideas along with the spirits required to give them existence by perceiving them. Berkeley presents as an argument for this thesis - that, "all the choir of heaven and furniture of the earth, in a word all those bodies which compose the mighty frame of the world, have no subsistence without a mind, that their being is to be perceived or known" - the very proposal we are considering: "To be conceived of which, the reader need only reflect and try to separate in his own thoughts the being of a sensible thing from its being perceived."
Berkeley believes that honest attention to our ideas, free from, "the embarrass and delusion of words," should convince us that we can form no coherent conception of an object without conceiving it as perceived. I shall examine the validity of the imagistic thesis of the understanding that this rests on. First I shall outline Berkeley's imagism.
For Berkeley, philosophy falls into error when it takes man's ability to manipulate words as a guide to ontology. The introduction to Principles of Human Knowledge urges that we return to the source of our knowledge: the objects of perception. Berkeley argues that illegitimate abstractions from the ideas presented in experience has drawn philosophers (here he is chiefly referring to Locke) away from the actual phenomenological basis of the understanding. In section twenty-three he bemoans the fact that there has been a call to attend to the ideas (by Locke) without an honest examination of them.
Specifically, Berkeley contends that Locke's thesis of the mind-dependent nature of the objects of the experience is too weak. Locke believed that there are mind-dependent properties of physical objects (secondary qualities) as well as mind-independent properties (primary qualities). For Berkeley, to make this distinction requires an unwarranted abstraction. All we are justified as taking as objects of the understanding are the images we perceive, either those that make up the external world or those that are the product of the imagination. Our imagination is constrained: legitimate abstraction, "extends only to the conceiving separately such objects, as it is possible may really exist or be actually perceived asunder." Berkeley asks us to attend to our ideas and ask ourselves if we can conceive of such abstractions as a body with extension and not colour. This is exactly the same move that he makes in considering the possibility of conceiving unperceived objects. We shall now show the assumption this argument is based on before passing on to consider that possibility.
Berkeley's argument only makes sense on the assumption of an imagistic epistemology; thus, in asking us to consider if we can conceive of an object with extension and not colour he is asking us if we can form an image of such an object. For Berkeley, when we use words without attending to the images of what they designate they are, "for the most part used as letters are in algebra." That is to say, they have a role in the performance of a calculation, but proper understanding is not present. Proper understanding requires the presence of, "that particular quantity it was appointed to stand for." I shall return to a discussion of this thesis after examining directly Berkeley's argument against the possibility of conceiving an unperceived thing.
Berkeley goes so far as to claim that he would be glad to give up his idealism if he could be brought to believe it is possible to conceive of an unperceived object. While this may be rhetorical there is some reason for it. His argument rests entirely on his conception of conceiving. Berkeley's entire epistemology collapses if his argument here doesn't work, as I shall argue it doesn't. Hence the argument has been labelled his 'Master Argument'.
For Berkeley, it is a contradiction to conceive of a thing unperceived for by virtue of forming it as an image I am giving it the property of being perceived. To be able to conceive an idea is to be able to perceive it (perception does not only refer to our experience of those images beyond our will, but to those of the will-directed imagination as well); in forming an idea I perceive it. Therefore, I cannot conceive of an object that is unperceived.
This argument clearly works because 'being unperceived' is not a property that can be represented visually. I can summon an image of a tree, then stipulate it as red and change the image accordingly. If I stipulate the tree as unperceived there is no way of presenting it to me that way visually. For Berkeley this is enough to rule it out as a genuine property. I suggest however, that there is more to this argument.
There appears to be a move made here analogous to that he makes to justify our knowledge of perceiving spirits. The existence of spirits is necessary given that there are images being perceived. Hence we can have knowledge of those spirits as the ground of the possibility of having knowledge of images, although knowledge of spirits is founded on knowledge of images. In having an idea I prove that at least one spirit exists. We can see that were Berkeley to claim that we can perceive of an idea as unperceived he would be to destroy his foundation of knowledge. It would mean that there was no necessary connection between the existence of an idea and the existence of a perceiver. If there was no necessary connection between having an idea and its being perceived by something then he would be left unable to justify the existence of perceivers and hence his entire description of the world could not get off the ground. He would be left with a form of solipsism that could not even justify the existence of the subject. The 'master argument' is indeed critical, as Stoneham seems to deny.
The obvious objection to Berkeley's thesis brings us right to the heart of the problem. I can ask you to imagine a world where humans never evolved. An abundant plant life dominates the planet. You can speculate: maybe Venus fly-traps do well. Maybe rhododendrons dominate the swampy grasslands. What would be the consequences for pollination? Would roses evolve as larger or as smaller due to the lack of cows to munch on them? Clearly this is an act of the imagination. There is no need for you to picture giant roses or swampy grasslands to reason about the example and draw conclusions. This is what Stoneham describes as 'conceiving-that'. To apply this point to Berkeley's example of the unperceived tree, we can stipulate that the tree is unperceived and draw conclusions from this. I can use a fact without picturing it. Berkeley would respond that we cannot understand what we cannot picture (the imagistic thesis). How can we respond to this?
First, we might want to show the consequences of this thesis. Much of physics would fail to be understood by the originators of the theories if Berkeley is right. There is no way to visualise twelve-dimensional strings. Berkeley would take this point on the chin: "since I cannot frame abstract ideas at all, it is plain, I cannot frame them by the help of pure intellect, whatsoever faculty you understand by those words." Also, the mind-body problem would remain forever insoluble, although Berkeley, as an idealist, would respond again that there isn't such a problem.
Second, conclusively, we might want to suggest that Berkeley's imagism is clearly false. I cannot understand a term just by having an image before the mind. I could present a picture of the Queen to an alien with the same perceptual apparatus as us. He could form an image of the Queen, but he cannot be said to understand that this is the Queen, even if I say the word over the picture hundreds of times. The mere ability to pronounce a word on the occasion of an image, let alone the mere presence of an image to the mind is nowhere near to providing understanding. Someone who could say the word 'Queen' in the presence of the Queen clearly would not understand the term: if they walked up to her as she made a tour of a hospital, pointed to her face and said 'Queen' repeatedly we would undoubtedly say they didn't understand the concept 'Queen'. The presence of an image cannot assure us of understanding.
Understanding has to at least include the ability to manipulate the terms and images in a way that is meaningful and relevant for other members of the linguistic community. One could manipulate the term 'Queen' in an entirely appropriate way without having a clue what a Queen looks like, what she wears etc. We could not deny that a person who could do this failed to understand fully as the image they could form of a Queen was merely that of a woman with a gold hat on. Therefore, it is not just the case that forming an image cannot assure us of understanding, but forming an image of something is an entirely separate matter from understanding it.
Putnam describes the ability to use a term as 'having a concept', a description that will serve us satisfactorily. To have the concept 'the Queen' one needs to have recourse to other concepts and the ability to meaningfully employ them.
We can now apply this alternate sketch of the understanding to the question in the title, thereby filling out our alternative. We can respond to it on two counts: (1) is experience the source of our concept of a physical object? (2) We can give a sketch of an answer on our alternate account of the understanding.
(1) Our above account of having a concept has made no reference to experience. To what extent is experience the source of our concepts? We can only give a brief account of this deep question here. The first thing to note is that being able to manipulate a concept is not the same thing as being able to manipulate the relevant object. Someone without the mental or linguistic capacities to use the word 'dog' with the full range of potentialities that we do - recognizing different species of dogs, comparing someone to a dog, understanding poetic use of the term 'dog' - could nonetheless pat a dog, kick it or pick it up. Analogously, having our concept of what it is to be a physical object is not identical with being able to manipulate 'physical objects'. There is a horizontal as well as a vertical influence on the concept 'physical object' that is constructed within metaphysical and scientific discourse. What is given in experience exerts an influence, but our concept physical object is as much determined by the needs of our theory as by our face-to-face contact with the world. To determine a physical object as what is given in experience is as much an act of abstraction from the inter-textual life of the concept as the abstraction of independent material subsistence that Berkeley decries. To remove one side of the distinction material/ideal can never be completed. It implies the understanding of the distinction, and as we have seen, the understanding of the distinction is constituted by the ability to use it; i.e. understanding the terms ideal or physical is constituted by the ability to manipulate the opposition they form, there is no privileging of the physical as directly given in experience, as experience is given through concepts. I have to understand 'physical' as opposed to 'ideal' to use either term. Thus we can see that it is Berkeley's claim that is incoherent: it is impossible to conceive of a concept that does not imply 'physicality' as much as 'ideality'. Berkeley's doctrine of the ideality of existence can only be understood if the concept 'physical (as opposed to ideal) object' is understood.
(2) How do we make intelligible to ourselves the idea that physical objects may exist unperceived? The nave realist answer won't satisfy us given the foregoing analysis. There are two fronts for our response. (a) We can affect directly unperceived objects. I can close my eyes, press alight switch, opened my eyes and find the appearance of the objects has changed. Berkeley, of course claims this is no reason to assume the objects had a physical existence in the meanwhile, although he is forced to concede that they have existence in the mind of God at that time. This concession counts against the force of his objection to the conceiving of unperceived objects as the plausibility of the claim rests upon the fact that we cannot experience the objects at this time. To claim they do exist in the meantime because they are conceived by God is to shift the weight of the point over to his argument against abstraction rather any argument that we have no perception of the objects at this time. He admits therefore, that the fact that objects are not perceived when I have no experience of them us not a criterion for assessing there existence or lack of it. (b) To understand something is to be able to manipulate the symbols of a concept in a way that is meaningful for other members of the linguistic community. There is no problem in understanding the concept of an unperceived object on this account. Indeed, to be able to think of something as perceived requires that we understand the concept of unperceived objects, otherwise there would be no use for either term.
We have seen that Berkeley's rejection of the conceivability of unperceived objects rests upon his imagistic theory of the understanding, and that this theory is false. We have also claimed that to be able to understand the concept of a perceived object requires that we be able to understand the concept of unperceived objects, and so with the ideal/material distinction. We have sketched a theory of what it is to understand in terms of what it is to take part in meaning-practices in a linguistic community. We have thereby left the concept of meaning unanalysed, as was inevitable considering the space available. We have seen that an assumption of the question is that experience is something that exists pre-conceptually and have implicitly claimed this is not so.