The distinction between the two multiplicities is central to Bergson's concept of duration. I shall try to show that the second multiplicity is a problematic schema. As the second multiplicity defines the nature of pure duration, I shall evaluate whether the concept of duration is dealt a fatal blow by the difficulties.
The term 'multiplicity' is to be used to understand the origins of the concepts of one and many, and the relations between the two. The second multiplicity can be considered an attempt to subvert the intuitive understanding of those two concepts that is better captured by the first multiplicity.
The first multiplicity Bergson deals with is defined with reference to extension and number. Extension is for Bergson pure quantity without quality. That is to say that extension can only be expressed mathematically. To give something's extension is to define it using co-ordinates; to express its internal relations that way is to measure its size, to express its external relationships in such a manner is to express its location.
Extension is thus intrinsically connected to the concept of number. For Bergson, every number is an implicit multiplicity. The concept of a discrete unit is thus to some extent an illusion. We can choose to consider any unit as a unity or as a multiplicity. The number one for example could be considered as a group of five fifths taken together. This means that the concept of extension is unable to find a foundational unit beyond which no division can be performed. In other words, no matter how much we divide a given unit, we can divide it further. The concept of a unit logically implies the possibility of division.
When we come to measure outer experience, such an infinitely divisible schema gives us no problems. We adjust our measure to suit our purposes. It is when it is applied to inner experience in time that problems emerge that led Bergson to call the applicability of this multiplicity into question. Bergson asks us to consider how we apply such a multiplicity to our experience, our states of consciousness. His thesis is that to do so involves an act of the imagination that is based on a symbolic representation of space. At any one time, my consciousness is suffused with a number of features. I may have a sense of hunger, be thinking about my work while making breakfast and becoming aware of a boiling kettle. It does have pragmatic value to consider those experiences separately, but to do so is to falsify 'the immediate data of consciousness', Bergson's subtitle for the French version of Time and Free Will. When we consider such experiences as separate units we utilise a symbolic representation in imaginary space.
It is the purpose of the second multiplicity to capture the interpenetration of states of consciousness. In our example, for the purpose of discussion we have discriminated between separate states of consciousness that Bergson says are not discriminated in actual experience. However, as we experience our lives it is rather the case that we can make no sense of the idea that there are borders between these states. The concept of a unit implies divisibility we have said; here we can see that this cannot apply to inner experience. There is no boundary between my hunger and my awareness of the kettle boiling, although my awareness of the latter may reduce my awareness of the former.
This actual experience that Bergson claims to have discovered - or brought to our attention - is duration. Duration is opposed to time as an original experience that is symbolically represented as time. As such, it is lived experience in its entirety that is falsified. If we consider the example of becoming aware of the kettle boiling, when considering time as a continuous line made up of instants (fundamental units), it becomes impossible to find a moment where one experience gives way to another (the claim is). The idea is that rather than there being discrete units of experience that replace each other at certain points in time, there are a number of experiences - even this expression is misleading - that interpenetrate, and this interpenetration cannot be captured on a linear model of time which considers a period of time to be made up of a given number of discrete moments following one another.
A first objection would be that we do, in fact, believe that we can say at given moments that we have become aware of something different. Our awareness does shift pretty rapidly from one thing to another, and our tendency to say 'NOW, I'm thinking of something different', feels like a phenomenological instant.
Wittgenstein's discussion of aspect perception gives us a good example of such experiences; there appears to be a clear, instantaneous break between seeing the duck-rabbit as a duck and as a rabbit. Here Bergson can reply by postulating a reason for the development of a spatialized conception of experience. It is true that in our everyday lives such a conception finds some purchase. This is because, for Bergson, the tendency to treat inner experience on the model of time is a result of the adaptation of the evolving human organism.
For Bergson, the growth of an organism's intelligence is matched by a growth in its tendency to spatialize experience, to take it under the first multiplicity. It is fruitful to understand this through Kant. For Kant, space and time are the forms of intuition. Intuition is Kant's term for the fundamental determinations of how a thing can be considered. Space and Time are immutable conditions of experience, and that of course meant the Newtonian space of Kant's day. Bergson's concepts of intuition and of spatialization are intended to open up this conceptual web to evolution. Thus for Bergson, intuition in space is an act of the mind. Space is not an external property in the noumenon, but a function of the meeting of mind and world. But for Bergson, the development of the organism leads to the development of this intuition in space. This means that there is a more originary experience that is overcome by the development of the idea of extension. As organisms acquire intelligence, there develops the tendency to perceive the world in discrete units. This development of intelligence leads to the development of words in man. Words themselves are instruments of spatialization. Thus in our above example of a complex experience falling under the second multiplicity we were forced to use separate words to describe separate units, despite our desire to say that these were not to be considered as discriminated units.
The originary experience that Bergson believes is covered up by evolution yet is retained is duration. The possibility of this covered-up experience also requires his second multiplicity. For the idea is that there is a continuous experience of duration that is being overlayed by the mind, interpenetrated with spatialized experience. To the extent that we live within a spatialized conception of our own experience we are directing our attention away from an aspect of our experience.
I want to consider whether the example taken above of the duck-rabbit figure Wittgenstein discusses is reconcilable with this view. The duck-rabbit is a figure that suddenly appears to us as either a duck or a rabbit. That is to say that our perception of it seems to change instantaneously. There is no process of change in the figure itself, it remains exactly the same. Nonetheless there is a definite experience of the figure switching significance: from considering it as a duck we switch to considering it as a rabbit. According to Bergson, experiences do not form discrete units. They flow into one another. However, isn't the aspect switch a counterexample? There is no question of there being a moment when both experiences are in the mind. At one time we are definitely inclined to say we are seeing a rabbit, at the next moment we want to say we are seeing a duck. An experience in duration is supposed to underlie these experiences, but can we make sense of that suggestion? Surely the experience would be destroyed if we were to find some stratum of our mind experiencing a multiplicity of the second type. Any such experience we could uncover could not possibly pertain to the critical features of the experience of aspect switching. Bergson is not, of course committed to there being no spatialized experiences, but it does seem that if the second multiplicity is to be the foundational state of consciousness then there are experiences that transcend it, and that those are experiences that are involved heavily in our interaction with the world.
This does not disprove the existence of duration, but it does loosen its claim to be taken as a fundamental experience or a substratum of experience. The experience of aspect perception as shown by the example of the duck-rabbit seems to have no dependence on an interpenetrating multiplicity at all. Furthermore, Bergson identifies, in TFW, spatialized ideas as more 'lifeless'. The example of aspect perception seems a blow to this, as the direct perception of the figures as meaningful objects contrasts to the perception of the figure that isn't under such an aspect as meaningless, lifeless.
The first multiplicity, the numerically based system of taking the world as discrete separated units, is conceived as supplanting and dominating a more vital experience in which we can not speak of rigid borders and discrete units. Such an experience typifies Bergson's second multiplicity. We have just questioned whether such an inner experience can be easily aligned with the vivified, now I wish to question whether such an experience of duration is plausible.
Duration is passive. That is to say, we become aware of our inner experience as durational by looking inward. Furthermore, structurally, it is passive to the extent that intuition as duration is opposed to intelligence as spatialization. Whereas for Kant intuition, as intuition of a manifold (which all experiences are), involves an act of the understanding, Bergson's intuition has no such act. The spatializing first multiplicity play the role of Kant's understanding. Therefore, in Bergson's picture, intuition is purely passive. Duration is entirely subject-transcendent. Bergson's vision is of an underlying experience that is entirely independent of the subject which the subject merely observes passively. The problem is that as the intelligence of the subject merely observes entirely passively. The problem is that as the intelligence of the subject is so intrinsically linked with the process of spatialization, it is hard to imagine such an experience. It would have to involve no thought per se, no ordering undertaken by the understanding. The subject would have to become entirely limp and passive. I shall discuss the contrast with Kant below.
This disregard for the active nature of consciousness is a factor of Bergson's work that Sartre has illuminatingly criticized in relation to Bergson's attempt to provide a non-mechanistic picture of the mind. Sartre points out that Bergson cannot account for the selection of memories as a non-mechanistic picture without bringing in a subject to choose, which Bergson will not do. We have uncovered evidence to support Sartre's thesis that this is a shortcoming of Bergson's work. In the example we drew from Wittgenstein we can see how an act of the mind is essential to experiences that are fundamentally meaningful and how there can be no question of an underlying interpenetrating flow. The discrete nature of such experiences is definitive of them. Furthermore, the act of the subject is fundamental.
For Kant, an act of synthesis is necessary for any experience as such, for any experience is a manifold. An act of synthesis would be necessary for experience of what Bergson would call pure duration. Bergson's criticism is that by referring to the synthesis of representations, Kant has taken spatialized moments of time as basic and has therefore falsified the flow of duration. Bergson thinks that Kant could not account for the persistence of moments into one another, the interpenetration of qualities. For example, when I hear a tap dripping I retain each qualitative sensation by prolonging the effect. There is a cumulative change in the quality of the experience. And so it is with music; we retain the past moments as qualities in the present.
However, it is not at all clear that Kant hasn't already dealt with this. For Kant, a single, non-manifold experience is impossible. Experience is the synthesising of the subject, as is the subject. When I draw a line, I have to retain the beginning of a line to know what I am doing and to be able to complete the act. So a single representation is already, for Kant, a fiction. Experience is synthesising. It is indeed a factor of our words that we have to write a synthesis of representations as if the latter were isolable things, but it is not clear that that is Kant's view. Rather, Kant makes the unity of experience depend on the subject, and the unity he describes is that of the only experience I can imagine as experiencing. An instant is an abstracted impossibility.
Bergson places the manifold nature of experience within a pre-reflective consciousness. But the logic of Bergson's position seems to commit him to the possible experience of an instant as a logical progression of the evolutionary tendency to spatialize and also to an experience of undiscriminated temporal flow. Both experiences, Kant would have it, are unimaginable.
It is the concept of intuition as a creative tool that would have to settle this question. Is Bergson's use of this concept sufficient to surmount the difficulty with conceiving duration or the ultimately abstracted instant? Bergson's evolutionary approach would have it that what is conceivable for us now may not necessarily always be so. What is inconceivable may become conceivable. Intuition is intended to be the creative act of thought that allows us to bend past the spatialized paradigm. This is not the place to come to a conclusion on this question. What I hope that I have shown is that the virtues Bergson claims for his view - that it recovers a more vivified experience that we can reach by attending inward and that it surmounts the difficulty in accounting for the growth of qualitative impressions across time - are questionable. In the first case, we have found meaningful experiences that display features of the first multiplicity; in the second case, we have seen that Kant provides an alternative conception of this process that avoids eliminating the subject. This latter question I believe to a fault in Bergson's thinking that Sartre has uncovered elsewhere. The concept of the second multiplicity stands or falls with that of duration. We have seen that the concept of an inner duration is problematic, and therefore have cause to question whether the division into the two multiplicities has been wisely performed.