With increasing globalisation and rapid growth in number of multinationals, companies needs to be more aware of the complexities of all the environments involved in foreign countries, such as cultural, social, economic, political, regulatory, legal and technological forces.
Every country has got its own distinct culture which needs to be followed in order for a company to succeed across national borders. Therefore the role of the firms is to adapt their marketing mix (Product, Place, Price, Promotion) to meet local needs.
The aim of this work is to discuss the issues of culture which a firm may encounter, for this purpose, the world's largest cosmetics company LOral has been chosen. In order to discuss cultural aspects, there is firstly a need to define what a culture is. According to Dibb and Simkin (2005), culture is "the concepts, values and tangible items that make up a particular society. Culture is passed on from generation to generation and is a kind of blueprint for acceptable behaviour in a particular society"
As L'Oral has a presence in most parts of the world, namely in North America, Latin America, Europe, Middle East, Africa, Asia, South Pacific or Oceania, where perceptions of beauty vary from one country to another, it has to face factors such as ethnicity, different requirements for skincare or different climatic conditions, thus it has to offer a wide range of products and brands to match with personal diversity.
Although all of the L' Oral brands have a basic image, Softsheen Carson of haircare products are dedicated for people of African descent, Lancme and L'Oral Paris epitomizing European tastes and traditions, Shu Uemura a bearer for Japanese style, Maybelline New York and Redken, trendsetters for the US, or Armani in Italian style, they are still sligtly modifying their marketing mix to get closer to local customers of each continent.
Using the five dimensions of the Cultural framework established by T.C. Melewar, which takes into account the different aspects of social heritage constituting culture, this includes Material culture, Social institutions, Humanity and the Universe, Aesthetics and Language, each aspects is going to be examined with reference to L' Oral.
Overall, the framework is well structured and accounts for all aspects of culture which a firm may encounter, thus it could be applied to many industries. However, as for L'Oral, few aspects could not be related.
It can be seen that the model works on issues such as Material culture (excluding the system of government), Aesthetics or Language. In terms of Social Institutions, the factor of Social organization was directly relevant here, however Political structures could not be used since it does not affect a cosmetics company in a direct way. Education factor was also not directly related, since regardless of the literacy rate, people still need to use toiletries. However in terms of advertising, L'Oral advertising messages are mostly conveyed via aural and visual affects, which should be understandable for the majority.
Human and the universe aspect was crucial to this firm, since few products have been modified (self - tanning and whitening crmes) to match with local tastes. However Religion, Superstitions do not affect any consumers, except for people who live in isolation, thus it was not discussed further.
According to Onkvisit and Shaw (1990), an advertisement is global only if it is virtually
unchanged in all countries except for translation. Thus for L'Oral, where the concept is kept the same, it can be said that except for the slight cultural adaptations already mentioned, most significantly being the skin products, there were no complete or fierce changes in terms of culture. This is proven by global hair care brands Reken, Matrix, Kerratesse or toiletries brand Garnier being the same across the world regardless of culture.
Companies operate internationally for either growth or survival. In order to succeed they need to adapt at least partially to the culture of the host country where they are operating in.
In the case of L'Oral, its global activities have been discussed and compared to the T C Melewar's cultural framework. Despite the company counting on its global reputation and brand image based on a particular country, and most products can be said to remain mostly the same, some changes were still made to meet the requirements of the local culture.
The research centres were also opened in few countries to (among other factors such as labour, taxes etc.) come closer to local market and reflect more on local tastes.
Therefore, as a general rule, "as far as culture is concerned, the message should be sensitive to social issues, as well as to religious mores, ethical behaviours, morality and business customs, practices and hierarchies".