The company (E) is competing with other 4 firms in the Honduras Industry. The firms compete in 2 product markets - Sonites and Vodites, where demands for 2 markets are independent of each other. Both markets may be targeted at different groups of customers. Sonites are mend for groups of Buffs, Singles, Professionals, High Earners and Others. Sonites customers, except for High Earners, are quite price - sensitive. Vodites customers include Innovators, Early Adopters and Followers. The products are distributed to 3 distinct channels - Specialty stores, Department stores and Mass Merchandisers.
During the 7 periods of competing with other companies, the main objective was to maximize the Share Price Index through optimizing the Market share, Sales growth and Net contribution
The company' s market share has been growing consistently, this is mostly due to being the only player in the Vodite market. Currently the company is holding 55.6% of industry, despite losing sales in Sonite market
The suggested strategy for next 3 periods is to launch SEN2, modify the marketing mix for SETH and reposition the declining products to extent their life
The key lessons learned from the Markstrat experience was to pay attention to Customer Behavior, Market Research Studies and Segmentation
When the Marketing team was recruited, Sonite was already a well established market, with several strong brands at different price points covering a wide range of needs. As other companies, firm E marketed 2 Sonite products - SEMI and SELF, which accounted for 25.6% of market share in terms of value (retail sales) and 19.6% in terms of units sold (the share in terms of unit sold is lower than the share in terms of value due to the firm placing higher prices on SELF than the competitors).
In order to determine the strategy for next 3 periods, the SWOT analysis have been included in the Appendix 1. Each product has been allocated to the BCG Product portfolio  (Appendix 4),
During the time as a manager of the company, I have learned 3 key points, which needs to be followed in order to secure competitive advantages for the company and to keep customers.
Customer behavior - there is a need to understand and relate to customers, know what they want. This enables the company to quickly adjust the production levels and product specifications according to current customers' needs. This can be done by reading through market researches, such as customers' surveys and panels, the stores that they visit, their opinions on the products and how can they be improved. Reading through reports on performances of the company, or brand results and comparing the figures also helps to understand customers and their behavior. As the pricing strategy of the company has been the demand - based pricing, the demand of customers needs to be known well to adjust the price levels.
There is also a need to conduct frequent Market research studies, which help to understand the economy, show the estimated market conditions, customers' behavior and most importantly they show the performances of competitors and their product ranges, thus the firm can decide on how to respond to their actions. An example would be when the company was launching Vodites, the market had to be thoughtfully researched and studies were used to decide how to brace the entrance for its competitors.
Segmentation - the market needs to be divided into segments, as customers have different requirements, thus specific groups of customers should be targeted differently. When a product is launched, it is very important to have the potential customers segmented to know for which group of customers the product would be most suitable for. The competitive advantage is gained when right customers are offered suitable products at the right time.
The segmentation and positioning strategy is also used in deciding which market segments will be
targeted and how products will be positioned.
Apart from this, there are other points which are necessary for keeping the efficient marketing, such as the marketing mix strategy, the day-to-day operational marketing decisions such as pricing, production, communication and distribution. The team also needs to establish product position and fortify it by encouraging brand loyalty. As profits increase, there will be competitors entering the market, thus need to be first in selected market segments and stop the way for competitors.
The company situation was explained in the report, and there has been a suggestion for the marketing strategy for the next 3 periods. However, the proposed strategy is based on assumptions that there are no external factors affecting the market, as the stability of the economy, or sudden change in taste of customers, could not be anticipated. Thus the strategy has to be re- examined prior to each period and made suitable for that particular period.