Our investigation was looking at the correlations between the three measures of gratitude, the GQ-6, the Gratitude Resentment and Appreciation Test (GRAT) and the Appreciation Scale. We were looking to see whether they were in fact reliable measures of gratitude. We did this by putting all three measures into one questionnaire and asking 150 participants, both male and female, to fill it in. We found that the three measures did correlate quite highly however they seem to be measuring different concepts of gratitude, shown by the correlations between the subscales of the measures. This suggests that what the measures defined as gratitude and what they measured it as was different, putting question primarily over the GRAT and Appreciation Scale as reliable measures of gratitude.
Gratitude is a significant emotion in modern day society and is seen to be a commonly experienced affect. Research found that feeling grateful was the third most common discrete positive affect experienced by adults, 90% of the sample reported this affect, (Weiner 2003, cited in McCullough 2004). The experience and expression of gratitude throughout history has been regarded by many cultures as being beneficial to both society and individuals. Several world religions such as Judaism, Christianity, Islam and Buddhism teach about the importance of gratitude, (Emmons & Crumpler 2000, cited in Tsang 2006). One of the first in-depth studies into gratitude was done in the late 18 th century, finding it to be a basic and necessary emotion that promotes social stability by guiding people to respond to others' goodwill towards them, Smith 1790 cited in (McCullough 2004). Yet there has been a small number of psychological work done on gratitude, this could be attributed to the fact that psychological research has generally been dominated by a focus on vice rather than virtue. Gratitude, along with other phenomena related to the good life, has been neglected, (Myers & Diener 1995, cited in McCullough 2004). Since 2002 and the publication of McCullough's article on gratitude, this field of psychology has come more to the fore.
McCullough's article defined gratitude as an affective trait, that it is part of someone's personality, so this appears to be what the GQ-6 is measuring gratitude as. He stated that person's who were highly grateful, had a grateful disposition, a characteristic in people that others would recall about them easily. The grateful disposition was defined as a generalized tendency to recognize and respond with grateful emotion to the roles of other people's benevolence in the positive experiences and outcomes that one obtains, (McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). Affective traits, such as gratitude, lower one's threshold for experiencing certain emotional states, (Rosenberg 1998, cited in McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). The grateful disposition therefore creates a lowered threshold for recognizing and responding with gratitude. The grateful disposition may emerge from particular attributions regarding the causes of the positive outcome. When there is recognition of an positive outcome happiness occurs, which is attributed to an external source, so happiness is labelled as gratitude, (McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). McCullough hypothesised that dispositionally grateful people tend to attribute their positive outcomes in life to the effort of other people and that due to this disposition they experience high levels of positive affectivity and low levels of negative affectivity. What might distinguish grateful people is their ability to stretch their attributions to incorporate a wide range of people who contribute to their well being, (McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). This led McCullough to constructing the GQ-6 in order to measure the disposition towards gratitude.
Further research by Watkins supported McCullough's argument that gratitude was a disposition, but disagreed on the make up of the disposition. He developed another measure of dispositional gratitude devising the Gratitude, Resentment and Appreciation Test (GRAT), (Watkins 2003). This self-report measure conceptualized dispositional gratitude as a combination a four different characteristics. Firstly, acknowledging the importance of expressing and experiencing gratitude, secondly a lack of resentment with respect to benefits received. Thirdly, an appreciation for the contributions of others towards benefits received, lastly an appreciation for simple pleasures, (Watkins 2003). This led to them testing their own measure of gratitude, known as the GRAT.
Adler and Fagley offered an alternative definition, believing gratitude to be one aspect of the feeling of appreciation. They argued that being appreciative facilitates and enhances feelings of well being and life satisfaction, (Adler & Fagley 2005). Expressing appreciation to others is also believed to build social bonds, and is seen as something that can be learnt over time. Appreciating something involves noticing and acknowledging its value and meaning, then feeling a positive emotional connection to it. To test this definition they constructed the Appreciation Scale, which contained 8 sub scales which they saw to be the defining aspects that made up appreciation. These being, have focus, awe, present moment, self/social comparison, gratitude, loss/adversity and interpersonal, (Adler & Fagley 2005). Their definition of gratitude is that it is an acknowledgment of a benefit that has been received, from a person or a deity, feeling thankfulness for the efforts and sacrifices of an 'other'. It is a positive emotional reaction to someone or something that has bestowed a positive event upon us, (Adler & Fagley 2005).
Within our investigation we were interested in looking at the relationships between these three measures of gratitude. Examining whether these three measures are actually measuring the same concept, a similar concept or are they in fact measuring something completely different. We expect to find a correlation between the three measures as they are all intended to measure gratitude.
We set out to try and identify whether the three measures of gratitude were in fact measuring the same thing. Our findings showed that the three measures did have a fairly high correlation, suggesting that they are measuring a similar concept or phenomenon, but not the same thing and definitely not an identical concept. The GRAT correlated quite strongly with the Appreciation scale, r =0.681, p<0.01. The GQ-6 also had a relatively strong correlation with the Appreciation Scale, r =0.634, p<0.01. The GQ-6 and the GRAT also had a quite strong correlation, r =0.674, p<0.01, (see Table 2).The internal validity of all three measures is extremely high, coefficient alpha =0.959, (see Table 1). The three measures need examining further.
The fairly high correlation between the three measures (see Table 2) suggests they are a measuring a similar concept but not the same thing, the concept they are measuring is not identical. This high correlation can be related to their similar definitions of what gratitude is, they all agree on the disposition of gratitude but differ on what they see as the make-up of gratitude. The high internal validity of the three measures (see Table 1) also suggests they are measuring a similar concept as Cronbach's alpha measures how well a set of items measures one similar construct.
The high internal validity between the eight sub-scales of the Appreciation Scale suggests that they are measuring a similar concept. However the 'Self/Social' subscale had the lowest internal validity at, Cronbach's alpha =0.647 (see Table 1), this would suggest it is measuring something slightly different to the other seven sub scales. The inter-correlation between the sub scales was weak though (see Table 2), showing that they are measuring different ideas, questioning the need for a single score at the end. Each of the subscales on their own don't correlate highly with the GQ-6 and the GRAT, this shows that on their own each of the subscales are not measuring gratitude as defined by the GRAT and the GQ-6. 'Awe' and 'Gratitude' subscales you would expect to correlate highly, as the definition given for 'Awe' is that it is the appreciation of feeling a deep, emotional, spiritual, or transcendental connection to something, (Adler & Fageley 2005). This is similar to the definition of 'Gratitude' which states it as an emotional connection to something, an acknowledgement of a benefit received by a person or a diety, (Adler & Fagley 2005). Obviously their questions in these subscales have not been related well to the definitions they have given. The definition of 'Gratitude' is also similar to the definition given for the 'Interpersonal' subscale, which is defined as acknowledging and feeling positively towards people in our lives, (Adler & Fagley 2005). These similar definitions would suggest a strong correlation, however the correlation is in fact weak which would not be expected. Once again the questions have not been related well to the definitions. The 'Self/Social' subscale correlated at a low level as well, with the 'Gratitude' subscale which is defined as feeling positively about things in reaction to downward self or social comparisons. Once again there is some overlap in the two definitions. The 'Gratitude' subscale also unexpectedly had a low correlation with the GRAT total and the GQ-6 total, this is a major point of discussion. The GQ-6 defined gratitude as a disposition that involved a generalized tendency to recognize and respond with grateful emotion to the roles of other people's benevolence in the positive experiences and outcomes that one obtains, (McCullough, Emmons, Tsang, 2002). This is very similar to the definition of the 'Gratitude' subscale, as is the GRAT's definition of which also sees it as a disposition of appreciation (Watkins 2003). The questions are incredibly similar (see Appendix 1). This shows the Appreciation Scale's subscale of 'Gratitude' is measuring a different concept of gratitude to that of GQ-6 and the GRAT.
The internal validity of the GRAT subscales is high (see Table 1), showing that they are all measuring a similar concept or construct. The inter-correlation of the subscales is low (see Table 2), showing there are not measuring the same idea, meaning that there shouldn't be a single score at the end. The non significant correlation of the 'Sense of Abundance' subscale with the Appreciation Scales 'Self/Social' subscale was not expected. These two scales look at 'resentment' as being a part of gratitude, so the non-significant correlation suggests that 'resentment' is in fact not a part of gratitude, (Watkins 2003). This shows their subscale to be unconvincing and their overall definition of gratitude as questionable. Self Social also has the lowest correlations with the other two subscales, but yet the highest with the GRAT total. This puts doubt over the GRAT overall, as a measurement of gratitude. The correlation between the 'Appreciation of Others' subscale, and the Appreciation Scales 'Interpersonal' subscale was lower than expected. This is because the definition of 'Interpersonal' is stated as noticing, acknowledging and appreciating people in our lives, this definition could be summed up as 'Appreciation of Others', (Adler & Fagley 2005). Either their definition of 'Appreciation of Others' is wrong, or their questions have been badly phrased. The results overall put question over the GRAT as a reliable measure of gratitude.
The internal validity of the GQ-6 was the lowest of the three measures (see Table 1), however by definition Cronbach's alpha is affected by two different things. The correlation between items and the number of items, therefore the GQ-6 will appear lower. It was the most reliable of our measures, due to the previous research done, with a coefficient alpha of 0.82, this is not significantly different to our own alpha score.
The three measures of gratitude do correlate quite highly, which suggests they are measuring a similar concept. However it seems the measures are in fact measuring different concepts of gratitude, this could be explained by their disagreement over the make-up of gratitude not it's definition. Future research could be done by looking at re-defining the subscales to make sure the same concept of 'gratitude' is being measured. To conclude the GRAT and the Appreciation Scale seem to be unreliable measures of gratitude.