The once fashionable belief that class analysis provides the key to history has increasingly come under attack. For many, both inside and outside of the Academy, class is no longer a viable way of looking at the world and examining history; it has become part of history itself. Jan Pakulski and Malcolm Waters assert that 'like beads and Che Guevera berets, class is pass', and they dedicate their work to 'confirm the good news that class has collapsed'. This paper examines the reasons behind the 'death of class' contention and offers an opinion on whether they are valid.
Karl Marx's name is synonymous with the concept of class. He states that men were always constituted by the antagonistic class relations into whom they are cast 'and the history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles'. This assertion was seen to not only have a capacity to unmask the structure of capitalist power, particularly in its inequitable and exploitative guises, but also to change the political terrain irrevocably. However, it is significant to note that he gives class no precise definition. Using his work, later Marxists developed what they saw as a duality to class. In an 'objective' sense, they spoke of a class 'in itself', which was no more than a form of collective identity. This grouped people together by their shared economic characteristics, principally in their relationship to the means of production. In a 'subjective' sense, there was a class 'for itself', which describes the process by which these aggregates become politically and consciously transformed, aware of themselves as a class. Others later took up the torch. Led by E P Thompson, the British Marxist historians present a history of class 'from the bottom up'. Thompson attacked the tendency of historians to see class as merely a structure or category and in doing so 'obscure the agency of the working people'. He began to recognise the prima facie relevance to other emerging social identities, such as feminism, thereby relinquishing Marx's economic 'determination in the last instance'. Despite this, to the Marxist, class remains primarily the anvil on which history was formed.
We now turn to the factors that, in some eyes, have made class irrelevant to historical analysis, starting with Postmodernism. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, defeat of organised labour, the fall of great Victorian staple industries, redundancy of Trade Unions and recrudescence of the New Right, scholars began to rethink the meaning of past verities. These changing dimensions had struck a fatal blow to the class politics of the Left, confirmed in the Thatcher electoral victories in 1979, 1983 and 1987. To Postmodernists, even the Miners' strike of the 1980s has more to do with the effect on community life, rather than traditional direct class struggle. Whereas for Marx, class was the essence of history, for the Thatcherite New Right, class was its perversion and they sought a 'classless society'. Postmodernists claim that the world today is no more than a global triumph of free market economies and pluralistic democracies, thereby bringing the old metanarratives, such as class, to their knees. Indeed, J F Lyotard opined that class had been 'blurred to the point of losing all radicality'. However, the license for the blanket repudiation of class on these grounds is weak.
Firstly, Postmodernist theory misses the continued critical relevance of class to the events it describes. Class can be used to explain the collapse of the USSR. The New Right traditionally sees this as a triumphant consequence of transnational capitalism and an overburdening system of military expenditure. The corruption, bureaucratisation and nepotism of the Soviet ruling class, particularly in the excesses of the Brezhnev era, ensured the continued oppression and alienation of workers. Against Postmodernist critiques, this alienation of labour and the consequent role of the masses in overthrowing the system suggest the continued viability of class. Secondly, although recognising the New Right's desire to drive class off the agenda - Thatcher called it a 'communist concept' - they remained sensitive to its continued power. The New Right was simply adept at disguising the language of class within the ideological cover of national security, jingoism and honour. Furthermore, the Postmodernist concept of a 'classless society' inherent in the language of the New Right is misleading. The New Right used the term not to describe a society without class but as the goal of a meritocratic society providing opportunity for people to advance regardless of class. Thus, the New Right is in fact reinforcing the existence of classes that it has only linguistically abolished. Finally, the Postmodernist charge rests on a haphazard assumption that the world is totally equitable under conditions of market capitalism. However, in its latest manifestation, capitalism continues to distribute inequitably its product. There is a clustering of power in the hands of a small homogenous elite, whilst the people of the Third World increasingly live in conditions of chronic penury. Therefore, we need a class element, in order to explain the negative outcomes of capitalism's distributive rationalism.
The USSR collapse is seen by many as the fundamental nail in the coffin of Marxist class theories. Joyce believes that any mention of class automatically locks us into a set of discourses belonging only to discredited Stalinists and a failed socialist project. Class for Joyce is made solely of Soviet clay. This is indicative of a post-communist age, where all forms of socialism and class have been brought into question, and tarred with the same brush. However, class has long been pluralistic in form, and attacking only the most discredited type of class is only 'scoring easy polemical points'. Indeed, advocates of this approach are mounting simply an ideological, rather than empirically justifiable, charge. Although recognising that orthodox Marxist class theory, and socialism as the telos of history, does look a little dated, class is more fluid than this attack would have us believe.
Linked to the Postmodernist agenda, class has also come under scrutiny from political historians, such as Frank Parkin. They claim that Marx's triadic society of classes, particularly the two 'great hostile camps' of proletariat and bourgeoisie, outlined in the Communist Manifesto, were historically over-simplified abstractions and it is impossible to locate precisely the politically relevant line of cleavage. This argument has gained momentum in the light of recent political claims that 'we are all middle class'. The working class, severed from the symbolism of old labour movements and increasingly a white-collar composite, has been absorbed into the middle class. This is emblematic in John Prescott's opinion that he is 'anything else than middle class now' despite a working class background. However, in spite of this, class remains a valuable dividing line. Firstly, concentration on headline reductive aspects represents a perverted reading of Marxist class theory. In the Eighteenth Brumaire, Marx recognised the existence of other classes but simply felt that 'of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today, the proletariat alone is the really revolutionary class'. Secondly, it is possible to locate lines of cleavage in modern social structures, even if it means abandoning previous Marxist reductive forms. For example, the emergence of a new Super-Class, born in the financial world of London, and a new underclass, living in a permanent state of dependence, are indicative of a reconfigured class structure. Although it is arguably harder to identify, class remains a useful measurement of social hierarchies.
Proponents of the 'linguistic turn' have also taken up the cacophony of voices declaring the redundancy of class. Born in the theoretical implosions of post-structuralism, language is deemed the foundation of all human activity, exemplified in Levi Strauss's claim 'if you solve the problem...of language, we can explain the rest'. Disciples of this school argue that historians cannot study the vexed relations between capital and labour because it was the language that people employed that provided the essential source of their identity. Class becomes no more than a simple rhetorical construction, still less a genuine motor of change. Gareth Steedman Jones provides the seminal work. He argued that social movements, such as Chartism, could be constituted on ideological and political planes, autonomous from Marxist economic conditions, and irrespective of class connections between them. Chartism spoke a language of class, which owed less to material underpinnings of class than it did to a vision of political evils of capitalist power, which would have predated class-consciousness. By stressing the political content of Chartism, emblematic in the language of parasitism and oppression, he forces us to consider the non-class character of popular radicalism. However, he abandons class at a considerable cost and, indeed, he concludes that his model leads to 'an unconvincing idealism'. He underplays the class nature of Chartism, ignoring the class antagonism at the level of production, and views the position of the state with rose tinted glasses in which the glare of reform obscures undercurrents of coercion and economic controls. If class is to be sacrificed on the altar, it cannot be done with such an idealised reading of discourse.
We must now discuss the impact of race and gender on class. The new social movements have argued that the class preoccupation with the realm of production, held up as its mark of theoretical rigour, downplays the salience of race and gender as categories of historical analysis. Where Marx would argue that ethnic groups are no more than 'national left overs', and it is the material changes in production that explain ethnicity, champions of race and gender analysis have begun to opine that class is a stultifying straight jacket, obscuring other lines of cleavage. Voices emanating from women's history, for example, claim that few women appear in the canonical texts of class and therefore this argues that class analysis should be abandoned, because it takes into account only half of possible historical actors. Although sympathetic to this debate, it is wrong to reject class unconditionally. Instead of bifurcating class, race and gender, historians need to recognise that they are integrated at a conceptual level. Certainly, industrial reconstructing of class relations in Britain resonated in the social and racial engineering of empire. The British exported the vocabulary of class to describe Africans as the same as the lower classes in Britain - 'the residuum'. Race is thus also about class. Furthermore, recent gender studies have shown that working class women never see themselves as just women. Class for many working class women has become a ' hidden injury of class', because they see class inferiority as a sign of personal failure. Ergo, they do not speak of class in the traditional sense - 'I am working class'. Class is thus not just about representation, 'a subject position which can be taken off a discursive shelf and worn at will', but is lived at an intimate level of feeling, inherently bound with gendered identity. Gender is thus also about class. So where does this leave us? Arguably, we should take the Weberian line. Class is neither the sole nor historically universal principle of social structure. Class is best seen as part of a complex interplay with other aspects of social structure such as race and gender
It is now necessary to examine the impact of consumption patterns on class. It can be opined that humans today are defined not by their relationship to the means of production but by the goods that they purchase in a world of increasing material fetishism. Consumption, therefore, becomes an independent dimension of social stratification and distinction. With humans self-consciously measuring themselves under the slogan, 'I am what I buy' rather than ' I am what I work', class is apparently consigned to the rubbish bin of history. This can potentially upset not only sociological thinking on today's society but also ways in which historians have understood social groups in the past. In his portrait of common Parisian life before 1789, Daniel Roche shows a wider world of rich materialism, thereby suggesting a possible review of the pre-Revolutionary social categorisation dynamics that led to the regime change. However, consumption remains inherently joined to the hip of class. For example, the nouveaux riches cannot necessarily look for a concomitant entry into the traditional halls of upper class society. This may be for 'snobbery' reasons (the 'my mother would not invite yours home for tea' adage) or through failure to adopt the values of their new class, as expressed in Marx's idea of 'false consciousness'.
The final part of this paper examines the social fabric of modern Britain, to see whether, despite the emergent views to the contrary, class in reality is still an historical tool that cannot be ignored. In contrast to Marx, who argues that classes serve to distribute power in society, Foucault opines that realities are constructed by discourse and there are no 'real' classes with 'real' interests. However, to proclaim the obsolescence of class on Foucaultian lines is fundamentally flawed, in the face of the evidence of continuing relevance of class in the country. The retired Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Carey, lamented 'we are still a class-ridden society'. This is also the image shared by foreigners. A survey by the Independent on 10 November 2000 offered that 75 per cent of foreigners said Britain showed marked class distinctions. We must give a few examples of why this is seen to be the case. Britain's education system bears the hallmarks of class inequality. Meritocracy in education is the creed of the elite, and the public schools still serve a predominantly professional clientele and the higher levels of the armed forces. The Education Minister, Alan Johnson, recently bemoaned an 'obscene social class gap' in British Universities, arguing that 'we need to get rid of the rope ladder and build a substantial staircase', in order to allow working class children to attend higher-achieving Universities. The data supports this, as exemplified by recent figures from Cambridge University showing that around half of its students are still from private fee paying schools. The existence of the monarchy and hereditary titles still provides a noticeable statement on Britain's 'ancien regime' structure, suggesting a continuation of inherent influence and privilege. Despite equality advances in recent years, it is difficult to perceive the honour system as essentially other than remaining harnessed to class rather than achievement, with the lowest level, the MBE, being the common award for the masses. Culture too betrays George Orwell's 'most class ridden country under the sun'. BBC Radio 4, and its 'thought for the day', remains the house station for the professional classes and 'good country stock' exclusivity. The television programmes we watch, for example the 'Bucket' family - no that's 'Bouquet' - in 'Keeping Up Appearances', contain clear class patterns. Thus all aspects of daily life provide a constant testament to the endurance of Britain's class structure. Class is not only about discourse and language; there is reality as well as representation.
To conclude, despite a climate in which the old metanarratives are seen as intellectually bankrupt and it is claimed that social identities are created by discourse, class remains of fundamental importance. Underpinning the debates is a constant and perhaps non-solvable epistemological problem - what is class? Much of the critique proclaiming the 'death of class' has only focused on its more Marxist reductive definitions and inability to look beyond the economic world. Although, no longer holding the master key to unlocking the entire historical process as seasoned Marxists would assert, class retains an analytical purchase in examining social structures, hierarchies and collective groupings, particularly when used in conjunction with race and gender, in an inter-linked 'Holy Trinity'. Furthermore, class is not just an esoteric occupation, consumed in the world of theory, but has a reality on the streets of modern Britain. To believe that class is not 'real' is only a prerogative of those unaffected by its inherent exclusions and prejudices.
Ultimately, this is not the eschatological end for class as an operative word, and there is certainly no need to find a new theoretical terra firma to replace it. It is simply a matter of recognising a suitable resting-place for it between the economic reductionism of Marxist historians and the nihilistic and subjective world of Postmodernism and linguistics.