The two men I will be discussing are Aristotle ( 384 - 322 BC) and John Locke ( 1632 - 1704 AD). They were both Empiricists, so they believed that knowledge is gained through experience and formulated their ideas from observation. Great thinkers before them influenced them both, yet both constructed new and refreshing ideas on old beliefs and concepts. Many of these beliefs and ideas they both share are very similar yet there are some distinct differences in they way think. The main similarity is their focus on sensation being the basis for all knowledge. Yet Aristotle furthered this thought by proposing the 'active intellect', suggesting the mind is indeed divine and immortal. Whereas Locke believed cognition began solely with sensation.
Aristotle was a true empiricist, gaining all his knowledge from observation; he had no time for the use of experimentation. However he did combine this use of observation with careful reflection and reasoning. When discussing Aristotle it is important to mention that he was the pupil of Plato, which must be considered as a historical and intellectual influence upon his beliefs and ideas. Yet his philosophical position was at odds with his masters. This difference lay in the precise nature of the 'forms' and their relation to the empirical world. For Aristotle true reality was the perceptible world of concrete objects, not a world of eternal ideas that were imperceptible. This was similar to Locke's view that the human idea of objects and what they resembled where actually incorrect, as there was no guarantee that the human idea of an object genuinely resembled what it was supposed to. So whilst the two views are in a way similar Locke puts doubt towards the human perception of concrete objects. There are according to Locke, three factors involved in the process of human knowledge. Firstly the mind, then the physical, or in the term of Aristotle, the concrete object. Finally, the perception or idea in the mind that represents that object. For Locke, man only directly knows the idea, not the object, he only gains knowledge of the object through the idea. Outside of man's perception is simply a world of substances in motion.
For Aristotle, Plato's theory of Ideas was both empirically unverifiable and full of logical difficulties. Aristotle saw that Plato's confusion lay in the treatment of a quality as a substance. Aristotle instead developed categories, in which the substance is the primary reality and the qualities are an abstraction of the substance. Richard Tarnas uses the example of a tall, white horse to attempt to explain this theory. The horse is the substance, while the quality is the whiteness and the quantity is how tall the horse is. Tarnas (1991). Apart from the substance everything else exists in that it is relative to an individual substance. Aristotle placed a large emphasis on the substance, as in his view they underline everything. If substances did not exist then nothing would exist. The real world consists of distinct and individual substances. A substance is not simply a unit of matter, but is an intelligible structure surrounded in matter. It is matter and form, which are the specific composition of these substances. Every substance is composed of that which is changed, the matter, and that into which it is changed, the form. As we have seen, for Locke the substance, which makes up the object is only a human idea. There is no guarantee that this idea is true to what the object is supposed to represent. Locke went further than Aristotle in that he made a distinction between primary and secondary qualities. Primary qualities consisted of objects that were measurable. Whilst secondary qualities were subjective to the human experience of those objects. They were simply consequences of the subject's perception. Locke felt by focusing on the measurable (primary) qualities, that science could gain a reliable knowledge of the material world.
The similarity between Aristotle and Locke were that in both being empiricists they believed knowledge was gained through sensation. Locke affirmed the foundational principle of empiricism and lay down the foundations of the 'Enlightenment', in stating "there is nothing in intellect that was not previously in the senses". Believing "all knowledge of the world must rest finally on man's sensory impressions or ideas". Aristotle held a similar belief to this believing that the human understanding of the world begins in sense perception. Therefore we require the powers of sensation to be aware of objects, these substances consisting of form and matter, and are able to distinguish between them. They both share a very clear idea that experience writes upon the mind as if it is a blank slate, before sensory experience the human mind is clear. For Aristotle it was man's reason that allows sense experience to be the basis for useful knowledge. Concerning reason though, Locke's form of empiricism limited human reason's capacity for knowledge to that of which could be tested by concrete experience. Reason was not a strong enough basis for Locke to base the understanding of experience upon.
Aristotle it seems regarded the mind not only as that which is activated by sensory experience, but also as something that is eternally active, and divine and immortal. This is an idea that Locke does not share, he believed that sensory experience and that alone was the ultimate source of knowledge. His time of writing though may have affected his view, as he wrote during the start of the Enlightenment. The idea of the mind being divine and immortal would not have been accepted in a very structured and logical time of thinking. In Aristotle's view to gain the universal knowledge that was necessary, it had to be through another cognitive faculty, the active intellect. This cognitive faculty actualises the human mind's potential knowledge of forms. Providing man with the fundamental principles that make possible certain rational knowledge.
Unlike Locke Aristotle lived in a time were myths and the stories of the Greek God's were widely believed and he would have a lot more freedom within his imagination. Meaning he could propose the 'active intellect' and also his theories on the human soul. He had a very sophisticated view of the soul believing it was the essence of the body. An individual soul might cease to exist with death as the soul is joined to the physical body it animates. It is the form of the body just as the body is the matter of the soul.
Aristotle combined his ideas of form and structure and how they help man view the world in showing how he believed cognition worked. When the mind receives the form of a substance into itself cognition takes place. This is even though in the world this form never existed apart from its embodiment of matter. When reality possess a structure cognition is possible. With an empirical approach to the world it can be organized according to forms and categories. Aristotle's view of the physical world was achieved through its empirically observable patterns and processes. Stating if a form is not incorporated into a substance then it does not exist, as a form possesses no independent existence.
Locke and Aristotle wrote in two extremely different periods and were influenced by different people. Locke is referred to by Richard Tarnas as 'Newton's contempary and Bacon's heir'. Tarnas (1991). Men such as Harvey, Boyle and Newton influenced him. He read Descartes sharing his view that God's existence was logically demonstrable from self-evident intuitions. His time of writing was also in the Enlightenment and before the birth of Romanticism, so therefore his ideas are bound to be logical and not influenced by ideas of the divine and immortal such as Aristotle's. Influencing him to argue such ideas as that Cartesian certainty was unobtainable. Aristotle's time of writing was much different although he was not a pioneer. He built upon the framework of ideas from men such as his master Plato. The early foundations of science had already been established, the Ionian philosophies on matter and the Platonic philosophies of form and mathematics. Aristotle simply placed more emphasis on the value of observation and classification within the framework formed by Plato. Aristotle considered both the Ionian and Platonic views and from it was able to get a fuller understanding of the world.
To conclude Aristotle and Locke were quite similar in their beliefs and ideas. They placed large emphasis on gaining knowledge through observation seeing the mind as a blank slate upon which experience writes. Yet Aristotle wrote in a period in which he could share much more liberty with his ideas than Locke was able to. Therefore they differ with their views on the divine and immortal, Locke would not be able to accept Aristotle's ideas such as the 'active intellect'. For him sensory experience was the ultimate source of knowledge.