The question of whether or not there is a general factor in intelligence, or g, has been a massive debate in psychology and the answer has important implications for society and psychology. Spearman (1904, cited in Deary 2001) first described g after finding several different mental abilities were positively correlated, and inferred from this that there was some underlying general factor that was influencing different abilities. This theory has been taken and developed in various ways by different psychologists over the past 100 years, but this approach has not been without it's dissenters, and there has been significant opposition, for example by Gardner's (1993) claim of multiple intelligences. Rather than being dismissed, these detractors should be answered, and unfortunately this has not always happened in this debate.
The case for a theory of general intelligence can be supported by research and theories from many areas of psychology. Firstly, there is the evidence from psychometric testing, and basic level cognitive task studies such as reaction time. Then there is mounting evidence from biological psychology, with suggestions of brain structures that might be the biological basis of g. Research in the 'real world' has also found evidence for the predictive power of g as a determinant of success in diverse contexts. Finally there is even support, recently, from evolutionary psychology. This essay will take each of these in turn to construct a case for g.
The positive manifold that Spearman (1904, cited in Deary, 2001) reported is one of the most repeated findings in psychology (Morley, personal communication). Jensen (1998) claims that now the evidence for this phenomenon has built up to the stage where it is completely irrefutable, and this also seems to be the mainstream opinion held by (most) psychologists specialising in the study of intelligence (Gottfredson, 1997). It is worth seeing what this view is based on, as this phenomenon itself provided the impetus for a lot of theories proposing a general factor in intelligence. By using a statistical procedure known as factor analysis, Spearman determined that one factor, labeled  g, was responsible for a lot of the variation between abilities measured by a range of tests purported to be testing aspects of intelligence. The fact that every test score correlated positively with every test score meant for Spearman that there must be some underlying factor causing this pattern. Critics have claimed that these correlations are a result of a statistical artifact, or that they appear because the tests actually measure similar things (Gardner, 1993), but the research now overwhelmingly shows that over a wide range of tests, done on different people in different cultures at different times, the positive manifold bears true (Carroll, 1993, cited in Deary, 2001). The fact that cognitive abilities are reliably positively correlated to each other gives a lot of weight to a model of intelligence with a general factor in it, as there is no other satisfactory way to explain this.
However contrary to Spearman's (1904, cited in Deary, 2001) model of one general factor and then many specific factors, the data suggests that there are also group factors, linking in for instance verbal abilities together as they inter-correlate even more than the other factors do (Carroll, 1993, cited in Deary, 2001). Therefore we need a model with three layers; g, group factors, and specific factors (Carroll 1993, cited in Deary, 2001), as this accounts for the data from psychometric tests in the best way.
In searching for an explanation of g, psychologists have examined the relationship between some basic cognitive functions and IQ (used as an indicator of g). These basic tasks have included reaction time tests, where a correlation of .49 for a reaction time test with an element of choice was found (Deary et al., 2001, cited in Chabris, 2006). Inspection time, a measure of the speed of visual processing, was also found to be correlated to IQ, at .51 (Grudnik & Kranzler, 2001, cited in Chabris, 2006). These tests are both very simple tasks, and both have been found to correlate to g, leading to suggestions that g is either a function of or related to information processing speed, and this does seem to be at least part of the picture (Deary, 2001).
Biological psychology has waded into the debate with suggestions of a neural basis of the individual differences found in g. Shaw and colleagues (2006) conducted a longitudinal study investigating the pattern of growth of the cortex through development, and found a characteristic pattern for the children that had the highest IQs. This group's cortexes started out thinner, rapidly thickening and overtaking the others in the early teens, before reaching around the same level at about 19 years old. The cortex is involved with higher processes such as memory, and specifically the pre-frontal cortex, which showed the most difference in development patterns, controls planning and reasoning (Shaw et al., 2006). Thompson and colleagues (2001, cited in Chabris, 2006) also found a correlation of .41 between frontal lobe volume and IQ (controlling for whole brain volume). This cannot be interpreted as a definite causal link, as there may be a third factor which mediates both of these, however it does appear that the cortex is involved in some way in bringing about the individual differences in g, and this kind of research providing evidence of a physical basis for g gives more credibility than a model based just on the analysis of multiple test scores.
Theories and models of general intelligence wouldn't be of much consequence if there was no evidence that g has some kind of relationship to the success that we experience (or not) in our real lives. Thankfully there is a lot of evidence that general intelligence predicts not only academic but also occupational, social and economic outcomes (Gottfredson, 1997). We can deduct that g is the causal factor here because it is measured before starting a job, and the higher the g the better the performance in the job (Gottfredson, 2002).
Evolutionary psychology was traditionally better suited to be aligned to a multiple intelligences approach, as a fundamental assumption it makes is that humans have evolved different independent 'modules' - parts of the brain designed to fulfill a certain needed function - to solve the problems that our ancestors faced (Cosmides & Tooby, 2002, cited in Kanazawa, 2004). This was a problem as general intelligence was theorised to a large extent to be hereditary (Deary, 2001), which means it would have needed to be evolved. However, recently a new theory has emerged that allows general intelligence and evolutionary psychology to coexist and even lend themselves to each other. Kanazawa (2004) has overcome the contradiction by suggesting that general intelligence actually forms just one evolved module, that to our ancestors was the advantageous ability respond to evolutionarily novel situations or problems. He postulates that 'on the savanna', humans mostly faced problems that were constantly occurring throughout the generations, and so solutions were evolved - these are things like knowing which kind of fruit will taste good, which insects should be avoided etc. We generally don't have to learn these kinds of things as we know them implicitly, and they are also not included in most models of general intelligence. However, humans would have also sporadically faced novel situations, and an ability to respond effectively would have been an advantage that would lead to its refinement via evolution (Kanazawa, 2004). The importance of this is that it is a flexible kind of intelligence, and now that humans have become so efficient at controlling our environment that from an evolutionary perspective it is almost entirely novel, this module has become extremely important and has become the general intelligence that we know today as ubiquitous (Kanazawa, 2004).
This provides general intelligence with a feasible evolutionary origin, and there is also evidence to support this theory, which by extension states that the kinds of abilities needed to overcome the problems our ancestors faced will show little individual differences, whilst abilities to solve 'new' problems will show individual differences. Cosmides and Tooby (2002, cited in Kanazawa, 2004) found that on the Wason selection task there were great individual differences in performances when the problem was in an abstract context, as it then relies on g. However when the same task was changed logically so that it became one of finding social cheaters, everyone became good at it and there were very little differences between individuals, because, the theory goes, our ancestors had to be good at identifying social cheaters.
There is support for the theory of general intelligence from varied perspectives, but it does have its weaknesses. The psychometric data that it is based on can be said to be narrow in scope, as the tests are typically done in a 1:1 situation, so that very few tests can be measuring the ability to cooperate and work with others to find a solution to a problem (Gardner et al., 1993). This results in a limited view of intelligence that fails to consider distributed intelligence, which could be damage its ecological validity, as in practice most of the time we do have other people and resources to call on for help - however perhaps this is purposeful - it could be only trying to explain intelligence at an individual level.
In Chabris' (2006) overview of cognitive and neurobiological measures, he concludes that there is a wide range of variables from brain size to reaction time that correlate with IQ from .3 to .5. This is at once a weakness and a strength of the general intelligence model, because while it means it is hard to pin down g, it also makes the model irresistible as it is impossible to ignore all these signs saying that it is not a product of the mode of testing or any cultural artifact, rather g is real and it exists with a biological basis in our heads.
Kanazawa's (2004) explanation of the evolutionary origins of general intelligence is attractive for its simplicity and ability to solve a contradiction without making significant changes to any theories, however as with many evolutionary psychological theories it is simplistic and is based on little hard empirical evidence. Also, it runs contrary to the wealth of data reported by Chabris (2006) which shows that g is linked to many different aspects of the brain's anatomy, and is linked to many very basic abilities too. Kanazawa's modular model needs to be refined, but he still succeeded in showing that evolutionary psychology and general intelligence are not necessarily opposed, and the idea of g becoming more significant as humans lived in less and less natural habitats may prove to be a good one.
Overall, general intelligence has built up enough empirical data supporting it to suggest that we should focus on this instead of other models of intelligence. The theories and approaches now supporting general intelligence come from many areas of psychology, and this can only help to refine this model and fill in the holes in our knowledge, of which there are many.
Another final weakness of the general intelligence model is that it is prone to be a victim of its own success. Because general intelligence is an exciting and powerful theory, it is important to understand its limitations and only apply it as much as is warranted, despite temptations to over-apply it. General intelligence is a very good predictor of various societal outcomes, however it is only useful at a broad level as there will always be many exceptions to any patterns. We should focus on learning more about the factors that make up each individual's intelligence profile before making damaging generalisations. We should also avoid putting g up on a pedestal, it is one of several things that can be used to predict performance in many spheres, including common sense, creativity, wisdom, people skills and motivation (Chabris, 2006; Deary, 2001).