The importance of our evolutionary past in determining who we are has risen in prominence in recent years (Archer 2001), and most agree that a recognition of evolution's importance is necessary. However Archer makes a very ambitious claim in saying that evolutionary psychology provides a single unifying starting point for understanding why we think and behave as we do, which is characteristic of the boldness of the advocates of this approach. What Archer means by this statement is that psychological research and theory should stem from an understanding that humans are products of natural selection and nothing else, hence hypotheses should be based on principles of evolution and tested to reveal what psychological adaptations are present in humans and how these influence our behaviour. This view is very contentious and there are many critics who pick holes in evolutionary psychology's arguments and claim that this kind of stance ignores the complexity of culture and thus cannot explain a plethora of culturally influenced behaviours.
Cosmides and Tooby (1997) describe evolutionary psychology as a 'way of thinking about psychology that can be applied to any topic', and are attempting to replace conventional psychological thought with what they believe is a superior approach. They claim that humans suffer from 'instinct blindness' - where we don't realise the power that our instincts are having on our behaviour and thought processes - but they claim that evolutionary psychology provide insights into this. A key tenant of their approach is the belief that not just our bodies, but also our neural circuits have emerged by natural selection to cope with problems that our ancestors faced. They think that these mental processes are organised into modules, with each module serving a different function. Flexibility of human thought is explained by stating that it is made possible as a by-product of the large number of evolved specialised circuits (Cosmides & Tooby 1997). An important part of their theory is that because, they say, evolution is a slow and gradual process, there has not been any time for humans to evolve since the Pleistocene, meaning that the neural circuits that you and I have are suited to the kinds of problems that our ancestors faced on the African savannahs and not in the concrete jungle that we live in today. They say that adaptations can be discovered by thinking about what kinds of problems our ancestors faced, how they might have been solved by natural selection, and then by checking empirically to see if any adaptations can be revealed that fit into the model. This method has been used to suggest an evolutionary basis for sexual attractiveness based on body symmetry (Archer 2001) and on the appearance of the face according to hormones changing (Smith 2005 cited in Vince 2005), and mate guarding (Buss 2001).
Rose and Rose (2001) argue that evolutionary psychology's assumption that humans have not evolved since the Pleistocene may be flawed, as there is evidence that some animals have evolved in remarkably short time-frames. If true this could strike quite a fundamental blow to evolutionary psychologies theories about us having neural networks that were developed for use in a very different age and environment than the one we live in today. They also make the important criticism that evolutionary psychology ignores culture, however this is be countered by the claim that humans have gained the capacity for culture through evolution, so studying evolutionary processes should teach us about culture (Cosmines & Tooby 1997). However this is unsatisfactory, as Gould (2001) points out that cultural change is directional and rapid, and happens through joining of different cultural lineages which is very different to evolution. History's unpredictableness must also be taken into account meaning that not everything can be explained by evolution, we need to incorporate other avenues of research.
Smith (2001) criticises evolutionary psychology's reliance on the computational model of the mind, which has now largely been superseeded by the connectionist model. Smith also makes the important point that the process of reverse engineering adaptations is extremely flawed as we have no good way of knowing what the environment our ancestors evolved in was like. Another criticism of evolutionary psychology's simplistic theorising about the conditions in which our ancestors were evolving comes from design systems theory (Oyama et al 2001) which states that organisms do not simply encounter problems in their environment and develop adaptations - as advocates of evolutionary psychology would have you believe, but rather evolution is co-constructed by the interaction between the organism and it's environment, particularly in the case of humans who took control over nature in a more significant way than other animals. Therefore there is no easy way to guess or work out the conditions our ancestors met and therefore we cannot hypothesise about the kinds of adaptations that might have arisen, which is a massive blow for evolutionary psychologists.
It is clear that evolutionary psychology has a lot of problems, and particularly comes unstuck when it tries to explain anything specific that isn't directly biological. The fact that there may have been evolutionary progress between the Pleistocene and now needs to be addressed, in fact evolution is a process with no end bar complete extinction so it is not useful to talk about evolution having happened or not happened, rather the pertinent issue is how much change there has been. The point that we ought not to merely speculate about the conditions in which our ancestors were evolving is also important. However despite these weaknesses evolutionary psychology can be robust enough to make an important contribution, especially if it doesn't stray out of it's depth into the murky cultural waters. Archer's (2001) model of hypothesis generation is important and does come up with viable research in areas that conventional approaches wouldn't, such as research revealing differential mate guarding with different genders (Buss 2001). To make a strong case that such a phenomenon is due to evolutionary processes, it should be a case where there are no obvious societal or cultural explanations for the behaviour - as in Thornhill and Palmer's (2000) explanation of rape which ignored viable societal explanations (cited in Rose & Rose 2001), it should be shown to be universal across different cultures and if applicable it should be shown to be innate by providing evidence that babies also have the mechanism that drives the behaviour.
Although many psychological phenomenon are too much located in the cultural realm to be studied from an evolutionary perspective effectively, evolutionary psychology does have an important part to play in explaining the actual mechanisms that have evolved to allow us to learn and use culture. Culture does not grow on a blank slate, rather it acts on a base, and biases laid down by evolution - we are clearly programmed to learn it, and we do have certain instincts in place, for instance the drive to have sex, even though culture can have a big influence on the expression of that, for instance suppressing it completely in nuns. It would be interesting and useful if evolutionary psychologists, instead of going hell-bent for a radical approach to psychology at the expense of good science, instead examined carefully the evolved ability to acquire culture, and cultural psychology can then explain how this potential is realised into a psychological system (Kitayama 2004, cited in Snibbe 2004). Also evolutionary psychologists could search for any adaptations that we actually have evolved, and how much the environment can effect it's ontogenetic development.
Evolutionary psychology cannot provide a single unifying starting point for psychology, as we inherit not only our genes produced by evolution but also our culture and history that were created by societal processes mostly so complex that evolutionary theory has little relevance to them (Rose & Rose 2001). However it has a very important part to play in an integrated approach of evolutionary principles and cultural psychology where each compliment each other.