Terrorism is a very social phenomenon. Despite suggestions in the media to the contrary, terrorists and suicide bombers actually do not show any signs of psychopathology (Silke 2001; Crewshaw 2000). Therefore, it is the job of social psychology to explain the processes that lead an otherwise normal person to join a terrorist group and commit an act of terrorism. Also, the impact of terrorism is greater than the sum of the lives it takes and the people it maims - it has a huge effect on the people in the wider community that perceive they have been attacked. The processes that influence the impact of the terrorism also need to be explained. If we have sufficient understanding we can use it to inform policies that will bring a reduction in incidences of terrorism and the negative effects it has on people in the attacked community. However psychologists such as Silke (2001) have criticised psychology's response to the challenge of studying terrorism, describing it as limited, patchy and of dubious quality.
Social psychologists in the west have traditionally been more interested in milder forms of intergroup conflict, for instance looking at why people prefer their own group, and hold negative stereotypes about out-group members, and have studied these phenomenon in a scaled down way (Argyle 1992). Added to this is the fact that the london bombers were all born in England, and even some of the 9/11 highjackers had lived in America for upwards of 7 years (Post 2005), meaning that it isn't clear which should be the in-group and which the out-group. Despite these drawbacks, are there any parts of research on prejudice and intergroup relations that might help us understand terrorists?
Tajfel and his associates' (1971, cited in Hogg & Vaughn) minimal group study may show how people can come to percieve themselves as a member of a group that they don't know a lot about, and how this can cause them to exhibit discriminatory behaviour, which could be said relates to the kind of terrorists the London attacks. However in the real world people aren't told which groups they or other people belong to, rather they construct this for themselves, and also giving people slightly more or less money in an experiment is a million miles away from blowing up the people that you perceive to be in your out group.
Margolin (1977, cited in Hudson 1999) claimed that terrorism is a response to the frustration of various political, economic and personal needs and goals, drawing on the original frustration-aggression hypothesis of Dollard et al (1939, cited in Hogg & Vaughn 2002). To apply this to the London bombers, we need to assume that they were frustrated vicariously as a result of the perception of their in-group's frustration in the middle east. Berkowitz's (1962, cited in Hogg & Vaughn 2002) refinement of frustration-aggression theory brought in situational cues, which might apply to the London bombers as there are plenty of role-model terrorists from which to take their cue from. However frustration-aggression theory states that aggression is just a dissipation of aroused energy, often taken out on a weaker scape-goat. Terrorists do hit soft targets, but it is obvious that this is not a random dissipation of aroused energy, rather it being a carefully planned strategy attacking symbolic and psychologically effective targets such as the world trade centre and the public transport system (Marsden & Attia 2005).
Tajfel and Turner (1986, cited in Fisher 1998) developed social identity theory, stating that in order to maintain a positive self-concept people construct positive evaluations of their own group in comparison to out-groups, which leads to ethnocentrism and related biases. This may be good at explaining some aspects of intergroup conflict but it is hard to see how it would be more than a very small part of the explanation for something as severe as terrorism.
Brown (1988) stated that when people become a member of a group, they change the way in which they see themselves, because group membership is one of the most important things by which we judge people. This could be vital in understanding the development of a fairly normal person to a willing terrorist once they are established within a terrorist group. Aronson and Mills (1959, cited in Brown 1988) drew on Festinger's cognitive dissonance theory to claim that the more severe an initiation to a group, the higher the members' evaluations of that group are after joining. This could apply to people who join groups and are required to change their behaviour and sacrifice certain things in the name of religion, causing them to think more highly of the group and thus binding them closer to the group.
The traditional theories have trouble providing satisfactory explanations for terrorism, this is due to a focus on milder forms of conflict and the difficulty of studying the psychology of terrorists using the experimental paradigms that are popular with social psychologists. However the topics of study of psychology, and especially social psychology, are heavily influenced by the societal context and historical events, and as such since the events of 9/11 we are starting to see an increase in research dealing with terrorism specifically.
Silke (2001) claims that the first impetus for joining a terrorist group can be, if in a condition of feeling that you belong to a beleagured group, experiencing an act of violence to one of your group. In the terrorists case, there is plenty of opportunity for them to see attacks on muslims in the media, and if their sense of muslim identity is strong, this may encourage them to think about terrorism. According to Sageman's (2004) evidence, 70% of the terrorists he studied joined terrorist organisations whilst not in their native country, were not particularly religious when they joined, and seemed to join because they had friends who were already members (68%). This would suggest that people are drawn at least in part because of an attraction to simply a kind of community, and once in, processes they go through instill more and more loyalty, producing willing terrorists. Post (2005) emphasises the importance of the leaders in terrorist groups, encouraging hate by promoting an interpretation of inequities as caused by unjust external forces. He argues that this draws together the members into a collective identity that makes them more willing terrorists. In this model individual identity is fused into group indentity, making people more likely to sacrifice themselves for the cause of the group. Crenshaw (2000) claimed that it is the shared ideological commitment and group solidarity that are much better predictors of terrorist behaviour than individual characteristics. The fact that individuals who become terrorists appear to very normal in other ways is a key insight and runs against people's imagination of terrorists as being 'crazed fanatics', which is an example of the fundamental attribution error of denying that external factors can produce such extreme behaviour (Marsden & Attia 2005). As if necessary, this also highlights the need for social psychology to examine and tease out the factors in these processes.
In our news and media obsessed society it has been suggested that one of the aims of terrorism is to take advantage of this and spread their message through our media, so the promise of media coverage encourages would be terrorists (Marsdon & Attia 2005). It has even been suggested that media coverage of terrorist attacks encourages others to do the same by media contagion (Marsdon & Attia 2005), however this may not apply as terrorism is a planned, sophisticated action carried out in groups, rendering it not as susceptible to media contagion effects. In any case, terrorists may not have media coverage in mind at all, as suggested by Post (2005), as he claimed that in the 80's and 90's 40% of terrorist attacks happened without anyone claiming responsibility, because they were killing infidels in the name of Allah and were not interested in who knew about it. However judging by the skilled and active use of the media by bin Laden and other terrorists it would appear that the media is a very important factor in the consideration of terrorists.
Social psychology cannot stop at explanations of how people can become terrorists. The damage done by terrorism is so much more than the immediate disruption and loss of life and injuries inflicted, and it is not even confined to victims and their friends and families. People who had no relation to anyone involved in the terrorism can suffer vicariously (Cohenal. 2002). There are obviously important social psychological processes occuring here that need to be understood if we are to have any power to reduce the negative effects of terrorism when it does happen. Schuster et al (2001, cited in Silke 2004) found a correlation between the amount of viewing of terrorist acts on television and stress, and it is easy to see how watching distressing images over and over again might cause higher stress. Robinal. (2005) also revealed how muslim Londoners reported higher levels of distress after the 7/7 bombings than white Londoners, this could be because they were viewed with suspicion as people's heuristics had been altered by the constant and relentless links between terrorism and muslims in the media, multiplied by a general state of arousal.
In light of what insights social psychology can provide into terrorism, are there any measures that we can make to improve the situation? Traditional ideas suggested to reduce intergroup conflict such as creating super-ordinate goals, as demonstrated by Sherif (1966, cited in Hogg & Vaughn) are unlikely to work with terrorists who are already too commited to conflict, however there is scope for it having a benefit being used with the wider community that the terrorists come from.
Post (2005) makes the point that terrorism varies according to the social, cultural, political and political context that it appears in, and as such policies need to be tailored to each specific case. However he also makes the case that generally, trying to apply external force to a small group will only cause them to unite stronger. He and others (Post 2005, Sageman 2004) make the point that terrorism is psychological warfare, and as such it needs to be countered with psychological measures rather than military action which may only exacerbate the problem. This would take the form of a media orientated strategy with effective communication of information.
In order to prevent people from joining terrorist organisations, a legitimate structure should be set up empowering people and giving them a way to address perceived injustices to their in-group in a peaceful way. Also measures should be taken to prevent the alienation of muslims in western countries, and give them a positive superordinate identity of being british by developing a truly inclusive culture and changing policies that are seen as being oppressive against muslims (Silke 2001). To get people to leave terrorist organisations that they are in, Post (2005) suggests having an amnesty program to give people a way out, and also promote intra-group conflict to counter the strong bonds that form in the group. Silke (2001) also argues that understanding that terrorists are not psychopaths opens up the possibility of negotiations, which has historical precendents of being successful in bringing an end to terrorism e.g. Northern Ireland.
In terms of reducing the negative effects of a terrorist attack after it has happened, media coverage could be designed to cover the news but not to cause distress, although obviously this is very difficult to implement.
Traditional social psychological theory and research on prejudice and intergroup relations actually offer only limited insights into terrorism. New approaches focusing more specifically on aspects of terrorism have started to be used and will only increase in the next few years. The current state of the research is that we have some concepts and ideas to work with but we are still a long way off building a comprehensive model that can be used to inform policies brought in to reduce the incidence rate and impact of terrorism. It is also clear that social psychology cannot explain terrorism by itself, and we need a cross-discipline cooperation incoorporating at least politics, sociology, social psychology and other areas of psychology for instance cognitive psychology.