Language development seems like a very difficult task, and yet nearly all babies are very successful at it. This has prompted Chomsky to famously suggest that babies have an innate 'language acquisition device' (Harley, 2001), but now it seems rather that babies are born with a number of various 'devices', or predispositions and abilities, through which they learn language. Despite the tendency to see babies as passive learners, just absorbing language, babies are actually very active in the process, interacting with the people around them in a way that will help their language development. There are several mechanisms that they have to help them along this path, such as getting attention from adults, innate preferences for useful stimuli, in-built perception skills to help them decode speech, and forming an attachment which helps construct a very beneficial environment for improving language abilities.
The first and most important characteristic of babies for their later language development is the indisputable fact that they are very social, that is they are predisposed to seek interaction with other human beings, right from birth. Babies depend entirely on care provision from others, and even when their basic needs of food, warmth and physical comfort are met, they still have an insatiable need for stimulation in their waking hours, so they need to be able to get this and also to make the most of it. Even neonates are orientated towards people, being able to identify suitable models to which they should attend to learn about social interactions (Messer, 1994). They also show the ability to recognise the face, and prefer to look at a face-like stimulus than an equally complex stimulus (Johnson & Morton, 1991, cited in Messer 1994). This is important as it will focus the attention of the baby on any vocalisations made by the person, and seeing the other persons face move may stimulate infants to move their own faces and to imitate vocalisations (Locke, 1993).
Neonates identify faces by an analysis of the edges of the face, but after 8 weeks they begin to look more at the internal features of the face, especially the eyes (Maurer & Salapateh, 1976, cited in Messer 1994). As a lot is communicated through the face, and much of it non-verbally, this enables babies to gain a greater awareness of these communications and become sensitive to them, establishing more reciprocal interactions with adults (Tronwick, Als & Brazelton, 1977, cited in Messer 1994). Tronwickal. (1977) found that infants became distressed when their mothers stopped interacting and held an expressionless face, and similarly Cohn and Tronwick (1983, cited in Messer 1994) also found that babies were sensitive to their mothers expression showing negative emotion. This shows that babies are sensitive to changes in their mothers facial expression, but it does not show that they are understanding their mothers emotion - it could just be that they are responding to a departure from the norm. Nevertheless, the outcome is the same, and that is that this kind of reaction to the change in their mother's expression makes it very hard for their mothers to maintain their 'poker face' (Tronwick et al., 1978, cited in Locke 1993), so that mothers are motivated to interact and provide the stimulation that the baby wants.
Murray and Trevarthen (1985, cited in Messer 1994) showed that not only are early infants sensitive to changes in their mothers expressions and vocalisations, but also that they could detect how responsive their mother was being to their own actions at the time. This was demonstrated by showing babies a live video feed of their mother, which they liked, and a prerecorded video of their mother showing the same kinds of behaviours, which they quickly disliked and caused them to become distressed. This shows that babies know whether their mother is reacting to their actions, and they prefer it when their mothers are being responsive. When mothers are being responsive, babies will smile and move their mouth and tongue more, which in turn encourages a positive response from their mothers (Murray & Trevarthen, 1985). The question of whether early infants are capable of turn taking like in a real conversation is a contentious one, but Bloom, Russell and Wassenberg (1987, cited in Messer 1994) suggest that infants may be capable of actively adapting their interactions in a way which makes it feel more like a conversation to adults, which encourages them to take part in 'conversation like exchanges' with the infant. Early infants can attract attention by crying (Frodi, 1985, cited in Messer 1994), and this may start a social interaction with an adult. Importantly, they then have the strategies to encourage the adult to maintain the interaction with them, and even illicit the kinds of interactions from adults that will facilitate their language development.
Another important ability that early infants utilise in their language development is the ability for joint attention, to refer to things manually, and recognising when someone else refers to something. Butterworth (1998a, cited in Harris & Butterworth, 2002) showed that as early as at 6 months old, babies can follow their mothers line of sight to the thing they are attending to, turning their head to see the same thing. Leung and Rheingold (1981, cited in Harris & Butterworth, 2002) found that from around 12 months babies began to understand when adults pointed, and looked in the pointed direction. This ability means that adults can direct the baby's attention to something, improving communication and providing means for more efficient learning. Babies themselves start to point from around 7 months (Murphy & Messer, 1977, cited in Messer 1994), and parents are very responsive to this, often naming the appropriate object for them (Musu 1982, cited in Locke 1993). This clearly provides a very useful mechanism for babies to learn new vocabulary in later development. Wells and Robinson (1982, cited in Messer 1994) supported this, by showing that infants who received more speech about things that they had identified were more advanced in their language abilities later on.
For language development, infants need to focus on speech, as well as communication in general. Early infants prefer to listen to human speech than other sounds (DeCasper & Fifer, 1980, cited in Harris & Butterworth, 2002). Neonates have also been shown to prefer listening to their native language (Mehler et al., 1994, cited in Harris & Butterworth 2002), which they can distinguish by judging on rhythmical and prosodic properties (Christophe & Morton 1998, cited in Harris & Butterworth 2002). They also are born with innate perceptual biases that help them to categorically percieve phonemes (Locke, 1993), which are adjusted by their first birthday so that they are sensitive only to contrasts that exist within their own language (Werker & Tees, 1984, cited in Harris & Butterworth, 2002). This is important as it means they will not be sensitive to irrelevant variations in the speech sounds that they hear due to different speakers, or even the same person speaking on different occasions. A difficult task for infants is to establish where one word starts and another begins in free flowing speech. Fernald (1991, cited in Locke, 1993), and Gleitman and Warner (1982, cited in Messer 1994) have proposed that infants pick out words from speech by using prosodic variations, like stressed syllables. Saffran, Aslin and Newport (1996) suggested that they use implicit calculations of statistical regularities to determine the starts and ends of words. It seems that infants have quite specialised techniques to meet the challenge of identifying individual words in speech.
In terms of actually producing vocalisations themselves, Stark (1989, cited in Messer, 1994) argued that crying might help babies practice producing vowel sounds, and vegetative sounds might encourage the practice of consonants, however this research has received little support. The importance of babbling in language development is debated, as infants whose babbling is delayed don't always seem to be negatively affected (Netsell, 1981, cited in Messer, 1984), but in general it seems that babbling does provide some form of platform to develop phonetic abilities (Locke, 1993), and hence the spontaneous babbling that babies start to produce at around 6 months (Messer, 1994) can be seen as facilitating their language development.
Early infants show a strong preference for things which are familiar to them. Not only do they prefer their native language as discussed above, but they also prefer their mother's voice which is familiar to them (Mehler & Dupoux, 1994, cited in Harris & Butterworth, 2002). Walton, Bower and Bower (1992, cited in Messer, 1994) showed that babies will also work to see a video of their mother rather than another person, and MacFarland (1975, cited in Messer 1994) showed that neonates prefer the smell of their mother's breast pad to one from another woman. Similarly Camras, Maltatesta and Izard (1991, cited in Messer, 1994) showed that infants will smile more at familiar faces. This shows that infants will quickly build up a strong preference for the people that are around them regularly, and especially their mother (unless the child is in institutional care). This fits in with Bowlby's (1969, cited in Locke, 1993) theory of attachment, which states that within the first few months the infant will form a deep bond to her/his mother. Messer (1994) claimed that communication develops best when the infant has a small group of adults to whom he/she is attached, because they will have a good understanding of each other through shared experiences. Locke (1993) stated it more strongly, saying that 'attachment starts children down the path that leads it to language'. He claimed that attachment helps in many ways, including encouraging vocal exploration, imitation and turn taking.
Infants have a plethora of strategies and preferences that help them to meet the difficult challenge of developing language, and these are used right from birth, some even prenatally. They are very social and can recognise their targets - people, and especially familiar people. Equipped with the means to attract and hold attention, and influence the type of interaction so that it suits their learning needs, they are very active in bringing about their own progression in language development. Their auditory perceptual systems are also well geared up to handle speech and learn patterns. Also very importantly, is their ability to form and maintain attachments to their primary care giver. This is vital for the next stages of language development as they can build up mutual understanding, consistency, shared knowledge, and develop a shared repertoire of language stimulating games (Messer, 1994). In short, this will provide the optimal environment for learning about social interactions in general and progressing in language development.