Mathematics has long been labelled the 'language of science' and it's continued involvement in developing sciences helps to keep mathematics fresh and original. Mathematical biology has become a very exciting and fast growing field, which will continue to develop for the foreseeable future. A very large area of mathematical biology is concerned with population growth. It is a topic in this area which we will seek to study in this paper, the topic being Predator-Prey population interaction. This concerns how two species in an environment may interact and coexist when one predates off the other.
In this paper we aim to study the interaction of two species of this type, to look at the growth of the two populations with respect to one another, and to see if an equilibrium where the two coexist can exist. There are many established models which can be used to describe predator prey interaction. In this study we will use the Rosenzweig-MacArthur system (1963). The main reason for this choice of model is the hope of solutions which may include local bifurcations. Another model could be the Lotka-Voltera System, as described by Braun (1978). We do not use this system because it is considered to be structurally unstable. The Freedman-Wolkowicz system (1986) and the Conway-Swollor system (1986) also describe predator prey interaction. However, both these systems exhibit global bifurcations. To use either we would have to study trajectories over a wide expanse of phase space. We do not wish to do this in this paper.
The mathematics we will use to analyse the model will be relatively simple. The main techniques will involve determining and classifying stationary solutions of differential equations, and plotting phase trajectories in the plane. Stationary solutions will be found by determining nullclines and their intersections. The main method of characterising stationary solutions will be by finding the matrix of partial derivatives and calculating its eigenvalues.
Imagine a stretch of desert occupied by two species, coyotes and roadrunners. The coyotes are carnivorous predators, feeding off the roadrunner population. The roadrunners are herbivores, which feed off the plants and greenery of the environment. This is an example of predator prey interaction, one of the most common population interaction models in mathematical biology. Using this model, we can study the growth and survival of the two populations, with respect to one another.
To study only the growth behaviour of our two species, we must make some modelling assumptions. Firstly, we look only at the two species we wish to study, we assume no species other than coyotes prey on the roadrunners and the coyotes have no other source of food. We assume that the roadrunners compete only with their own kind for food, that there are no other species feeding off the same sources as them. Another assumption we make is that both populations are disease free. We also neglect to take seasonal and environmental changes into account. Although these modelling assumptions seem to limit the accuracy of our model, they can be added in once the simpler model is established. (We will not seek to do this in this study.)
Now we have decided which factors to leave out, we can set up the model. As previously stated, we will use the Rosenzweig-MacArthur System (1963). The growth rates of the two species, (let us refer to them as predator and prey), can be modelled by the following two equations.
Equation (1) describes the growth of the prey population, denoted N, with respect to time. The first part of the equation, r 1 (1 - N/K) N, describes the positive growth of the prey population. The constant r 1 is the birth-rate per capita of the prey population. K, also constant, represents the 'limited carrying capacity of the environment'; this is the maximum number of prey that the environment has sufficient living space and food to support. The prey's mortality rate is represented by the second part of the equation, .
It is obvious here, that the mortality rate of the prey depends not only on the existing number of prey, but also on the number of predators, (and on some constant, a).
Equation (2) describes the population growth rate of the predators, denoted P. The constant r 2 is the mortality rate of the predator population per capita. The second term, , describes the birth-rate of the predator population. This term depends on the existing number of predators, on the amount of food available, i.e. the size of the prey population and also on some constant, b.
In this paper we have studied the interacting growth of a Predator-Prey model. Using the Rosenzweig-MacArthur system (1963) we have investigated how the two populations can coexist. We looked at the general conditions for coexistence and saw that this occurs where c < -. Here we found that the system tended to equilibrium where both populations survive. We saw a stable point or spiral, and when c/(-) < (1+c)/2 we saw a limit cycle. We were able to interpret these ecologically and draw realistic conclusions. When c > -, we saw a stable solution with only the prey population surviving.
It would be interesting to go through the same problem using a different model, the Freedman-Wolkowicz system (1986) for example. We did not seek to do this in this paper as phase plane analysis would be over a much larger expanse. It would also be of interest to reinsert into the model the variables we took out in our modelling assumptions. A far more accurate model would be constructed this way. The Rosenzweig-MacArthur system, however, gave realistic and interesting solutions, and its choice is justified.