This report outlines the application of two analysis tools that are utilised in the design of a formula 1 front wing and nose section. These tools are computational fluid dynamics and finite element analysis. Both are software programs that require a high level of computing power in order to produce accurate simulations. The discussion in this report considers the benefits and limitations of these tools and contrasts them manual techniques such as wind tunnel testing and prototyping.
An example FEA analysis of the front wing section shown above has been carried out using the COSMOSWorks facility in SolidWorks. The model has been assigned a material (carbon fibre aluminium composite) and various pressures have been applied to the appropriate surfaces to simulate the loading experienced at top speed.
The analysis found that the front wing and nose section was structurally sound with a minimum factor of safety throughout the structure of approximately 17. The analysis was subject to simplification however which means that the results cannot be treated as absolute. The analysis must only be used as a guide and engineers should rely on their own experience in designing a suitable component solution.
FEA provides formula 1 designers with a powerful tool for getting designs analysed quickly and without the need for costly prototyping and testing various solutions thus reducing the timescale which is all important in formula 1.
CFD is less well utilised although it still provides a useful analysis of individual aerodynamic devices. The computing power required for accurate simulations of an entire car is too high for our current capability. The experience and imaginative flare of the designer combined with testing in the wind tunnel remains the best solution for the aerodynamics department.
Finite element analysis and computational fluid dynamics both play a very significant part in the design of a formula 1 car. In a sport where hundredths of a second can be the difference between the outright pace of two different cars, the teams spend huge amounts of money embracing technology that will enable them to increase the pace of the car by even the tiniest amount.
The front wing exists to generate downforce which pushes the front of the car into the ground thus resulting in more grip. It can consist of several elements all attached to endplates at either end. The wing section is joined to the nose by two uprights at the centre of the wing section. The nose section in turn joins to the monocoque just in front of the front axel. From this mounting point the section must be able to cope with the downforce that the wing generates at top speed, with negligible deflection. This is due to the regulation that prohibits any moveable aerodynamic device.
The wing section must be stiff enough to not deflect under high loading and the endplates must be strong enough to resist the twisting force that they will be subjected to as the wing generates more downforce at higher speeds. However the wings themselves must be quite thin so as not to create too much drag and also the endplates must not be too thick in profile or they too will cause a lot of drag.
A front wing can typically generate an equivalent mass of 560Kg in downforce at top speed. In the COSMOSWorks FEA program this can be modelled as a negative pressure on the underside of the wing elements. The deflectors on the endplates will also experience a small force which is modelled in the same way.
The following pages show the results of the analysis which in turn is followed by a critical analysis of the process and the reliability of the results.
The downforce has been split evenly between the two wing elements and modelled as a pressure distribution on the lower surfaces of each element. The much smaller downforce generated by the deflectors on the endplates has been modelled in the same manner. The material properties were obtained from the CES Selector materials database. The chosen material being a carbon fibre aluminium composite similar to the material actually used in formula 1.
The main points that we can initially take from the analysis are as follows:
The stress within the structure does not exceed the yield stress at any point therefore all deformation is elastic
The maximum deflection is just over 1mm and occurs at the outer edges of the endplates
The overall deformation is well within the rules regarding moveable aerodynamic devices
The minimum factor of safety throughout the wing and nose section is approximately 17
Before taking these results at face value we need to examine the validity of the model. The pressure distribution on the surfaces of each wing element is assumed to be constant. This is not the case in practice, however it is not possible to apply an exact representation of the pressure distribution in COSMOSWorks and so the model had to be simplified. This simplification affects all of the results for stress, strain and deflection. The next step may be to refine the analysis by reducing the simplifications however this would result in a more complicated model that would take longer to simulate. This analysis was also undertaken using the finest mesh possible within the program. Therefore in terms of the number of nodes and degrees of freedom, the model cannot be made more accurate.
Since the lowest factor of safety is 17, it would be reasonable to assume that the structure is sound despite the simplifications that have been introduced into the analysis. This means that the designer can modify parts of the design such as the shape of the endplates (these play a critical role in the aerodynamics of the car) without affecting the structural integrity of the wing section. Once a modified shape has been modelled it is very easy to run the FEA again. The alternative and indeed logical next step is to choose to manufacture and test the part in the wind tunnel. It is only by this more direct approach that the component parts can be analysed fully before they are tested at the track. The FEA helps to produce a near optimal solution before the wind tunnel need even be utilised.
The manual approach to the same design problem would be to examine the forces that are exerted throughout the wing and nose section. Figure 7 shows the wing and nose section model with the significant forces and likely areas of stress highlighted.
High areas of stress are likely to occur at sharp edges and along thin sections subject to a twisting force. The wings will bend downwards under loading and exert a twisting force on the endplates. With this in mind the designer must consider where the structure needs to be strengthened by adding some thickness to the appropriate places. The venturi components seated at the bottom of each endplate act both as an aerodynamic device affecting the flow to the underside of the car but also as a strengthening component for the endplate by giving it extra thickness. This is where the experience of the designer and their own imagination helps to find a solution to the structural problem by use of a component that is there to perform a completely different function. It is this thought process that is the most important design technique in formula 1. The FEA is only the tool that is used to analyse the effects of this design philosophy.
The nose sections is fixed to the monocoque. This is the point that acts as the restraint for the entire wing and nose section and must be able to cope with all the associated loads imposed on the whole section.
The wing elements will be subject to a bending force causing them to deflect at their extremities.
The uprights must support a downforce of about 5500N when the car is going at top speed.
The endplates will be twisted by the deflecting ends of the wing elements.
The Winglets on the outer edges give some thickness to the endplate to resist this force.
In terms of cost, the design and manufacture of a formula 1 car is astronomical. It is not the same process as for a product that is to be marketed to the public or for a particular use etc. Those sorts of products have a finite design process from conception through to production. A formula 1 car is an ever changing design. The car is never the same from one race to the next and the engineers are constantly working on developments that will improve the car. In order to do this they spend millions on analysis tools such as FEA and CFD along with the wind tunnel etc. Using these analysis tools is the only way to get to the front of the grid. The engineers will always push the team bosses to invest in more powerful computers and more sophisticated and the team bosses in turn will search for sponsorship in order to raise the finance. No formula 1 team makes a profit. It is a unique sport where on the face of it, the teams seem to just throw huge amounts of money into research that will gain them maybe a few tenths of a second over their rivals. Until the governing body take action over the huge costs associated with competing in formula 1, the only management option for the teams is to continue to invest in technology otherwise they will end up at the back of the grid.
It is possible to arrive at different conclusions regarding the use of CFD and FEA as analysis tools in formula 1 design. Whilst they both have significant uses in formula 1 design they remain a guide to the process and their findings should not be treated as absolute. All analysis models have to make assumptions that are not entirely consistent with the real world if they are to perform some sort of simulation.
FEA is a very important analysis tool in the overall design of the car. It can be used to analyse practically every part of the car's different components and provides very accurate results if the right program and computing power are available. For formula 1 the use of FEA does not detract from the skills of the design team. It is simply a necessity because the pace of development is such that any tool that will help guide the design team to the optimal solution is a must have or the team will fall behind.
The process of conceiving a design that combines the aerodynamic devices with their use as stressed elements in the design is very much a skill that the designer brings to the process through experience and not by simply analysing all sorts of solutions using an analysis tool such as FEA.
CFD is utilised less as an analysis tool than FEA because the parameters governing airflow over the car are much more wide ranging and more complicated than the stresses and strains within a material. CFD therefore requires a lot more computing power than FEA. The uses of CFD are therefore restricted mainly to the analysis of flow over individual aerodynamic devices which can lead to problems of boundary condition assumptions that may not be an accurate simulation of what really happens. CFD is not currently capable of modelling the airflow over a whole car to sufficient accuracy for it to supersede the wind tunnel.
The conception of aerodynamics is also very much an imaginative process based on years of experience in the field. The manual process of testing aerodynamic solutions in the wind tunnel is still the favoured analysis technique.