Relations between Britain and America deteriorated so badly in the eighteenth century that the American Declaration of Independence was made in 1776 to cut their country off completely from the island that had ruled them since its birth. The main reason for this turn of events can be attributed to Britain's growing attempt to stifle America's growth through a series of trade acts and economic regulations which highly favoured Britain. This type of control, without any consultation with the American officials, ended up creating an anti-British sentiment which was added to by a variety of factors which appeared during that century.
Even as early as the 1730's Britain had passed a series of laws which put American traders at a disadvantage, ranging from prohibiting the exportation of colonial made felt or hats to a law decreeing in 1736 that all sails made in the colonies had to be made of British cloth. In addition to this Britain ruled in 1732 that the colonies were forbidden to levy import taxes on British goods thus stripping the Americans of that avenue to raise income. Virginia and Maryland were hit hard by restrictions placed on tobacco exportation and it has been estimated that this cost tobacco planters about 270,000 a year. However it was not actually until later on in the century that this type of action by Britain really angered the colonies and provoked any sense of organised resistance.
Britain waited until the 1760's to begin policies which were intended to be extremely beneficial to the English but at the same time often highly detrimental to the Americans. The main reason for this was that Britain had been involved in the Seven Years War and had successfully gained Florida from the Spanish and land in the north and west from France. However, Britain had amassed a huge debt in the process and looked to its colonies to collect extra revenue as taxes in Britain were already fairly high. It was at this time that the British Crown and ministry sought to "centralize the administration of the colonies and to intensify the efficiency with which they were exploited".
In fact it was not until the Proclamation of 1763 when the Acts which started to be passed were having a strong enough effect on the people for them to voice criticism publicly. The Crown decided to defer opening up the land west of the Appalachian Mountains for settlers and this decision was one of the first to become "a source of acute discontent in several of the North American colonies". The reason for the discontent was that much of the land to the east of the line was exhausted by 1774 so it was disliked for obstructing the expansionist aspirations of settlers and land speculators and colonials were "also reluctant to pay the costs of maintaining garrisons in the Indian country of the interior".
This was followed only the year after by a law known as the Sugar Act being passed which vigorously enforced British rules of trade, renewed duties on molasses and sugar and placed new duties on wine, silk, indigo, coffee and non British textiles. This Act angered large sections of colonial society, in particular rum distillers who feared that it would "destroy their industry" and coastal shippers "whose trade was impeded by new customs regulations associated with the Act". The Act caused such ill feeling that it can be claimed "the menace of the Sugar Act led Americans to unite, which fear of the French and Indians had never done," and so colonials could stand together against Britain in a way they had had previously been unable to do so.
The Sugar Act had a detrimental effect in other ways too as the stagnation of trade produced by the Act was "an important factor in intensifying post-war depression," which obviously did nothing to improve relations with Britain. In fact America suffered recessions throughout the eighteenth century, the worst being in the 1750's and again between 1764 to 1769 at exactly the time of the passing of the Sugar Act and the Stamp Act which was to follow. The Stamp Act in 1765 placed direct taxes on many items such as newspapers and law documents and it affected a far wider range of trades and professions than the previous acts had done. It actually became impossible to sell the stamps and "the stamp collectors and others who tried to enforce the law were threatened with violence".
The reason for such a level of opposition included a number of grievances the most commonly cited was that the colonists held the Stamp Act to be "especially dangerous to the freedom of the press and freedom of political agitation". The tiny island of Britain was seen to be taking away the freedom of their far larger satellite country without any consultation with the American people themselves. The key part to the colonists reasoning was a belief that "unless and until the colonists were represented in Parliament... Parliament could not legally and constitutionally tax them". This idea of no participation without representation led to a decision to boycott British imports and to suspend debt payments to British merchants.
The suspension of debt payments to British merchants had a significant role in the deterioration of relations between the two countries as Southern planters and farmers borrowed substantial amounts from English merchants and with fairly harsh conditions placed upon the loans. The planters not only had to pay a very large interest back on the loan but pay the import duties in England, insurance costs and warehouse, inspection and carting fees. This caused a great deal of resentment as it was seen that "the Southern planter took all risks; the British merchant took much of the profits".
The suspension therefore led to pressure from the merchants to repeal the Stamp Act which Parliament did do the following year as it had become obvious that it was nearly impossible to enforce. However, instead of the British using this decision to attempt to repair relations with the colonists, they passed the Declaratory Act which reaffirmed Britain's ability to have total control over laws and taxes passed over America. The repeal also led to a sense of instability as groups such as the 'Sons of Liberty' believed they had forced the government to capitulate through their organised campaigns of violence and this in turn "spread a spirit of insolence in the colonies towards the English".
During the opposition to the Stamp Act, Parliament passed yet another law, the Quartering Act, which required the colonies to "furnish provisions and other necessaries for troops stationed within their bounds". This caused further tensions between the two countries especially when troops took many of the scarce places of employment in the winter months leading to higher unemployment amongst the locals. When the British Navy was sent over to enforce the Acts of trade, officers were entitled to half value of seizures and the income raised from American customs increased from 2,000 a year in the early 1760's to over 30,000 a year by 1774. It is easy to see then why so many colonial leaders were alarmed by the stationing of so many British troops and began to look upon them as "the instruments of tyrants".
Only a year after the repeal of the Stamp Act, the Townshend Duties were passed in 1767 which imposed customs duties on colonial imports of glass, red and white lead, paints, paper, and tea. These sort of external taxes were extremely unpopular with Americans and were seen to be outside the authority of Parliament to enforce and led to a feeling that Britain were resurrecting their "pattern of tyranny". Indeed some colonists even went so far as fear that the crown planned to "whittle away the liberties that they, as Englishmen, had won in the Glorious Revolution of 1688". Charles Townshend, the Chancellor behind the duties, also set up a separate Board of Customs for the continental colonies operating out of Boston, not London as it had previously done. This was a measure expected to put an end to colonial evasion of the trade laws and to make sure that Townshend's Revenue Act would be strictly enforced.
The problem Americans faced was that because of their lack of representation it left very few options available to them to voice criticism or to resist the legislation being passed for them thousands of miles away. Even when colonials did oppose theses Acts they were often punished further as was the case with the threat of suspension to the New York Assembly if it did not comply with the Quartering Act. This was seen by some as to be a step too far and certainly added fuel to the tense relations between the two countries. John Dickenson, a lawyer from Pennsylvania, wrote that the Suspending Act was "unconstitutional and warned residents of other colonies that it might serve as a precedent for a similar assault upon their legislative rights".
What many see as the final stage in the deterioration of relations however, was the continuing presence of an act on tea after the other Townshend Duties had been repealed in 1770. The struggle against the Tea Act was seen as "a struggle against the British monopolization of the American trade", and smugglers in particular had a lot to lose. Relations became so bad that the 'Boston Tea Party' occurred in December of 1773 where colonials dressed up as Indians and boarded ships carrying tea in the port of Boston and threw it all overboard ruining thousands of pounds worth. This was a far more direct and violent challenge to British authority than had occurred previously and was described as the "actual catalyst of the sequence of events wherein the colonies moved from resistance to revolution".
Britain's reaction to this led to a group of acts known as the Intolerable or Coercive Acts passed in 1774 which decreed that "until the town of Boston paid damages to the Company [East India] and duties to the customs officers, it was to be closed to ordinary trade". Within the legislation was also the Quebec Act which served as "a severe restraining device on the growth of the thirteen colonies and represented a heavy blow against American fur traders and land speculators" so yet again Britain alienated colonials and went against their best interests.
The result of British policy towards America meant that there was no part of colonial life unaffected and "all found particular legislative acts especially burdensome or restraining". This inevitably led to anti-British feeling and even earlier on in the eighteenth century some colonials felt that they needed to move further away from their mother country. A commentator at the time wrote that the colonies felt that they were distinct states, "independent as to their internal government, of the original kingdom, but united with her, as to their external policy". It was this type of feeling which was effectively nurtured by actions from Britain especially when other factors affecting colonial people are taken into account.
Social tensions were very much apparent among the colonies themselves during this period, in particular, class and inequality conflict between the north and south, the free and the enslaved. Conflict over land and religious tensions too did nothing to help the stability of the colonies and in this sort of situation; feelings of discontentment are much more easily harboured. In fact amongst the white population in America a third were not even British and so there were some, "especially the Irish and the Dutch, with significant anti-English hostilities".
With all of this in mind, it is possible to see how inevitable the American Revolution was as the eighteenth century progressed and the extent to which British policy was responsible. Acts unfavourable to colonial trade and profit as well as ones such as the Proclamation Act which impinged upon American freedom were never going to remain unchallenged as America grew in population and stature. It could also be argued that a united opposition towards the British was a timely distraction from other issues dividing the country. This, coupled with the increasingly appealing idea of independence as more and more restrictive legislature was passed, meant that relations with Britain were always likely to deteriorate.