There is a strong argument that it was indeed artisans who were the most likely group to participate in militant action in the nineteenth century as their tradition and culture was one of social and moral solidarity. It seemed to take a longer period of time for proletarian workers to find this solidarity, to organise themselves and to raise a so called 'class consciousness'. There were exceptions, of course, but I will attempt to show why I agree with scholars such as Craig Calhoun that it was primarily artisans that resisted the changes brought by industrialization and who seemed to have more of a sense of unity in comparison to the factory workers.
In many of the large-scale disturbances across Europe, for example the Paris Commune in 1871, the Chartist protests and the tailors' strike in England in 1834, it was artisans who made up the majority of those taking part. William Sewell agrees as he says "down to the commune of 1871, the history of working-class protest in France was essentially the history of artisan protest." Indeed, the thousands who were killed and arrested during the Paris Commune were predominantly tailors, shoemakers, building craftsmen and furniture makers; skilled workers who had a lot to lose. The militant movements across England and Wales, namely Chartism, Owenism and the Luddites, mainly included skilled craftsmen who were resisting the changes bought about by new technology. It is arguably not until the Twentieth Century that is more common to have seen factory workers rise up and participate in strikes in an attempt to improve their working and living conditions.
To try and find solid reasons for why this was so is easier to do so when looking at France in particular. The French period of industrialization occurred much more slowly than that of Britain, Germany and America, and as a result the French proletariat grew at a lesser rate. Coupled with this was the slow increase in population which meant that there was a "relative continuity in the urban experience of workers." This led to more generations of artisans being aware of the changes that were occurring around them and to realise that they did not like the future they could see ahead of them. Calhoun argues this point as he believes that the artisans see no place for themselves in the emerging world, where as the proletariat had less to look back on and compare their new situation with.
The traditions of the artisan, too, meant that they already had a sense of solidarity and were willing to come together when they saw their livelihood being threatened by new developments. The artisans' proclivity for class-conscious action was largely a consequence of "a social understanding of their labor that derived from the corporate or guild system of the medieval and early modern cities." In France there was the history of the compagnonnages which were organisations comprised of artisans and the "journeymen who tramped across France relied on these to provide them, in each town, with a mere who secured lodgings and a roleur who arranged their job placement". In some areas there had been cooperatives and mutual aid schemes to help out those who fell into difficulty; often everyone paid money per month and this was redistributed when necessary. All of this meant that before the French Revolution the culture of the artisan was nothing if not social.
The Revolution itself contributed to why the artisans had to resort to militant action as under the Ancien Regime France had many corporations which were empowered to regulate the practice of a trade in a given city, for example, local monopolies, quality control and limitations on entry. These were organised by a collective body not an individual and were sometimes linked with a particular patron saint which meant people could celebrate on mass for special occasions. However, the Revolution swept away the privileged corporations so artisans were legally free to carry on their trade according to their own wishes. This led to 'abuses' in various trades and most artisans became unhappy about new practices which they saw as creating unfair competition.
Amongst other things they complained about "a subdivision of the labour process, the use of cheaper materials and of larger manual machines, which permitted a scale of production appropriate to a mass market." With the collapse of all meaningful apprenticeship safeguards and the influx of unskilled, women and children: with the extension of hours and Sunday work: and with the lowering of wages, piece-rates and wholesale prices the dishonourable part of the trade grew. These difficulties meant that artisans were more likely to come together than factory workers because they had a shared history and knowledge of how much better their situation was prior to industrialisation.
Furthermore, the Revolution did not dispose of all the ways in which artisans were potentially tied to each other and were able to socialise in large groups. Often they worked extremely long hours during the week and then spent the weekend drinking heavily and socialising with like minded craftsmen. In fact they often dubbed Monday 'Saint Monday' as many of the workers would take the day off to recover from their hangovers and work especially hard from early on Tuesday morning. There were also labour organisations after the Revolution, commonly known as associations, and "artisans from different occupations came together ... and soon discovered that they suffered from similar problems." For example there was the Brotherhood of German Workers which John Breuilly describes as the most important labour organization established in Germany before the 1860s and which drew its membership overwhelmingly from artisans.
Another reason why artisans were more likely to take part in political militancy was because they had the resources to resist the changes that were occurring and felt that they could be successful in challenging the system. In France especially, where craftsmen often specialised in luxury items, their skills were often required in up market sectors and so they had a stronger position to bargain from. Artisans also tended to have higher rates of literacy than an average factory worker and they were able to sustain a radical press which made them stronger as a group across a larger area than could usually be communicated to. There seemed to be feelings of pride in the high quality of the goods produced and artisans were also skilled "because they could adapt existing ideas and forms of action to the pressures upon them in order to put up a collective resistance to those pressures."
However despite the above reasons as evidence for the 'radical artisan' discourse it is not so simple to explain why it was artisans and not other groups in society who took part in political militancy in this period. There were often frictions between master and journeymen, for example in Germany where the masters' guilds persisted. Journeymen were often outcastes as they never really fitted into one area and therefore could not become part of a local organisation or association. This led to resentment from local craftsmen as it was more difficult to try and regulate journeymen and make sure they did not become too great a competition. In addition, within the artisan world they had already experienced some of the so-called 'abuses' such as division of labour which "was not a nineteenth century innovation but was already taking place in tailoring, where workers were being forced to specialize in measuring, cutting and stitching or embroidery."
There is also criticism of Calhoun's idea that artisans looked back to a sort of golden age, which appeared infinitely better than the age which seemed to be coming, as "only through selective nostalgia could it [a previous time] be characterized as a settled world of harmony, independence, skill and craft pride." Some have suggested that artisans were more likely to be found in conservative mobilisations, such as the Catholics in Marseilles and Royalists in Nimes. During the June Days there were artisans on both sides, with a generational difference being apparent as the younger craftsmen were drafted in to fight on the side of the state against the older artisans. There is also the view that some of the discourse about craft-proud artisans derives from radical intellectuals who never actually set foot inside a workshop. However, it was certainly the case that "there was a serious deterioration in the status and living standards of the artisan" and this prompted action to be taken at various times throughout the nineteenth century.
As well as seeing why artisans seemed to be so active it is also important to look at why the proletarian factory workers were not active in political militancy in the same period. In France, it tended to be more because artisans remained the majority of the working population and industrialisation occurred much more slowly. But this was not the case of Germany or Great Britain; in the European cities where factory workers were numerous and outnumbered the artisans there was more chance of a class consciousness rising amongst the proletariat. This did not tend to happen however as there was no culture or tradition of solidarity and so it took longer for the workers to feel a sense of unity with their fellow employees. There was also a very high turnover of workers in bigger factories and so there was no time to forge strong friendships or bonds. This high turnover also meant that if workers were to go on strike then they could easily be replaced and it would only be effective if a large proportion were to act at once.
In conclusion, it is true that it was artisans who played a larger role in industrial action before 1870, but it is more difficult to distinguish exactly why this was. I do believe that there are some convincing arguments however and I think the central reason for artisans participating in political militancy is because they were able to remember what, for them, seemed like a better past and they believed that their lives would be affected for the worse with the advent of industrialisation. They had the social means and tradition of coming together to face adversity and the period before 1870 was the time when they feared changes the most. After this they may have realised that it was probably too late to return to their preferred way of life and it was left up to the vast number of factory workers to fight for better living and working conditions. Moreover, following this period, the ideas of socialism and a class consciousness had had time to take hold in the proletariat and they were inclined to organise strikes and similar activities.