In contrast to the majority of European countries it was only in the years before 1914 that industrialisation began to rapidly occur in Russia. As with other industrialising countries this brought with it many problems such as poor working conditions, long hours and a move from the countryside to more urban areas. The reason that this caused such radicalism in the Russian labour movement particularly, and not to such an extent in the rest of Europe, can be attributed to many factors. Rebellious traditions, an oppressive regime which seemed to give more freedom with the October Manifesto but then took it all away again, and the presence of a revolutionary intelligentsia all contributed to growing radicalism in the labour movement.
Firstly I will look at the effect of industrialisation and a Marxist theory attempting to explain the revolutionary tendencies of the Russian labour movement explored by the historian Christopher Read. Some Socialist Soviet historians believed that the radicalism came from two types of worker; 'advanced' and 'backward'. 'Advanced' workers are thought to have been radical because "the further a worker developed away from the countryside the more revolutionary, the more 'conscious' and the more 'advanced' s/he was thought to become." As they often experienced the rise to becoming a skilled labourer and therefore higher wages, they expected more, had more to lose and gained better literacy levels to understand what was going on in the world around them. This then made them more likely to strike or take part in organised rebellions against the Tsar.
The argument for the 'backward' worker is that "those who were left behind in the process, low paid, short-term, frequently female workers, were thought to be 'backward', lacking in 'consciousness' and even potentially counter-revolutionary." These people would riot spontaneously as opposed to plan a rebellion but could be a threat to the stability of the state in the same way as the 'advanced' workers. Although Read goes on to point out that the theory is not accurate for the majority of Russian labourers, it is a good starting point to see the potential effects on labour militancy of a rapid period of industrialisation. In addition, it is due to this background of societal change that meant that a variety of other factors had a greater effect on the radicalisation of the labour movement.
Possibly the most important group of people in encouraging radicalism were the university educated thinkers and writers, the intelligentsia, who were much better received due to the unstable condition of Russian society. This existence of "a brilliant, creative and, in many cases, heroically self-sacrificing intelligentsia devoted to the eradication of social injustice in Russia" ensured that labour in Russia would retain its radicalism. They were able to do this as parties, circles and workers' groups tended to consist of a small intellectual nucleus around which clustered a group of workers enabling the intelligentsia to stand by and, when the opportunity arose, became the articulators and leaders of the mass labour movement.
Another important factor which contributed to labour radicalism was the existence, and sometimes non-existence, of trade unions. I say this because trade unions were legalised and prohibited throughout the years leading up to 1914 and under either circumstance there was instability for the state. The existence of legal labor organisations before 1905 had a great affect on the workers; two in particular run by Sergei Zubatov in Moscow and Georgii Gapon in St. Petersburg. Despite membership being quite small "thousands came into contact with these organizations through lectures and meetings" and the different sections served as "centres for discussion and formulation of economic demands." In addition there was the emergence of a Central Bureau of Trade Unions in St. Petersburg in1906 which led to "the unionization of some 9,500 'militant' metalworkers in the space of just three months."
Also in St. Petersburg the presence of trade unions led to the employers forming the Petersburg Society of Mill and Factory Workers (PSMFO) and their "consistent refusal to accept the unions as legitimate bargaining agents for 'their' workers became central points in employer argumentation and practice in this period." The struggle between the two sides led to increased radicalism and it is thought that the workers protest became less spontaneous and more intentional. Therefore the summer strikes generated new types of protest with "work slowdowns, boycotts on jobs and work orders, picketing, and work stoppages in selected shops." These types of action were much more infuriating for the owners and it was often harder for them to find proof and punish those who were responsible.
However even when trade unions were banned, for example with the 1912 Convention, it did not ease the tensions and arguably forced the workers into more aggressive and radical ways of protesting. Changes in the way the workers expressed their opinion were doubly problematic for the state because they were the front line for the protests even if they were not protesting against the Tsar. This was because "Relations between workers and employers were frequently mediated by government authorities, transforming conflicts over workplace conditions into political confrontations." It is argued that the Tsar should have helped the situation by taking steps to de-politicise industrial relations but "in the prevailing conditions nothing could have been more difficult to implement," and the state would have probably ended up losing the majority of its control over the factories. The final problem with the prohibiting of trade unions is that the workers were left with no other way to express their views except by becoming more aggressive or trying the traditional method of petitioning the Tsar directly. However, petitioning the Tsar could be a dangerous step as many found out at the beginning of the 1905 Revolution.
The 1905 Revolution was begun by a peaceful march of mainly metal workers who went to the Winter Gardens to petition the Tsar under the banner of the legal Gapon Assembly on the 9 th January. Despite the workers' peaceful intentions the Tsar's troops fired upon them killing and injuring many and causing uproar from workers across the Russian Empire. The resulting October Manifesto gave many workers belief that they now had more freedom to protest about their grievances and hoped that more would be done to help them. After October 17 th in the so-called 'Days of Freedom', the "St. Petersburg metal-workers and others sought to exercise their newly won civil rights by meeting freely, speaking openly and reading an uncensored press." Some hoped that the constitution and the Duma it granted would be the dawn of a new era, "an era of rule by a constitutional monarch, whose power was tempered by a representative assembly."
These freedoms were short-lived however, and after 1905 "The Duma was hemmed in, freedom of the press restricted and manipulated where possible, unions harassed, and radical parties driven back underground." The Tsar backtracking on his promises caused much longer lasting problems than he realised at the time as he had given the people a taste of freedom but taken it away again so suddenly. The ultimate result of these circumstances was that they "served to disillusion workers with the possibilities for peaceful change under the tsarist system and drove them toward more drastic and radical solutions to labor problems." It was in this sort of climate that those with revolutionary aspirations began to have an influence within political parties, in particular the Social Democratic and the Socialist Revolutionary parties.
From as early on as 1901, before the events of the Revolution even took place, parties were formed such as the Socialist Revolutionary Party who were taken from previous revolutionaries, the People's Will, and included both a political and a terrorist wing. These parties often conducted illegal revolutionary work and "carried on political and party functions, such as the dissemination of Social Democratic literature and illegal publications and the organization of political protests and demonstrations." Due to the affects of the 1905 Revolution the Russian Social Democratic Party began to realise as early as 1907 that "the workers were no better off than they had been in 1904," something which led to even more radicalism and enabled both the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks to influence labour militancy.
It was undoubtedly the Bolsheviks who were the most aggressively revolutionary and their "efforts to transform unions into vehicles for revolutionary struggle gained appeal among workers in 1913-1914 because of the union's inability to represent and defend workers' collective interests openly and legally." Those who had become impatient with the Mensheviks and who had become fed up of the Tsar's dictatorship were attracted to the Bolsheviks who advocated a labour radicalism very much supporting strikes and strong protest.
Those willing to rebel against Tsarism grew in number especially after the events which took place at the Lena Goldfields in Siberia. In April 1912 peacefully assembled miners were shot by tsarist troops for presenting demands to the mine's management, an action which, like the incident at the Winter Gardens, shocked workers across Russia. In fact, Heather Hogan argues that the Lena strikes provided a pivotal event, "unleashing years of building resentment within proletarian Petersburg, while also helping to ignite oppositional sentiment within broader segments of society frustrated by the incompetence of the autocracy."
The Mensheviks too benefited from the outcry at Lena and they were able to make "substantial inroads into the trade-union movement in St. Petersburg, Moscow, and elsewhere." Victoria Bonnell writes that under the influence of all the political parties and factions certain key ideas were widely adopted in the organized labour movement, in particular that of,
This idea of an emerging class consciousness is also a factor that needs to be considered in the increasing radicalism of the Russian workers. The more they felt they could identify with each other and become a solid force, the more belief they had that they could be successful in challenging the system and achieve their goals. It is hard to know to what extent a class consciousness emerged amongst the workers across Russia but the importance of the accumulation of similar experiences must have had a strong affect on their perceptions of the realities which confronted them.
However, perhaps the most important reason for the increase in labour militancy in the years before 1914 is probably the most obvious reason; that the workers were forced to live and work in such poor conditions. Although their conditions can be compared with many other countries at the same stage of industrialisation it has to be remembered that these bad conditions were the reason why it was necessary to voice any grievances and become involved in revolutionary groups. For the workers; "Wages were low, hours were long, accidents frequent, job security non-existent for many, sickness benefit and compensation unheard of," in addition to over crowded housing and fines imposed for absenteeism and unpunctuality. Christopher Read shows that in 1904 over 10% of the labour force in metal-working factories were injured, a huge 67,000 people, and a further were 556 killed.
It is possible to show exactly how much the people were aggrieved by their situation if the two strikes at the Erikson phone and the Atlas Engineering plants in June to August of 1906 are viewed. The workers demands were for a nine-hour workday with an hour and a half for lunch, the replacement of hourly with daily shop pay so Saturday could count for a whole day and pay and amnesty for the strike. In another example workers wanted pay for the day of Nicholas II's coronation in May 1896 at the Rossiiskaia cotton mills in St. Petersburg. This simple demand led to some 30,000 people going on strike which was one of the biggest strikes ever to take place in Europe.
In conclusion, I believe that the poor conditions the workers were faced with led them to need to air their grievances publicly in an attempt to change their situation. However, due to the Russian state and its refusal to modernise or adapt, everything the workers did was politicised and the Tsar made the mistake of using violence to put down strikes. The 1905 Revolution and the events at Lena were used by the intelligentsia and political factions to make sure that workers maintained their radicalism and harboured revolutionary aspirations.