The decade before the Civil War broke out was one of heightening tensions between the Northern and Southern states. This was due to many factors but the most important was unquestionably the divisive issue of slavery and whether or not it should be allowed to continue. Controversial legislation such as the Kansas-Nebraska Act created a huge amount of debate and American politics became revolved around what was the correct action needed with regards to new states being formed. Added to this was the increasing difference between the economy of the North and the South and hence what they each required from the government. Therefore the government's failure to unite both sides due to a highly centralised system and inadequate leadership meant that it was arguably inevitable that political accommodation between the North and the South would break down in the 1850's.
The issue of slavery had always been a cause for disagreement between the two halves of the country as the South relied almost exclusively on cotton trade to form the bulk of their economy whereas the North had never been involved in this industry to such an extent. In the South it was a perfectly accepted way of life and there were a large amount of cotton plantations owning numerous amounts of Black slaves. Southerners argued that the plantation owners provided shelter, food and care for the slaves where as free workers in the North had to endure much worse conditions and fend completely for themselves.
However the difference of opinion was not really a cause for concern until new areas of land which were to be organised into new states appeared and suddenly legislation was needed from the government on whether or not slavery was to be permitted there. This was especially the case after the Mexican War ended in 1848 and land was acquired from Mexico and what is now Texas. This resulted in the Compromise of 1850 where California was allowed to enter as a free state, New Mexico and Utah could have popular sovereignty and slavery was prohibited in the District of Colombia. This was, as its name suggests, an attempt to balance out the number of slave and free states but the South was not entirely happy about new states being able to choose for themselves. In this way the Compromise was one of the first acts to lead to public tension as it 'forced rival Northern and Southern visions of the national future out into the open'.
The other major piece of legislation which was passed concerning slavery in this decade was the Kansas-Nebraska Act in 1854 which has been described as 'the most important single event pushing the nation toward civil war'. Whether this is entirely accurate or not it definitely caused a huge public split between the North and South as the legislation decreed that new territories could decide themselves whether to allow slavery. In the North 'it was widely and strongly felt that the South was the aggressor' in pushing the act through and it created further divisions by giving strength to both the pro-slavery and anti-slavery forces to try and determine the 'popular' decision in Kansas to be in their favour.
As tensions mounted feelings of nationalism within the South began to gain in strength and the 'Northern threat to slavery was interpreted as a totally unacceptable intrusion into Southern affairs, and led to a closing of Southern ranks'. During the 1850's, as we will see later on, the South saw themselves in an increasingly minority position within the Union and came to see American nationalism as being beneficial simply for the North. Political accommodation further broke down due to this as 'defence of sectional interests within the Union could easily lead to the affirmation of separate national identity'. This is, of course, exactly what happened and the more the North attacked the notion of slavery the more the South rallied together and vehemently defended the principle.
The reason these tensions became so apparent in the 1850's, however, can be attributed some what to the vocal nature of both the abolitionists of the North and the so called 'fire-eaters' of the South. As early as 1850 the most prominent members of the fire-eaters, Edmund Ruffin, Robert Rhett and William Yancey, were urging secession at a conference held in Nashville, Tennessee. They were particularly extreme in their views and pointed out that they were 'wearing homespun, proclaiming the need for a Southern economic self-sufficiency'. These sorts of Southern sentiments only continued throughout the decade and it has been argued that the Civil War actually 'resulted more from the whipping up of emotions than from the impact of realistic issues'.
The end of this decade was also the period of the Lincoln-Douglas debates which captured the publics' attention and persuaded people to take one side or the other. However these debates were misleading as Abraham Lincoln did not believe in the total abolition of slavery and believed it should be protected where it already existed where as Stephen Douglas held a typical Southern view that slavery should fully continue and be allowed in new territories. This did not stop the Southern hatred of Lincoln though and his presence in public and consequently running for President did a great deal to stir up feelings against the North.
The South was also unhappy about literary publications regarding slavery and especially the publication of Uncle Tom's Cabin by Harriet Beecher Stove which had sold half a million copies by 1857. The book helped to raise awareness of the brutality of slavery and was based on a family of slaves who escaped to Canada and set up a refuge for former slaves in Dresden, the Dawn Settlement. This kind of public and widespread criticism of the Southern way of life further alienated the South and hampered any potential compromise between the sides.
The end of the decade saw another incident which demonstrated how far political accommodation had broken down between the two sides. John Brown's seizure of the Harper's Ferry arsenal in 1859 and his call for the insurrection of the slaves was a complete disaster after he was besieged within thirty-six hours. He did however manage to seize the Potomac River Bridge, the Shenandoah River Bridge and the Federal armoury and his subsequent trial created a great deal of public attention. The abolitionists viewed him as a martyr when he was hung in December 1859 and the Southerners perceived the North as an ever increasing threat and one where its individuals were willing to use force and violence.
I mentioned earlier that the South was increasingly feeling as though it occupied a minority position within the Union but this was not just because of the pressure to abolish slavery. Economic differences between the North and South were becoming even more apparent as the century went on and by the 1850's 'industrial growth, urban growth, large-scale immigration were helping both to boost the North's majority status and to intensify the divergence of character between Northern and Southern society'. In particular they disagreed over the possibility of bringing in a tariff which could protect Northern manufacture but would at the same time be detrimental to the South as trading cotton for foreign goods would not be as easy any more.
In addition the North wanted an improved banking and currency system and federal subsidies for shipping which the South saw as discriminatory and favouring Northern commercial interests. This led a contemporary, Charles A. Beard, to remark that 'Southern agrarianism and Northern industrialism must necessarily clash because of their dissimilarity' and this view is certainly a valid one when the occurrence of the Civil War is considered. When economic differences are analysed it is interesting to see that, although the South is often seen as the side that encouraged sectionalism, the Northern support for a tariff or for 'sectional internal improvements, adopted by sectional majorities in the national government, was no less sectional than Southern opposition to them'.
These differing view points both about slavery and the economy may not have been such divisive issues, however, if the government had been able to unite the two sides and create compromises as each difficult situation arose. America had a highly de-centralized, federal system and Washington was often referred to as a capital without a country. This meant that splits were inevitable let alone when a crisis occurred and it lacked 'the institutional safety net to cope with the great sectional crisis when it came'. Therefore it may have been that by the 1850's the central government had already let the problems between North and South escalate too far and it was unlikely that their differences would ever be reconciled in a peaceful way which would accommodate both sides.
In particular it was again the issue of slavery where the authorities gave out mixed signals with regards to its stance on whether it could continue and if it could then to what extent and where this was allowed. This was seen most publicly with the Dred Scott Case which finally finished in 1857 after ten years of deliberation on what the verdict would be. Scott had been a slave and sought freedom after marrying another slave, Harriet Robinson, and spending time in the free states of Illinois and Wisconsin. Eventually it was ruled that Scott was not recognised as an American citizen and therefore could not sue for freedom and even if he was living a free state was not free from slavery. The Supreme Court declaring 'for the Southern position that the Constitution forbade the exclusion of slavery from the territories' outraged many in the North and greatly influenced the nomination of Lincoln to the Republican Party and his subsequent election.
The 1850's was therefore the decisive decade in whether political accommodation between the North and South would be achieved and it was slavery that played the major role in ensuring that it would break down. The South could not imagine life without it and it was seen as a necessity in keeping their economy going even if it was not growing at the same rate as in the North. This divisive issue was not helped by the government's failure to unite both sides and provide a firm stance on where they stood with strong leadership. Economic differences meant that the South saw themselves in an increasingly minority position in the Union and it has been argued that the perceived 'Northern takeover of American nationalism impelled Southerners towards the idea of their own separate nationhood'. These difficulties all combined to split the country in two and a civil war seemed the only option to many to finally settle their disagreements and achieve a united America once more.