The fifteenth century saw the first successful attempts at discovering and exploring the land mass that we know today as North America but it was not until later on in the sixteenth century that any European country showed direct signs of establishing colonies across the Atlantic. The appeal of new, 'virgin' lands full of opportunity and the possibility of finding exotic treasures similar to the gold and silver found in South America were all key reasons for European countries to begin colonisation. Add to this the existing social, and often religious, unrest found in many parts of Europe and migration to America seemed like the perfect solution.
Initially, many of those who wanted to journey to America were solely interested in making their fortune and wanted to find passages enabling quicker access to the spices of Asia. Despite there often being a lack of interest from the English crown, 'the prospects of finding a passage to Asia or getting around in front of Spanish exploitation of the interior were still powerful lures to imaginative men'. This was true not only just of England but of France, Spain, and possibly to a lesser extent, Holland too. Both John Cabot and Christopher Columbus were in search of the source of the spices they had seen in Mecca and initially believed they had sailed to Asia and not America. For many years afterwards America was believed to have a special short cut through to Asia which could be exploited and bring fortune to those who discovered it first. These beliefs formed some of the initial reasons why colonisation began to take place.
This desire to discover new and exotic goods and jewels was fuelled a great deal by the Spanish due to their many discoveries in areas in South America. Many asked the question 'if gold and silver could be found in Mexico and Peru, why not in North America?" Indeed this was a consideration for France as the French explorer, Jacques Cartier, under financial support from Francis I, set sail 'to find great quantity of gold and other valuable things' to where we now know to be Newfoundland.
The Spanish also amplified hopes of establishing successful colonies through their ability to multiply the number of cattle, pigs, sheep and horses that they had taken over to South America. This had such an effect to lead Englishmen at the time to believe that 'English settlers would harness American soils and climate to produce goods to satisfy all England's imported wants...rendering it independent of foreign suppliers." This Spanish influence suggesting that it was possible to take European culture and civilisation and plant it over in new lands with the minimum of difficulty, provided a strong argument to go ahead with the process of colonisation.
However this possibility led to a huge amount of competition between Europe's main players. England, France and Holland were very much aware of how beneficial Spain's acquisition of land in South America was to the Spanish and wanted to turn North America similarly to their own advantage. They were worried that Spain would inevitably be the first to exploit the new land as it was seen by some that 'North America was just another of the vast areas in the west which Spain could invade and settle as and when she chooses'. This Iberian domination of the 'new world' was particularly hated by the French who were often at war with their neighbours and the 'French kings had never accepted the arbitrary division of the world between the Spanish and Portuguese.'
English sentiments were similar and in addition to wanting to get the better of the Spanish in acquiring land in America they even took to stealing treasures directly from Spanish ships due mainly to 'hopes of profit and hatred of popery." This was on top of a developing sense of national pride which got stronger in the quest to be the supreme country in Europe and 'English freebooting, like English trade and expansion,' has been described as 'becoming more and more a racial activity." This intense competition and feelings of nationalism were to be found throughout Europe and were two of the main reasons England, France and Holland all attempted to out do each other through colonisation in America.
However the Dutch seemed to have slightly differing priorities in the sense that their main reasons for travelling to America were more for temporary trade purposes than for permanent colonisation. The Dutch began to establish an impressive naval fleet and 'with ships built at a third the cost of the English and with a low rate of interest upon which to capitalize their undertakings,' they could see great prospects in setting up trade with America and often with the natives themselves. They were able to set up the West India Trading Company which, until 1664, 'controlled at New Amsterdam a base of immense strategical importance." In fact the French became extremely desirous of Holland and England as 'Both groups could provide Indian trade goods at prices considerably lower than the French.'
Nevertheless, the French had further reasons for wanting to colonise America as they had become able to exploit the many resources around the Gulf of St Lawrence. They had a monopoly over much of this area and the English were somewhat envious as 'Its fish and whales and fur were tempting." Brebner even claims that 'the summer fur trade of the St Lawrence had become so valuable as to make desirable both regulation of it among Frenchman and protection of it from encroachments by men of other nations'. This sort of struggle between countries was inevitably going to become a reason to attempt colonisation because even before migration had seriously begun this competition had become apparent. An example of this being that 'as the demand for fish grew in the 1580's, there was fierce competition between the French, Basques and English for cod and for the oil taken from whale and walrus'.
To add to this, there were opportunities to find new trades and trade routes all over America but 'the incentive most talked about in the sixteenth century, however, was timber, the most widely used natural product in European society' and a product found in abundance in the new world. The availability of access to new sources of goods and indeed new goods themselves played a major role in attracting Spain, France, Holland and England to attempt colonisation in these fresh lands.
Tobacco needs to be highlighted as one of the most important persuasive products in encouraging colonisation, especially for the English. The beauty of tobacco was that 'the crop was easy to grow and required small capital investment', and therefore the possibility of profit making was exceptionally high. This certainly occurred and 'The high prices prevailing in the early years ensured good returns and encouraged further migration to America." Not only were goods which could produce a large trade and therefore profit an incentive to colonise but there were goods which could benefit society, in particular a country's health. In 1603, at a time when London was suffering an outbreak of Plague, Martin Pring brought back a cargo of sassafras 'a plant considered a panacea for syphilis, plague and other disease' which contributed a great deal to the propaganda in favour of colonisation.
The social conditions of this time across Europe were another factor in the decision to pursue colonisation. For England this period was a time of huge population growth, with the number of people doubling from two and a half million in 1500 to around five million a century later. Inevitably this put tremendous pressure on food and land resources which led to many rural communities losing people to more urban areas in search of work. However, the standard of living in these urban areas was extremely low for the majority so when news of large quantities of fresh land across the water emerged, the starting up of colonies in North America was viewed as an excellent solution.
The importance of additional land available to many countries in a densely populated Europe is highlighted by the fact that 'land was not only what they lived on but what they lived off, since agriculture was the only major industry." By using this new land a 'major economic advantage to be gained from colonies, it was urged, was freedom from population pressure." This was not simply an ideal solution for the Monarchs of Europe to ease economic tensions but was seen by the people as a fresh start for themselves away from their tough lives, struggling to exist on a daily basis. This popular support is a further reason why many countries began colonisation as the majority of those who wanted to migrate 'expected material betterment, seeking escape from the rising landlessness, unemployment, and falling real wages.'
These potential benefits to society, on top of the economic advantages of trade, were able to contribute greatly to improving political stability. Increasingly the benefits of colonisation were seen by rulers in terms of the amount of land under their country's jurisdiction and 'During the reigns of the first two Stuart Kings, the 'good of England' became increasingly associated with expanding English commerce and nurturing an incipient seaborne empire." So colonisation was embarked upon by Spain, England, Holland and France because of the wish to expand their empires for political gain in the sense of wishing to be seen as the superpower of the continent above their rivals.
Alongside social, economic and political reasons for colonisation, religion also had a significant part to play. There are examples from England, Spain, France and Holland of religious differences being both the push away from Europe and the pull towards America. The push away resulted from the turbulent changes which were occurring across Europe due to the many reformations and counter-reformations which were taking place. All over Europe 'many minority religious groups wanted to escape the danger of their own country to set up their own communities in a free land'. This is true of the Pilgrims of Plymouth and the Puritans of Boston who came over in whole communities in an attempt to practice their religions in peace.
The first large-scale migrations of the British people, which led to the founding of New England, have been described as 'essentially the product of religious differences', which is not hard to believe due, for example, to the number of changes to England's official religion over the sixteenth century. In France too religious tensions played a part and later in the seventeenth century, 'Huguenots banished from France migrated, their Protestantism not the problem in the British Atlantic that it had been in their homeland'.
As well as many Europeans migrating to colonies due to unrest at home, there were some who left for America in the hope of spreading their particular religion to the native people. This was another area in which competition between Catholic Spain and France and Protestant England and Holland served to increase attempts at colonisation. Groups in Spain such as the humanist friars felt they needed to travel to America as 'Its vast populations were to be set on new paths of Christian virtue and godliness." In England also their 'forays were intended to bring Protestant Christianity to the natives and to counter Spanish Catholicism's missionary campaign'. As well as this, 'English rulers assumed that their subjects in the New World would adhere to the Church of England, transplanting the hierarchy, ritual, and loyal worships that they also sought' and therefore be able to 'tie the natives to the colonisers and cement loyalty to the crown'.
Overall, new, fresh lands were always going to be popular in an environment of a rapidly growing population and an often declining standard of living. In this way it could be argued that 'Success, or the news of success, in settling in North America was the best incentive of all." Therefore English, Spanish, French and Dutch reasons for colonisation were fairly similar and became intertwined a great deal especially through rivalry with each other and the desire to be the country to best exploit the new available resources. This, alongside social, religious and sometimes political unrest, were the main factors in determining the decision to colonise in America.