Despite recent criticism of the grand theories of integration I am going to argue that they are actually very useful tools for analysing European Union (EU) policy making. Federalism, functionalism, neo-functionalism, intergovernmentalism and liberal intergovernmentalism are all useful because they look at different aspects of European integration and explain what has happened at various stages in the EUs history. They have certainly provoked discussion and as a result new theories have been put forward, both regarding the EU and international relations. It is especially hard to dismiss their importance in the light of the argument that "a consensus on the causes and the future of the integration process remains as elusive as ever" and so it is difficult to claim that any new theories are superior to or damage the credibility of these original ones.
I am going to begin with an analysis of federalism, arguably the first main theory to be put forward by scholars looking to improve relations within Europe after the Second World War. Although many people argue that the European Union has fallen far short of the ideals of the main proponents of federalism, Jean Monnet, Walter Hallstein and Altiero Spinelli, it does encompass aspects of the federalist theory. The founding of the European Community (EC) brought together countries which had only recently been at war with each other and has grown to include twenty five countries who arguably never shared any meaningful connection before joining. Many federalists argued that unless "substantial changes were to occur to the political organisation of Europe, the continent would tear itself apart in nationalistic internecine conflict." We know that since the formation of the EU there has not been any inter-European war and there has never seriously threatened to be either. So if federalism set out to form an institution to keep the peace between European countries then it has succeeded in doing just that.
Another benefit of using federalism is that "democratic representation of all participating communities emerges as a common defining property" and this is something which happens within policy making in the EU. Even with enlargement every country has their own Commissioner, own representative on the Council of Ministers and seats in the European Parliament. Obviously some countries have more power than others and more seats in Parliament but this is the same in other federal systems such as in the United States where states with more wealth can often wield more power than their neighbouring states. Federalism also looks to make the federated state stronger in the face of external threats; a recent example of this being EU sanctions on imported clothes from China in order to protect European businesses. This is a clear example of a collective decision being made with consultation of all represented nation-states and the EU standing firm against outside pressures.
It is easy to criticise federalism as being a theory which described a certain place in time reacting to a certain situation but "perhaps the most significant thing to be said about federalism is that it continues to be a powerful discourse of some of the possibilities inherent in the European integration process". It is important to remember that it is a theory which was trying to put forward a way which would best benefit Europe and it was not trying to explain what was or has actually happened since the end of the Second World War. In fifty years time, or after the current integration crisis has passed, it may well be that the European Union will become more recognisable as a federal state and federalism may be pushed back up as the 'grandest' theory of integration.
Moving on to another grand theory; functionalism proposed by David Mitrany is perhaps the hardest of all to describe as being useful but it is certainly not redundant as a concept. In fact it is a very positive theory as "The foundations of functionalism tend to reside in a positive view of human possibilities and, to some extent, of human nature. Rational, peaceful progress is possible; conflict and disharmony are not endemic to the human condition." Organisations such as the EU are moving all the time to promote a better world to live in, for example with environmental legislation, and attempting to keep world wide peace. In other areas of functionalism there is an emphasis on the principle of technical self-determination which can be found somewhat within the EU with the existence of consultative bodies that employ many experts in whichever area is being looked at. Before making important decisions or proposing policy a huge amount of research is done and specialists are called upon to give their expert opinion.
In addition, Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman borrowed key aspects of the functionalist method in seeting up the European Coal and Steel Industry when they "employed Mitrany's focus on technical, sector-specific integration and his emphasis on avoiding political debates about the surrender of national sovereignty". Nonetheless functionalism has been heavily criticised as having a poor record of prediction and for not being scientific or methodological enough. Mitrany defended himself against these criticisms by arguing that his work was about "advocacy rather than prediction" and "theoretical rigour was problematic because it denoted practical rigidity and creative closure." His last point I think is highly persuasive because the changes the EU has encountered over the years back up Mitrany's argument that because human needs change over time and vary across space "this means that the design of institutional solutions has to be an open-minded and flexible process." Although many current scholars of integration would deny an affiliation to functionalism, it could be argued that recent work on EU governance "certainly shares the imagery of complex, overlapping, multi-level authorities that we find in the functionalist repertoire."
The key importance of functionalism, however, is that it laid the foundations for the neofunctionalist integration theory; "the branch of international theory most closely associated with the development of the European Communities." At the heart of the neofunctionalist theory is three types of spill-over; political, economic and geographical, all of which can be found within the EU today. Although neo-functionalists such as Ernst Haas have argued that this spill-over would lead to a complete transfer of interests towards a new centre it is possible to see compromises between countries over various issues, the biggest probably being the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). Countries such as France, who needed large subsidies for their farming industry, affected policy making as other countries throughout Europe then required different monies to make up for this inequality. In fact it can be said that the community method completely characterised the EEC decision making process between in its formative years "as the six original members met alongside the Commission to put in place the essential elements of the EEC customs union and the CAP." The community method can also be found in the EU today with joint lobbying activities of organised interests, the involvement of national governments in complex negotiations at the European level and the Commission's right of legislative initiative and a certain tendency for upgrading the 'European' interest.
Haas also believed that supranational institutions would "develop into repositories of knowledge to ensure the continuation of integrative momentum and the durability of the integration achievement." This has happened to some extent with the formation of the European Monetary Union and with the widespread use of the Euro. Critics point to the so-called current 'crisis of integration' in the EU but it has been typical of the EUs history that integration has slowed and then picked up again with new leaders or directives. It is highly plausible to think that despite the rejection of the constitution the integration process will get back on track in the coming years and it may be easier to again see neofunctionalism as an extremely useful tool of analysing policy making. Furthermore, whatever criticisms can be made about neofunctionalism today, the theory has been integral to the study of European policy making in the second half of the twentieth century and "the main propositions of the approach have been defined, tested, reformulated and re-evaluated by some of the finest political scientists of the day."
Despite my defence of neofunctionalism I am also going to endeavour to defend the theory put forward by Stanley Hoffman; intergovernmentalism, which is arguably the opposite of the neofunctionalist school. I can do this because I am not trying to find the best theory or to argue that all of the theories are one hundred percent useful but that aspects of all of them are needed when trying to understand what has happened in the EU both since its formation and what is happening now. So if neo-functionalism shows what has happened when integration is going well then intergovernmentalism attempts to explain why there are times when national interests are prioritised. Much of the literature came about because of Charles de Gaulle as he was the man largely responsible for the vetoing of the British membership application in 1963 and it was his objections to proposals for institutional reform which lay at the heart of the empty chair crisis when France withdrew from EC business for a portion of 1965. Even later with the accession of new member states such as the UK, Ireland and Denmark in 1973, "member governments made clear that they would resist the gradual transfer of sovereignty to the Community, and that EC decision-making would reflect the continuing primacy of the nation state."
Therefore Hoffman used this evidence to argue that the role of the nation state had been underestimated and he portrayed Western Europe as "grappling with the contradictory logics of integration and diversity." He also realised that there was a difference in the effectiveness of integration when you considered high and low politics separately. It is true that in the EU integration has been much easier to achieve in areas of low politics, for example health and safety, but much harder when the autonomy of national governments or issues of identity are at stake. Even if nation states are willing to make sacrifices economically for the long term good of the EU during economic downturns or recessions countries firmly look to their national interests as a priority. Many scholars would point to the current situation in the EU as a perfect example of Hoffman's analysis with countries rejecting the constitution to become a more united Europe in favour of keeping their national interest as the most important concern. However, intergovernmentalism, like functionalism, is argued to be more important than useful as it led to the formation of the final grand theory of integration; liberal intergovernmentalism.
Andrew Moravcsik has been the main advocate of liberal intergovernmentalism and argues that there is a mixture of national and European level interest. He believes that a national preference is put forward and then bargaining occurs at the EU level with the choice to adopt some EU institutions and delegate some sovereignty to supranational actors. This is perhaps the most persuasive of all the grand theories, and was the leading theory most recently in the 1990s, as it recognises the compromises made in all policy making decisions and appreciates the informal decision making process which occurs. Moravcsik argues that "the transaction costs of EU bargaining are low because of the long time-frame of negotiations and the innumerable possibilities for issue linkages, trade-offs and sub-bargains." This can be seen by the fact that so many countries have opted to join the EU as the advantages of being a member far outweigh any loss of sovereignty that will take place from time to time due to compromising over a certain issue.
Liberal intergovernmentalism is particularly useful because it focuses directly on policy making and is more concerned with trying to show what happens within the EU and not what should happen if the theory's predictions turned out to be correct, something which federalism does for example. Moravcsik also shows how, as a result of preference setting and bargaining, the environment in the EU becomes information rich as there is "widespread knowledge about the technicalities of EU policy making and states have a clear idea of the preferences of and constraints upon other states." This is true of now due to the transparency between the countries and institutions when embarking on policy making and the use of experts who provide copious amounts of information.
Some of the biggest criticisms of liberal intergovernmentalism have come from the scholar David Wincott and one of them in particular is that it is not theoretical enough and so should not be looked upon as a grand theory. This is easily defended by Moravcsik though as he states that it "has intrinsic theoretical content, since it is based on various assumptions, e.g. governments are the fundamental actors, they act in an instrumental fashion and, therefore, the formation of preferences analytically (though not always temporally) precedes bargaining, which in turn precedes delegation." He also defends himself against Wincott's criticism about the role of supranational actors by claiming that "Wincott fair-mindedly concedes substantial areas of agreement with Liberal Intergovernmentalism, including that member governments have delegated significant powers to supranational officials."
Every member state has had to delegate some of their previous power to institutions and officials in the EU and abide by a set of rules often not found at a national level.
In conclusion, I think that the grand theories of integration are useful in studying EU policy making as all of them highlight different parts of what is happening in the EU today and predict what may happen in the future. Although I have analysed each theory separately my argument for their usefulness is more one of bringing all of them together to give an overall picture and this is particularly easy to do when one theory does not seem to have eclipsed the others in importance. Despite new concepts, such as institutionalism and the governance theory, the grand theories have already identified the major aspects of EU policy making and have led in one way or the other to a lively debate and new ideas about the area; something which can only be good for the literature and perhaps bring us nearer to finding a definitive explanation about the workings of EU policy making.