The idea of an unconditional basic income (UBI) has been coming to the forefront of political discussion in recent times especially in European countries such as the Netherlands where its merits are being looked at more closely in an attempt to find a solution to unemployment and high levels of poverty. A UBI has been justified in terms of having the means to do what one might want to do, an argument of real freedom put forward predominantly by Philippe Van Parijs, and in terms of justice and equality of opportunity, an argument associated with John Rawls. There have been further advantages proposed but they have tended to be of a more pragmatic nature and it is the principled arguments of Rawls and of distributive justice which I will argue present the strongest reasoning for a UBI. I am going to compare the merits of my argument with those of other supporters and then attempt to defend a UBI against the many objections and alternatives which have been suggested.
Van Parijs defines a UBI as being paid by the government to every full member of society (excluding children) even if a person is unwilling to work, irrespective of them being rich or poor, whoever they might live with and with no regard to which part of the country they may live in. In this way there is no discrimination against anyone and no need for the amount received to have been means tested as is done with the benefit system in the United Kingdom today. This definition lends itself to many benefits which could be enjoyed by everyone who was a citizen of that particular country and therefore were able to receive an income.
The principal advantage of a basic income is probably the fact that a guaranteed social wage gives everyone a much larger than normal scope for choosing what to do with their life. In fact nearly all of the arguments in support of a UBI "are all animated by the common aim of enhancing individuals' occupational freedom." There is a choice of being able to do voluntary or charity work which many people may like to do but are unable due to financial constraints. There is also the possibility for people to remain at home to be a housewife or husband and look after children or indeed another loved one who needs caring for such as an elderly parent.
The extra income will allow people to be safe in the knowledge that they will not starve if they find themselves in a position where they cannot go out and earn a living, for whatever reason. Andrew Reeve writes that in the sense of thinking about opportunities to live as we might wish, "an unconditional income (at least of a certain level) adds to our choice-set the opportunity to consider the choice between work and leisure in a way otherwise unavailable." Van Parijs adds that "what the suggested institutional set-up is intended to do is not to discourage as much as possible waged labour or a career-dominated existence, but to do as much as can be done in order to provide everyone with a genuine opportunity to make different choices."
As well as someone being able to decide what they want to do with their life a UBI gives people the choice of when to do certain things. This independence means that wives would be free to leave abusive husbands without having to worry about having little money and people would be able to choose when to marry and have children with less regard to their financial status. It would also be possible to take more time over making important decisions and may give people the opportunity to try things beforehand or travel and see more of the world before being tied down. This is especially important in light of the current emphasis in society about the seemingly 'right' way to do things and the mindset that the best jobs are those with the biggest salaries and unfortunately it is the case that often people do not get the chance to enjoy the world for what it is and experience its diverse culture.
In addition it allows those who want to change career "to opt out of paid employment for a while and to return to the educational system (by bearing the major part of the finance cost of schooling) and it allows those with a strong vocation unrecognised by the market to stick to it." Moreover a guaranteed basic income could provide an income cushion to encourage 're-skilling' amongst workers. As advances in technology and changes in industry have rapidly occurred in the past few decades, politicians and employers have encouraged workers to acquire new skills and knowledge. However, "only a tiny proportion of workers in selected industries and occupations are provided with transitional income assistance when they temporarily leave full-time work to re-train or receive further education." Jobs themselves may also be improved as businesses could be forced into increasing wages and improving working conditions as a consequence of workers' increased "bargaining power with employers" and the resulting safety net to protect them from market vulnerabilities in the economy.
Furthermore there is a strong argument that it "may lead to a more equitable distribution of income, paid work, care work and free time among men and women." As a result of the biological differences females often still take primary responsibility for child-care and adjust their working lives to accommodate family needs. Secondly, and not coincidentally, women in America, for example, only earn about three quarters of what men earn and this can lead to "lifelong economic insecurity". Women could now be paid for looking after the home and children which is what many see as being an equally worthwhile job compared to working in an office all day. Anne Alstott believes that even a UBI below subsistence level could make a real difference in women's lives. She gives an excellent example where if you take the poverty line for a person in America being about $8,500 in 1999 then straight away if a UBI of less than half of that was considered it would mean for the median single mother an 18 percent increase in income - for the median elderly woman, a 40 percent increase.
I believe that all of the above advantages generated by a UBI can be justified in terms of Rawlsian justice which states that everyone should have equality of opportunity to achieve what they wish. This concept of justice as fairness is qualified by Rawls in a situation where everyone is under a so-called veil of ignorance in the original position. Rawls argues that in the original position where no-one knows anything of themselves or their place in society then they would choose the best conditions possible for everyone in case they were the one that ended up in the worst position. This certainly supports the idea of a UBI as a basic income helps the prospects of the majority of the most disadvantaged members of society not least by freeing "individuals from being bound to accept paid employment in order to meet their fundamental needs," and giving them time and choice if it is required.
Rawls continues that it is unfair if some inherit more than others or are born naturally stronger or more talented and therefore "from the standpoint of the original position, desert has no place." Rawls further qualifies this with his conception of the political community as a system of social cooperation and the understanding of social justice as "the fair organisation of such a cooperative venture and fair allocation of its joint products." Despite critics being quick to point out that social cooperation would invariably mean having a job to contribute to society it could equally mean helping out voluntarily or providing entertainment through possessing a particular skill. Moreover, Rawls's second principle of justice "gives priority to protecting individuals from being disadvantaged in the competition for jobs by class origin, and other misfortunes in the social lottery, over maximising the income and wealth of the least advantaged." This in fact lends itself to a more radical notion that a UBI is preferable in society even if the position of the least advantaged is not maximmined.
In reasoning that everyone has an equal entitlement to society's natural resources it reduces the problem of having to work out and favour a particular type of the 'good life' which as was mentioned earlier has become symptomatic of our society. This advantage is what Loek Groot has termed the neutrality postulate and is essential when trying to decide upon what is fair and what is not as Richard Arneson points out "Van Parijs would quite reasonably ask on what basis I claim to know that surfing is a better activity than eating potato chips and watching mindless TV."
However the Rawlsian idea of justice is by no means the only argument in favour of a UBI and it is Van Parijs who presents perhaps the other most compelling argument. The major difference with Van Parijs is that he bases his argument on the idea of real freedom and states that "one is really free, as opposed to just formally free, to the extent that possesses the means, not just the right, to do whatever one might want to do." Thus the leximining of real liberty is the key issue for Van Parijs where as "Rawls insists on the universality of the principles of justice" and sees equality of opportunity as being the main concern. Rawls himself does mention real freedom but he sees it as having primary social goods and not the money to enable someone to do whatever they may want to do.
Van Parijs also makes the case for a UBI helping people out of the unemployment trap and therefore alleviating poverty. The argument is that currently in many European countries people will get more money from collecting state benefits than by finding a low paid job and this is no way encourages people to go back to work. Many people would be reluctant to look for work due to the "uncertainty in renouncing a safe and regular benefit as a result of taking up a job which they may soon prove unable to keep or to bear." This would not be the case with a UBI because as soon as someone managed to find a job they liked they would be immediately earning more than they would be getting from solely their government income. Although this is a welcome advantage of a UBI it does not really lend much weight to its cause as there are other ways that could possibly alleviate the unemployment trap, for example, the fact that people need to be actively seeking work in order to claim in the United Kingdom or the possibility of cutting unemployment benefits altogether.
Further arguments in favour of a UBI cover aspects such as the fact that there would be no time delay in receiving it and it would "at least give people the real freedom not to starve while waiting for tax administration to calculate their entitlements." There would also be no need to intrusively pry into households' private details, something which would surely improve the liberty and rights of a nation. These issues are also linked with the problem of experiencing humiliation and stigmatization which many families or individuals must feel when having to give details of their failures and apply for means tested benefits. Rawls himself mentions the social basis of self-worth and believes a UBI would stop those receiving the income feeling "ashamed of themselves, or undermine their self-respect." Brian Barry gives the example of the British economist Tony Atkinson who has calculated that "even a basic income at a rate of half the standard state benefit would take millions of people off means-tested benefits, which are demoralizing, demeaning, and expensive to administer."
The administration cost is another factor which is cited as being beneficial if a UBI was to be employed as the expense would be dramatically reduced. The only check would need to be if someone was a citizen of a particular country and if they were still alive. There would be no huge forms to fill in or lengthy delays while processing the details and far less people would need to be employed to make sure the claims were accurate. It should also reduce fraudulent claims and would save the millions of pounds tax payers lose every year to people receiving benefits who should not be or it would enable the money to be put to better use on a health service or education system.
With regards to the economy there would be potential benefits too such as the enhanced flexibility of the labour market and the better opportunity workers would have to learn or improve their skills as mentioned above. One current example can be found in the European Union today where the Common Agricultural Policy costs European countries a huge amount of money. However, with a UBI, farmers' incomes could be supported without having to distort agricultural prices to such an extent. There is also a possibility that individuals would become more enterprising and adventurous "in that it would reduce the fear of extreme deprivation, or of uncertainty with respect to subsistence income." All of these things could serve to improve a country's economy and make it more efficient in the long run.
One final argument for a UBI comes from Emma Rothschild and is that a society of people who are more equal are perhaps "more likely to have a sense that they live in the same (international) society as other, distant people." This may mean that "a society of greater and more universal justice would also be a society that was more open to individuals and influences from other societies," therefore helping to eradicate racism and fascism.
Nevertheless, as beneficial as all of the above arguments would be to society and as helpful as they may be in making a case for a UBI, if a country is taking the decision to convert to a basic income there needs to be a principled argument presented and agreed upon before any pragmatic advantages can be accepted. There are other ways to create some of the advantages mentioned above but often it cannot be done as there is little justification to do so and the majority of the public may see any action taken as being unfair. Although pragmatic advantages often swing an opinion in the end there needs to be an initial justification for something as radical as a UBI.
This is why an argument based on Rawlsian justice and not liberty is the best way to present a case for a UBI. By giving everyone an equal opportunity to a better quality of life, whatever that may be in their own eyes, the condition of society improves as the whole. Despite the objection that people are self-interested, so may change their mind from when they were in the original position in light of knowing their real situation, this is not necessarily the point as Barry shows that "Rawls's conclusions are intended to appeal to his readers' sense of justice, not their self-interest." In Western society people are very much concerned with justice and people receiving what they deserve, the prominent law and judiciary systems being an obvious example. This is also why in the United Kingdom we give benefits to single parents with infants on the basis that they did not choose this path and events out of their hands along the way forced them into a more unfortunate position.
However despite the number of arguments in favour of a UBI, and before I come to the main objections against it, a UBI needs to be defended against the number of alternatives which have also been put forward. The main contender of the UBI is what many Western countries use at the moment; a mix of participation income and means testing. The idea is that those who find themselves in a particularly bad situation economically can apply to receive government benefits which are designed to help in the short term. However unless someone is suffering with a long term problem, for example being disabled, they have to prove that they are actively seeking employment. Many see this as being entirely fair otherwise it is possible to claim money for doing nothing and there are worries that that would have a detrimental effect on society.
Yet means tested benefits come up against many of the pragmatic disadvantages I have already mentioned such as the affect on people's self-worth and the high administration costs as well as the fact that "sheer ignorance or confusion is bound to prevent some people from getting access to advance payments they could have claimed." Nonetheless it is the participation issue that causes greatest concern as it raises two main problems with the principles behind a UBI. The first is the stipulation that people must be actively seeking work and be available at any given moment. Immediately this rules out "their using the time to improve their qualifications, engage in community work, or help a neighbour while earning a bit extra."
The second difficulty is that governments are assuming that having a job is the best way to lead a life and they are overlooking those who may be trying to participate in another type of life such as building a career as a sports person. There is also the problem of some people being able to participate better than others maybe not because of a disability but because of a difference in natural talents and ability. It is hard to say that it is fair that someone gets paid more for working longer hours if they were born stronger and more naturally able. Even if there were some means of universally being able to tell who were weaker and compensate them there is still a problem due to "our inability to measure the respective contributions of natural endowment and freely directed effort towards any specific accomplishment."
An alternative which America has chosen to use is the Earned Income Tax Credit or EITC which is a refundable tax credit that reduces or eliminates the taxes that low-income working people pay (such as payroll taxes) and also frequently operates as a wage subsidy for low-income workers. It has proved highly successful in the US as an anti-poverty tool but it still means that it is necessary for someone to be in a job to enjoy any benefit. Additionally the scheme has encountered difficulties in that the error rate remains extremely high and this costs the government billions of dollars each year. There has also been evidence that the increase in labor supply which it has affected has led to a fall in hourly wages among those eligible for the credit.
Along similar lines is the negative income tax scheme (NIT) which would replace the current progressive income tax system used throughout most of the western world. This would be replaced by a flat tax of, say, 25%, but each taxpayer would also be given 10,000 by the government. Thus a person earning only 4000 per year would pay 1000 in taxes, but overall would receive a net gain of 9,000 from the government. A person making 40,000 would be at the break-even point and would neither pay taxes nor receive any benefits. A person making 1,000,000 per year would pay close to the full 25% tax, as the 10,000 would count little towards relieving the tax burden. Unfortunately this scheme also means that you only receive the 10,000 if you are already paying taxes, i.e. you are in a job. In addtition the incentive to commit fraud may be increased with an NIT since the monetary reward for fraud could be larger than a taxpayer's total tax liability. Critics claim that the added expense of policing fraud would more than offset the reduction in administration resulting from the cancellation of current welfare services. Furthermore the administrative costs involved in the advance payment scheme that must be coupled to a negative income-tax system "make the latter more expensive to run for any given level of income guarantee, and therefore absorb resources that could otherwise be used to swell this level."
Other options are a wage cost subsidy or a marginal wage cost subsidy which would benefit employers if they could produce certain jobs. A wage cost subsidy would go to employers who create extra low paid jobs for the unemployed and a marginal wage cost subsidy is paid out for the creation of extra jobs or for hiring unemployed job seekers. There are two main negatives to these proposals; Paul de Beer points out that employers may lower the wage of existing jobs that are just above the income ceiling of the subsidy in order to become eligible for the wage subsidy and so "although the workers in these jobs would not drop below the poverty line, the position of this low income group would nevertheless deteriorate." Finally there is evidence to suggest that "creating an extra job is more expensive than paying an unemployment benefit or social assistance, so a rise of the tax burden would be necessary to balance the government budget."
A strong argument in favour of a UBI is that it gives people the choice to engage in voluntary work perhaps in the community or looking after a sick relative. In America they have tried to cater for this and have set up an organisation called Americorps which, "since 1994, more than 100,000 Americans have had the opportunity... to engage in compensated national and community service." Although this has gone a long way towards helping those who choose to provide this sort of service there is still a lack of choice if you join the organisation. There are only certain schemes available and the tax code only compensates those who are looking after an immediate relative and does not take into consideration friends or other dependents.
Finally there are some alternatives which are a lot closer to the idea of a UBI but which face their own problems. Some scholars have advocated the idea of each person receiving a lump sum when they reach maturity, perhaps aged 18 or 21, which they can choose to do what they want with. Although this would be acceptable under Rawls's equality of opportunity theory it brings pragmatic concerns if someone who receives the money makes a bad decision and "it may not take long for some to squander all of it and end up destitute." They may have been given some bad advice or lacked the common sense to know what to do with such a large sum and there is no fall back unlike with a UBI where the next instalment is always around the corner. There is also an argument to either increase or decrease the UBI with age but this would surely favour either those who led longer lives or those who died younger and would take away the equality factor.
However there are those who object completely to the idea of a UBI or anything similar and several academics have cited justice as reciprocity as their main line of reasoning. Stuart White in particular believes that the reciprocity principle is that "those who willingly enjoy the economic benefits of social cooperation have a corresponding obligation to make a productive contribution, if they are so able, to the cooperative community which provides these benefits." The critics believe that if a UBI were to be introduced then a lot of people would simply stop working and live of their income effectively free-riding off the more productive members of society. John Elster continues that "any such proposal would fail because it would be perceived as unfair, indeed as exploitative," on those who were still in work.
The strongest rebuttal of this argument is that it is unlikely that a UBI would be enough solely to live on and "it is quite probable therefore, that many recipients will try to supplement their basic income with a part-time job." Even if it did provide enough to live on most people would still want to live above the basic line and those who chose to get a job would enjoy the benefits from their decision and at the same time be receiving a UBI like everyone else. White's reciprocity principle suggests that in order to receive a UBI it is necessary to give something back to the community but this does not have to be in the form of paid employment surely. I would argue that doing charity or voluntary work produces a far greater good for society then being sat in an office all day doing people's accounts.
If reciprocity should be adjusted to ones ability to contribute then there is no "moral basis for an inalienable right to inherit resources," something which certainly gives some people a head start over others economically. White also mentions free-riders or those are too lazy to get a job but laziness is by no means a principal cause of poverty, rather a more plausible explanation for the differences "is that much greater resources per capita are available to some countries than to others," and are given to some members of society over others. Again there is a lack of equality of opportunity which is found the world over and the egalitarian concern to neutralize brute luck is found to be inconsistent with reciprocity. As Van Parijs argues, "let's first get people's basic entitlements right, and then let reciprocity rule over the allocation of privileges."
A continuation of White's criticism is that those who want to continue work may work the same amount but finish up will less income, or those who want to achieve a net income have to work harder to get it. Hopefully this would not be the case if the scheme was implemented slowly to work out the financial details and those working would still have the benefit of the UBI and if they fell on hard times, for example if they were made redundant, then they would have the security of a UBI to fall back on. This goes back to Rawls's conclusion that those under a veil of ignorance would choose to have a UBI because it is impossible to know what is around the corner and circumstances may be out of a person's control.
One of the main concerns for both those in favour and those critical of a UBI is where the money would come from to finance such an idea. One of the primary ways to collect funding for a UBI is to take the money directly out of the means tested system already in place as well as using the money saved with a simpler administration. However Van Parijs argues for a radical solution where all assets should be taxed including not only natural resources but also jobs. He argues that everyone has "rights to equal tradable shares of available jobs, or equivalently, to an (additional) unconditional income equal to the value of a per capita share of available jobs".
The principal objection to this is similar to the criticisms of a UBI as a whole; that it is unfair to those who are working hard to earn a living for themselves because if jobs are taxed then the redistribution should go only to those who are in paid employment. Nonetheless Van Parijs makes a good case for it as those who are taking up the jobs are effectively stopping others from getting them and are therefore are benefiting from a better opportunity than others, violating the equality of opportunity principle. This is also something which could be implemented slowly so as to be careful that those in low paying jobs would not be better off just being unemployed and receiving their UBI. Eventually though, Van Parijs argues that "once the UBI tax base is accordingly expanded to include these employment rents, it becomes large enough to finance a substantial UBI."
Further support for Van Parijs's idea of jobs as taxable assets is that people will not want to give up work anyway because "[p]aid work offers opportunities for social contacts, satisfying activities, social recognition, and social power which pay without work does not supply." Therefore it should only be those who cannot work at a particular time, for example through illness, re-education or waiting for a suitable job, who will not. The more people who wish to work then the more the value of aggregate job assets will increase and the higher the UBI will be. This should lead to a higher consumption power and improve a persons "ability to get access to jobs with the desirable non-pecuniary features mentioned above."
It is on the way to finance a UBI where I agree most strongly with Van Parijs although if his method proved to be unsustainable I still believe that there would be enough money from converting the current system in Britain to provide at least something of a UBI. However, despite the excellent work his principles of real freedom have done in opening up such debate, it is the Rawlsian principle of justice as fairness which does most to legitimize the case for a UBI. The pragmatic advantages which follow from either argument such as the vastly increased choice people would have in their lives is a welcome addition to equality of opportunity for all. The availability of choice also goes a long way to discredit many of the alternatives put forward or which are already in use. The main objection of reciprocity is rejected because there is no way of measuring what the good life actually is and people's individual circumstances may mean that they are unable to participate in paid work. Overall everyone would benefit greatly from a UBI as most people would gain directly from it and those who are wealthy enough that they might be disadvantaged slightly by the taxation would still have it there to fall back on if they fell on hard times and would benefit from the improved condition of society that would follow.