The idea of distinguishing between a negative and a positive sense of the term 'liberty' goes back at least to Immanuel Kant, but was first examined and defended in depth by Isaiah Berlin in the 1950s and '60s. Berlin showed negative and positive liberty are not merely two distinct kinds of liberty; they can be seen as rival, incompatible interpretations of a single political ideal. However there are criticisms of this theory and in Gerald MacCallum's view, there are a great many different possible interpretations of freedom, and it is only Berlin's artificial dichotomy that has led us to think in terms of there being two. I will attempt to show why I think that MacCallum's definition; that the basic concept of freedom is subjects being free from certain constraints, or preventing conditions, to do or become what they want, is the most persuasive.
Initially though, I will answer the second part of the question and try and distinguish some contrasts between the notions of positive and negative liberty. Berlin asks two different questions in an attempt to show the distinction; for finding positive liberty he asks what, or who, is the source of control or interference that can determine someone to do, or be, this rather than that? Where as for negative liberty he asks the question: what is the area within which the subject - a person or group of persons - is or should be left to do or be what he is able to do or be, without interference by other persons? So, for positive liberty, Berlin claims that there needs to be self-mastery and a lack of internal obstacles in order to become free. It is positive liberty that Kant, Hegel, Locke and Rousseau all talk about when they talk of self-control and realization; basically our ability to appraise ideas which prompt us to act and decide whether or not to satisfy them.
If you are positively free then you are liberated from temptations you know that you would reject if you were in a calmer, saner or more knowledgable condition. Rousseau talks about social self-control where you should devise a strategem if you know you cannot resist a certain temptation, for example, addicts can seek discipline and social order as a means of liberation. Berlin sees positive liberty as "to be conscious of myself as a thinking, willing, active being, bearing responsibilities for my choices and able to explain them by references to my own ideas and purposes." It is this type of liberty which is most heavily criticised and is dismissed by some as being an unnecessary condition to be free.
Negative liberty, on the other hand, encompasses non-interference and a lack of external obstacles, something which Thomas Hobbes strongly professed. There must be an absence of coercion and Berlin argues that the "The wider the area of non-interference the wider my freedom". When Benjamin Constant argued that "at the very least the liberty of religion, opinion, expression, property, must be guaranteed against arbitrary invasion", he was arguing for negative liberty. Berlin also claims that your negative liberty is infringed even if the action against you was unintended as it still blocks you from being free to do what you desire. Typical examples of a loss of negative freedom can be found in situations such as when a dictator stops you from public worship, or punishes you for speaking your mind.
So for Berlin the main difference between the two concepts of liberty are that positive liberty focuses on the individual and negative liberty concentrates on interpersonal relationships. He sees liberty in these two concepts which he believes are very distinct from each other. His argument is certainly persuasive especially when you consider the long traditions of prominent political philosophers such as Hobbes, Rousseau, Kant, Hegel and Marx. Berlin sees all of these men as being firmly in favour of either positive or negative liberty, and not some mixture of the two.
He is also very careful to distinguish between negative liberty and conditions which make the exercise of liberty impossible so that he cannot be criticised for allowing negative liberty to encompass everything. What Berlin does not count as a limitation to liberty is when something is impossible to achieve, for example, a human flying to the moon. This only becomes an infringement of negative liberty if other people are not giving resources to allow someone to fly to the moon in a rocket. Within his analysis of negative liberty he also talks of economic slavery, for example, if a man is too poor to afford something on which there is no legal ban he is as little free to have it as he would be if it were forbidden him by law. He also distinguishes between the actions of other human beings and your own physical capacity so if it is a natural disability or mental problem that is stopping you from doing something or you are being affected by economic slavery then you are being 'derived' of freedom.
Another of Berlin's arguments is that there is a difference between the concepts because they can often conflict with each other. For example, if a man is walking down the street and there is a big hole in front of him which he has not noticed then positive liberty would allow someone to push them out of the way on the basis that you would want to be pushed out of the way if you were in a more knowledgeable position, i.e. that you knew that the hole was there. However negative liberty would say that no-one should interfere as there is no situation when it is acceptable to physically stop someone doing what they want to do, so in the case of the man, walking down the street. Although this proves that there may well be two concepts it raises the question of which liberty is most important and therefore is it even necessary for the least important one to exist?
Perhaps Berlin's biggest critic is Gerald MacCullum who argues that there is a triadic relationship within liberty. He sees all liberty is freedom from some constraint to do or be something and that we might sometimes focus on the constraints because the objectives are obvious, or vice versa, but both are always implicitly at issue. There is a relation between three things: an agent, certain preventing conditions, and certain doings or becomings of the agent. Any statement about freedom or unfreedom can be translated into a statement of the above form by specifying what is free or unfree, from what it is free or unfree, and what it is free or unfree to do or become.
On MacCallum's analysis, then, there is no simple dichotomy between positive and negative liberty; rather, we should recognize that there is a whole range of possible interpretations or 'conceptions' of the single concept of liberty. Indeed, as MacCallum says and as Berlin seems implicitly to admit, a number of classic authors cannot be placed unequivocally in one or the other of the two camps. Locke, for example, is normally thought of as one of the fathers or classical liberalism and therefore as a staunch defender of the negative concept of freedom. He indeed states explicitly that '[to be at] liberty is to be free from restraint and violence from others'. But he also says that liberty is not to be confused with 'license', and that "that ill deserves the name of confinement which hedges us in only from bogs and precipices" This confusion can be shown more clearly if you look at the problem that if negative liberty is freedom from obstacles than why can it not be that freedom from internal obstacles, positive liberty, is actually negative liberty as well?
There has also been some criticism of each concept separately, leading some scholars to choose one and dismiss the other. Negative liberty has been criticised as being inadequate because it is impossible to allow everyone to do exactly as they please as this would lead to complete chaos and there is always going to be a serious lack of resources to achieve this. John Stuart Mill disagrees with Berlin over negative liberty as he sees the solution to not having such liberty with the logic that "If I find that I am able to do little or nothing of what I wish, I need only contract or extinguish my wishes, and I am made free." He then disregards this as being acceptable by saying that "Ascetic self denial may be a source of integrity or serenity and spiritual strength, but it is difficult to see how it can be called an enlargement of liberty."
Charles Taylor is another scholar who has found difficulties with the notion of simply using negative liberty as he claims that "the Hobbesian scheme has no place for the notion of significance. It will allow only for purely quantitative judgements." His point is that it is not the type of liberty which is important but the significance of what is being done to block someone's liberty. If you did not do this then you could argue that Albania is a freer country than Great Britain because it has fewer traffic lights which stop you driving down the road as you would wish. He also points out that internal barriers create external ones such as depression (a mental barrier) not allowing someone to trek across the Andes (a physical one).
Positive liberty has been criticised as having the ability to lead to the 'Totalitarian Menace' if it is taken to be what Rousseau and others believed it to be. It has been suggested that if only four steps are needed to reach this end; self-control and realization, paternalism, social self-control and state servitude, positive liberty should be seen as a redundant concept. There is also an argument about whether it is more important that it is the person or the action that is free. So, for example, if a person chooses of his own free will to become a slave then his action is free but he as a human being is no longer free and it is difficult to discern whether he has positive liberty or not.
Further, there are problems with two distinct notions of liberty when you look at opportunity and exercise concepts of liberty. Taylor describes an exercise concept as where "one is free only to the extent that one has effectively determined oneself and the shape of one's life" which is compatible with both negative and positive liberty. However opportunity concept is only compatible with positive liberty as it describes being free as being "a matter of what we can do, of what it is open to us to do, whether or not we do anything to exercise these options." One way of looking at it is "if an opportunity concept is not compatible with a positive theory, but whether it or its alternative can suit a negative theory, then one way of ruling out positive theories in principle is by espousing an opportunity concept." So in effect it is not necessary to have positive liberty if you are looking at liberty in terms of just opportunity concept.
In conclusion I think that although Berlin makes an important distinction between two different ways of looking at liberty, positive and negative liberty are not distinct enough to be thought of as different concepts. They also have trouble standing firmly as independent ideas as there has been heavy criticism of both. MacCullum's analysis seems to me to cover the essence of what liberty and freedom are and when there is a conflict between the different ways of looking at liberty (something which I think rarely occurs) then it is just a matter of deciding which one is more important at the time.