Environmental policy has come to the forefront of European Union (EU) politics over the last few decades and now affects the majority of policy areas. As a result of this the EU has had to keep the environment as a high priority and there have been a number of directives and regulations directly relating to improving the current situation. With regards to global environmental protection it is necessary to analyse the Union's role in three key ways; its influence as a global initiator of legislation, its standing as a role model and its success as an implementer. The EU's success as an international actor relies heavily on all three of these aspects in evaluating to what extent the EU has contributed to globally helping the environment.
Regrettably for the environment the EU seems to have achieved limited success particularly in international negotiations and in the implementation of its legislation across its twenty five member states. Despite the progress that has been made in some areas of Europe in recent years, the Union's unique institutional set up has made it difficult for it to participate fully in international negotiations and thus influence the major polluters, namely America and, more recently, China. Even more of a challenge has been attempting to implement laws once they are finally passed or to be in a position to punish those who are failing to do so, problems which have become especially acute in light of the recent Eastern enlargement.
Firstly though, it is important to clarify what it is that is expected of an international actor such as the EU particularly in terms of environmental policy. The EU enjoys the privileged position of representing a large group of Western countries, some of whom enjoy extreme riches and wealth, and therefore it should be pushing hard to dramatically improve the state of the environment. As a continent Europe is industrialized sufficiently and possesses both the money and technology to be pro active in bringing about such a change and be in a position to influence others to do the same. If the EU is to be a role model for other regional organizations in promoting a better way of life then it is essential that they are being seen to be improving the health of their citizens by helping the environment. With these aims in mind it is essential that all EU institutions are involved in the process, for there to be a fair representation of environmental focus groups and actors, and for citizens to be educated about the benefits of environmentally friendly schemes.
To an extent the EU has succeeded in completing some of the above aims and it has enjoyed some success in participating in important international talks. The reason that the EU has even been able to participate is due to the Single European Act introduced in December 1985 which gave the Union a legal basis for negotiation in Article 130r(5), which stated that "within their respective spheres of competence, the Community and the Member States shall co-operate with third countries and the relevant international organizations." The Maastricht Treaty followed on from this maintaining that "Community policy on the environment should contribute to promoting measures at international level to deal with regional or worldwide environmental problems." Even as early as 1973 at the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), the major global treat on nature protection, the EC enacted "a regulation implementing the Treaty (EEC/3626/82) which protected more than 250 species of fauna and flora more stringently than did the CITES Convention itself."
Furthermore, in relation to both the Climate and the Biodiversity conventions in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, the EU has been said to have "performed a leadership role" as well as that of a mediator on the Rio Declaration on Environment, Development and Forest principles. The EU's leadership capacity can also be seen at the Kyoto talks in 1997 where the EU "had the most ambitious negotiating target for Kyoto - namely, a 15 per cent cut in the three greenhouse gases: CO 2, CH 4, and N 2O." Considering their often needs to be lengthy internal negotiations between member states before an agreement can be made on the EU's position it has done well to have any sort of influence at the major environment conventions. It is especially impressive in light of the fact that the EU may still find itself up against a member state in talks if matters fall under both Member State and Community jurisdiction and a system of dual representation is used where by the Union is represented by both the Commission and the Member State holding the Presidency of the Council.
In spite of these difficulties, the EU was signatory to "over 30 major multilateral environmental agreements on issues from fisheries and desertification to climate change and loss of biodiversity," by 2001. Some scholars have argued that over time, "the Community has become a unitary actor more frequently, has worked out a working relationship between the Commission and the Council Presidency, and has secured international recognition." Furthermore the EU is the only international organization ever to have been given the privilege of being able to participate fully in a United Nations Conference when in 1992 they were able to take part in the deliberations at the Conference on Environment and Development. However the UN were careful not to let this be viewed as a precedent and the Union was still not allowed a vote.
This is how the unique set up of the Union becomes limited in what it can achieve in international negotiations with other nation states. In most rounds of talks the Union is usually only given observer status along with other organizations and the Commission itself has recognized the difficulties that it faces:
This poses problems for the third parties that the EU is trying to negotiate with as they find it difficult to know which authority, Brussels or the member states' governments, "would be responsible for implementation and enforcement." In fact the member states themselves have never actually acknowledged that environmental policy comes under the jurisdiction of the Union and have tried successfully to keep an important role in the area individually.
This has meant the EU has only enjoyed narrow success in influencing the rest of the world to follow a greener path. The EU has also failed even when their position has been fully cohesive and it has been able to exert its influence because it has not always been pushing for environmental benefits. During the Vienna Convention the EU's staunch opposition to binding commitments meant that "a framework convention laying out general principles was seen as the only feasible option." Furthermore the EU wanted to put itself out there as an environmental leader at the signing of the Kyoto Accord but its dubious track record meant that others were less willing to accept its position. Andrea Lenschow argues that the EU is not in a position of credible leadership in international environmental policy and will only be in the future if it is able to meet its Kyoto commitments.
If analysing the EU's role as a global protector of the environment then it is necessary to see what effect the Union has been able to have on top polluters such as America. As far back as 1977, when the member states agreed to allow the EU to be a signatory to the 1973 CITES agreement, America blocked the amendment because they were "concerned that the institutional structure of the EC would not be able to effectively implement CITES restrictions." Years later in 1992 EU Finance Ministers argued that they would only support a carbon tax if America and Japan did the same. Japan gave their support to the idea if America would participate but unfortunately for all parties concerned the Clinton administration refused to do so. It is fair to say that the EU has had little influence over the US, something which has and will continue to hold it back from being able to contribute to any meaningful extent to global environmental protection.
Despite the somewhat limited role the EU has had in international negotiations, within Europe the organization has achieved some degree of success. The successes the EU has enjoyed have helped improve its position as a role model for other countries and regional organizations across the world. Being the only real international legislator means that if it wants to pass laws regarding environmental policy then it is able to send a positive message to everyone else. The EU has certainly not shied away from dealing with environmental worries as nearly every year from the Treaty of Rome it has included environmental concerns in its regulations, directives and even treaties. Even in the years immediately after the birth of the European Community, in the late 1950s and early 1960s, members "had already passed important environmental legislation on safety standards related to radiation or the control of dangerous chemicals."
In 2006 the EU has in excess of two hundred laws directly regarding the environment and "[u]ndoubtedly this has had an impact in reducing the worst cases of pollution across Europe." One of the main pieces of legislation was the 1974 Control of Pollution Act which covers many aspects of the environment from control over the sale of anti-fouling paints and treatments to control over poisonous and polluting substances entering Europe's water systems. More recently, in 2005, the EU introduced the world's first emissions trading system whereby EU governments issue allocations to industrial and energy businesses authorising them to emit carbon dioxide up to a certain limit. Firms who do not use all their certificates can sell the surplus to firms who want to avoid the hefty fines associated with exceeding their emissions ceiling. Although it is difficult to analyse the difference this has made due to its recent beginning, Defra (the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs) states that the UK scheme which began in 2001 delivered emissions reductions totalling 5.9 million tonnes of CO 2 against their baseline over the first three years of the scheme, 2002-2004. Additionally the EU is actively promoting Green Public Procurement (GPP) with a handbook published in all EU languages which contains practical advice for public authorities on GPP including the purchase of new environmental technologies. The Commission also adopted a Directive in 2005 requiring public bodies to spend a quarter of their annual procurement of heavy vehicles on environmentally friendly vehicles.
Back in 1972 at the Paris Summit the Commission established the European Environmental Action Programme which used the ideas of 'prevention', 'action at source' and 'the polluter pays'. These ideas were not only very progressive at the time, "but remain core principles of EU environmental policy-making today." Furthermore, in 1995 the Commission published the White Paper on energy policy which proposed a number of initiatives "including communications on energy efficiency, cogeneration and renewable energy sources." There have also been numerous other policies such as in 1985 with the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive and 1987-1988 which was the European Year of the Environment. Such directives and programmes are a clear sign to the rest of the world showing what can be done to try and help the environment.
The EU has also set up committees to provide up to date information and solutions to environmental problems such as the European Environmental Agency in 1993 and the Environmental Policy Review Group in the early 1990s which was set up to "improve communication between member states and the Commission, and it brings together the Directors-General of the Environment from all member states and the EU." Improvement in communication and availability of up to date information increases the efficiency of any legislation or solutions proposed, something which the rest of the world would definitely benefit from if they were interested in protecting the environment.
Over the past two decades the EU has spent a large amount of its budget on helping member states to improve their environment, for example after the southern enlargements in 1981 and 1986, which were "accompanied by a substantial increase and refocusing of the Communities' financial support schemes for environmental investments." In 1993 the Cohesion Fund was launched and half of its budget was to be spent on environmental projects whilst more recently the LIFE programme (the Financial Instrument for the Environment) funds research into environmental issues and schemes to protect the natural habitat or the environment. According to the Union's official website LIFE has a budget of 317 million Euros for 2005-6 and even countries on the border with the EU are eligible for grants such as Romania and Turkey. The money which has been put into environmental protection in Europe will be of benefit globally not only as a role model for other organizations or countries but as a means of improving environmentally friendly technology and resources which can be sold to the rest of the world.
Within the Union the European Parliament is particularly green and the Environment Committee has been described as "exceptional among the major 'legislative' EP committees in continuing to produce a considerable flow of 'own-initiative' reports." This is because the Committee has been extremely pro-active instead of waiting simply to react to formal Commission proposals. In the Parliament itself between 1999 and 2004 7.7 per cent of seats went to MEPs who were members of the various green parties. The Parliament has also been particularly susceptible to Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs) campaigning for the environment. For example, in 1971 the Parliament was petitioned by animal rights groups concerning the hunting of migratory birds and immediately asked the Commission to take up the issue, finally pressurising them into a directive in 1976. The success of green parties at European level is surely an indicator to the rest of the world that it is a popular choice to pursue environmentally friendly strategies alongside economic growth.
The success of NGO lobbying at the EU compared with other countries will also be of benefit worldwide as it will encourage NGOs to lobby elsewhere especially if they may have support from sections of the Union. The largest NGOs such as the European Environmental Bureau (EEB), Friends of the Earth and the World-Wide Fund for Nature actually receive funding from the Commission to help with their regular operations. In fact the EEB was set up in 1974 with help from the Commission and is now a federation of 132 organizations from 24 European countries. This kind of support means that the NGOs will have better resources at their disposal to help in their quest for global environmental protection. However, although there has been an expansion in environmental group activity at the European level, "there are still relatively few environmental groups that maintain a permanent representative in Brussels."
In contrast to the above arguments there have been many areas where the EU has actually been a fairly poor role model and although "on the one hand, the EU has arguably the most progressive environmental policy in the world, one that continues to grow in depth and breadth," on the other hand, "the state of the European environment is a cause of growing concern." The fact that the EU is probably one of the leaders compared to the rest of the world does not mean that they have contributed that much to global environmental protection. I am now going to analyse the areas where the EU has failed in its role model status and has often allowed economic considerations to take far higher priority.
The EU may be doing less now than it ever did as "environmentalists point to the substantial drop in the number of new environmental laws emerging from Brussels, and the demands from some member states and businesses for wider deregulation." It is indeed true that what comes out from the EU often tends to be only aims and rhetoric and recently there have been fewer actual directives or laws being passed. The treaty revision agreed in Nice in December 2000 failed to complete previous reforms, "and raised doubts about the central role of environmental policy in the future profile of the EU." Doubts were raised because Quantitative Majority Voting was not extended to the few remaining areas including environmental taxation and the threshold for reaching a qualified majority was slightly raised, therefore making it "easier to block the enactment of more active environmental policy, a factor that is particularly significant in the enlarged EU."
The problem the EU faces, like any other organization or government, is that of trying to maintain economic growth and prosperity whilst at the same time trying to protect the environment. Big businesses and corporations are constantly exercising their influence in order to make costs less for them and to block any legislation which may be detrimental to them financially. So even if NGOs can influence agenda setting and new proposals, when it is time to make a decision, "large multi-national companies and their organisations have access to members of the Commission and ministers and heads of government in member states." If the EU is seen to be influenced by powerful companies then it is particularly hypocritical of them to criticise other countries for doing the same especially if they may still be in the process of industrialization.
A further difficulty for the EU is the fact that it now represents 25 countries, some of who set a particularly bad example of environmental protection. If the EU benefits from environmental leaders such as Sweden or the Netherlands then it also suffers from environmental laggards such as Greece, Spain, Portugal and many of the new Eastern member states. Countries that are further behind in their environmental policies are more likely to drag their feet when it comes to enacting laws that may be expensive to administer in the short run. For example it took the Commission eleven years, from 1983 until 1994, to secure a ban on the exportation of pesticides prohibited in the EU to third countries, whereas "some member states had already adopted unilateral bans for these products in the late 1980s." The EU therefore has to maintain a careful balance with its legislation so as not to disadvantage a few countries over others if it is going to cost particular government more to adhere to it. This has the ultimate effect of limiting the legislation that the EU feels it is necessary to pass which had led some scholars to claim that "the economic preoccupations of the EU may trump its environmental agenda."
However, if the EU has been fairly poor as a global initiator of environmental policy then it has been somewhat more successful as a role model for the rest of the world, despite the fact that far more needs to be done. It is with implementation of the EU directives and regulations that it has really failed to help the global environment as even by the Commission's own admission, "there are serious weaknesses in the current state of implementation and enforcement of environmental law in most parts of the Union." In fact what is closer to the truth is that in the environmental sector "hardly one directive (be it in water, waste, soil or other sectors) has been implemented and enforced by all Member States." This is a large problem for the environment globally both because it decreases the EUs standing as a role model and policy initiator and because the environment across the region is not improving which is of major detriment to Europe as well as the surrounding areas with regards to transboundary pollution.
The reasons for the EU's poor implementation record are numerous but the unique position of the EU in being a legislator for 25 separate countries is possibly the biggest stumbling block. In each country "ministries and agencies each monitor different laws operating within different legal systems, address different actors, apply different administrative and criminal enforcement styles and have different resources." There are then problems in each individual state after they take onboard the environmental regulations often due to "lack of information and management skills at the subnational level, reluctance of decentralised authorities and the private sector, general lack of inter- and intra-ministerial cooperation and coordination and too little involvement of stakeholders and public authorities in the policy process." It is especially hard for the Union because they do not have anything like a police force which they can use to enforce their laws across Europe; they need to rely heavily on the obedience of the member states themselves.
However the member states "have never agreed to give inspection and enforcement powers to the European Commission," indicating how unlikely it is that any of the countries fully comply. For small businesses in particular it is difficult to check that they are all complying and tough for them to meet new criteria as they often "struggle to understand hundreds of regulations and thousands of pages of technical requirements" and frequently "permit applications must often be prepared by teams of costly experts." Compliance with EU law often depends on the attitude of a country's population and if they are willing to make small sacrifices for the benefit of the environment. A study by Wyn Grant, for example, shows that "twice as many respondents in Switzerland as in Britain were prepared to accept cuts in their standard of living to protect the environment." Nevertheless for the EU to be able to make any real headway with environmental protection it needs the support of all 25 countries so that it can improve an entire continent's environment thus making some difference on a global scale.
This has been made an even greater challenge because of the enlargement of the Union to include some of Europe's less developed countries. Estimates from the Commission suggest that "Ensuring compliance with the environmental acquis requires an estimated investment of around 80 to 120 billion for the ten Central and Eastern European countries alone." However the Commission also states that it believes the total value of the benefits compliance will bring could range from 134 to 681 in the long run. The problem is that in the short run it is too much for most countries to invest and the Commission's statement in its Agenda 2000 that "none of the candidate countries can be expected to comply fully with the [environmental] acquis in the near future," has proved to be very accurate.
A further problem the EU has to face is that often they can only pass regulations which frequently require the member states to be the ones to take action to ensure compliance. At least if a directive is passed then the EU has more power to make sure states comply as they are required to "implement national laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to bring national legislation into line with EU law." As a result of all of these difficulties there are still hugely damaging environmental effects being felt across Europe and the rest of the world. The EU's website even gives the example of summer smog which originates in potentially harmful ground-level ozone and which exceeded safe limits somewhere in Europe on two days out of three during the summer of 2001, a statistic which has probably been made a lot worse as a result of enlargement.
Furthermore the volume of road traffic is expected to have doubled by 2010 from 1990 which will completely cancel any previous benefits of vehicle emission controls. Across the intensively farmed regions in Europe there remains a big problem with the nitrate concentration in rivers and lakes and in fact the levels have not actually decreased since 1980. There are also projections that the level of methane in the atmosphere will rise 80% by 2050 which will have dramatic consequences for the greenhouse effect. If one of the world's environmental policy leaders cannot do enough to protect its own environment then it shows little hope for other countries especially if they are even worse polluters or if they are less developed.
In spite of these problems the EU does have the European Court of Justice (ECJ) which can be used for people, businesses and countries to be punished if they are found to be failing to comply. Fairly often it is the Commission which initiates proceedings against member states and under the Article 228 TEC procedure "it may impose pecuniary sanctions in cases of prolonged non-compliance or poor compliance." Additionally individuals or groups may start legal proceedings against national authorities that are seen to be failing to comply with EU law. Article 234 states that "if an individual argues before a national court that a national law or policy conflicts with EU law, the national court may seek guidance from the ECJ by making a preliminary ruling reference." Often if a country is found guilty the EU can impose economic sanctions in the form of fees, taxes or withheld subsidies although it does face further problems trying to get the offending party to actually pay them.
Finally, the future of EU environmental policy is going to be heavily influenced by the effects of enlargement and there are two main theories which predict which way policy will go. The theory of liberal intergovernmentalism assumes that the original member states will only be willing to bear the costs of extending EU environmental protection to the new states if it yields net benefits for them. The possible advantages for the original members are that the competitive advantage for industries in states with lower environmental standards may be reduced, export markets may be created for member states' environmental industries and Europe as a whole would benefit from transboundary pollution being reduced. The problem is that these benefits probably do not economically outweigh the hefty investment that would be required in order to bring the new members into line with existing EU law. Therefore liberal intergovernmentalism predicts that environmental policy will struggle to progress as it will become somewhat re-nationalised and global protection may suffer as a result.
There is a more positive outlook, however, from historical institutionalism which believes that the effect of enlargement will bring about the adaptation of environmental policy making with the Commission increasing the flexibility of environmental regulation. The theory states that "DG environment seems well prepared and willing to expand on the concepts and practices of flexible regulation developed so far in an effort to manage the long-term risks of Eastern enlargement for EC environmental policy." Therefore the EU may still have an important role in global environmental protection in the future, despite the changes that will need to be made to meet the challenges of enlargement.
In conclusion the EU can be described as one of the worlds leaders in environmental policy, both in its role as a global initiator and as a regional legislator. However this title is in comparison to other countries and organisations that seem particularly lacking and reluctant to spend any money on protecting the environment. Therefore the EU has actually contributed to global environmental protection in a fairly small way due to its inability to affect any real influence at global negotiations and its failure at implementing its own legislation. Environmental protection is such an enormous task that there needs to be rapid progress from all corners of the world, particularly from organisations like the EU, in order to counter the mounting threats that we face.