The theory of endosymbiosis claims that endocytosis of primitive organisms is responsible for the evolution of eukaryotes, and the presence of membrane bound organelles. This idea is assessed using evidentiary support provided by different experimental techniques, which found fundamental similarities between the morphology and genetic content of eukaryotic organelles, and that of primitive prokaryotes. The discussion focuses primarily on the implications of research into the nature of mitochondria and chloroplasts in relation to primitive aerobic and cyanobacteria respectively. Alternative theories including the hydrogen hypothesis and Plasmid Theory are also discussed, thus providing an interesting debate regarding the methodology of eukaryotic evolution.
The ways in which modern eukaryotes have evolved is a widely debated topic, and one of great interest to science. Much evidence now exists to support the different theories that have been proposed and, consequently, the debate continues. One such theory, that of endosymbiosis, has been proposed consistently with differentiating aspects throughout the 20 th century. Portier (1918), in addition to American biologist Ivan Wallin (1927), proposed a not altogether dissimilar theory, which was later developed and presented by Schanderl (1948). The controversy aroused by the common view amongst biologists that bacterial cells were present within the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells resulted in the theory being ridiculed for many decades. However, the modern Serial Endosymbiosis Theory, (SET) was developed in 1967 by the former Boston University biologist Lynn Margulis, who has now accumulated much experimental evidence and research to support her revised theory. It is now a widely accepted proposal. Before an adequate evaluation of the validity of this collection of evidence, and thus the accuracy of her theory of endosymbiosis can be established, one must first understand not only the suggestions and implications of the theory towards human cell biology, but the original requirement for cells to evolve.
Evolution of the Earth inevitably challenged the survival of primitive anaerobic cells. Fossil records reveal the development of organisms such as cyanobacteria, which release oxygen as a bi-product of metabolic activity. As the atmosphere initially consisted predominantly of carbon dioxide and nitrogen, cyanobacteria produced a 15% increase in the amount of atmospheric oxygen present on Earth, and so organisms which were intolerant to oxygen were placed under a new selection pressure. Thus it became beneficial for them to ingest aerobes with the ability to utilise atmospheric oxygen, and beneficial for the aerobe to be ingested as the element of protection was offered by the larger organism. Not only was this evolutionary change obligatory for many organisms, it should also be noted that the two organisms would mutually benefit from the change (Lynn Margulis, 1970).
Biologically, symbiosis refers to an interaction between two different organisms living in close physical association, especially to the advantage of both (Oxford English Dictionary, 2006). Endosymbiosis is hence defined as an existence in which the close association between two species results in a symbiotic organism inhabiting its host. The theory of endosymbiosis states that the evolution of eukaryotes, which has allowed very sophisticated and efficient functioning as a result of compartmentalisation of cells, is achieved by ingestion of bacterial or fungal cells. This occurs when the plasma membrane of the host encounters the smaller bacterium, and forms a vesicle around it. The process of endocytosis allows the small bacterium to be ingested into the cell, so that the host membrane may re-form around it. It is believed that as opposed to being digested and utilised for their nutrients as would normally be the case, such ingested cells became symbionts. This process consequently produces a cell with a double-membrane bound organelle, the inner membrane of which is the original small bacterial plasma membrane, and the outer of which derives from the host cell's plasma membrane which engulfed it. Ultimately, the modern eukaryote is achieved by the phenomenon that is microbial associations (Lynn Margulis, 1981).
The original hypothesis of endosymbiosis placed importance on the relationship being mutually beneficial to both organisms. Much evidence is in existence of this concept, the majority of which focuses on the similarities between the genetic materials, methods of replication, morphology and history between prokaryotic ancestors, and eukaryotic organelles. Specific aspects of study will be discussed in relation to mitochondria and chloroplasts.
Research focusing on the morphology of the mitochondrion has been fundamental in providing support for the endosymbiosis theory, as the similarities between the organelle and its hypothesised bacterial ancestor are more than significant. The outer mitochondrial membrane should be shown to consist of the same biological molecules as a eukaryotic cell, if the above statement regarding the method of endocytosis is accurate. It has been found by a combination of two independent courses of research, that the outer membrane contains voltage-dependent anion-selective channels (VDAC) which occur in specific complexes of Neurospora (a genus of fungi), mitochondria. Negative-stain electron microscopy has revealed an accumulation of close-packed negative stain along the membrane. This stain was indicative of VDACs arranged in crystalline arrays 4-4.5nm apart, and it is the tendency to form this arrangement which is indicative of the presence of pore orifices, and thus carries important evolutional implications that are concerned with the theory of endosymbiosis.
This finding has been cross-referenced with x-ray diffraction, which together, when referenced with the protein stoichiometry of the mitochondrial membrane, discovered that each channel is composed of between two and three polypeptide chains. It has been proposed that the function of the channels in the Neurospora mitochondria is to allow metabolites to diffuse into the intermembrane space. Alternatively, it is suggested that polypeptides required by the organelle yet synthesised cytosolically may utilise the channels in import. Finally, evidence also is indicative of the channels being employed by metabolites to interact with kinases and hence be transported across the outer membrane into the cytoplasm of the cell.
Computer-filtered microscopic images show that these arrays, based on triplets, and the preference to form triplets when grouping together, bears a strong resemblance to that shown in Escherichia coli. The discovery of the formation of large structural complexes by VDAC is similar to the results of an investigation into porin. Porin is a membrane bound protein located in the outer membrane of the E coli bacterium, and is responsible for the formation of pores allowing transport across the membrane (C. A. Mannella et al, 1983). Thus, it is apparent that the structural arrays and functioning of the mitochondrial outer membrane is extremely comparable to that of the hypothesised bacterial ancestors of the mitochondria. This association in itself is substantial evidence to support the plausibility of the theory of endosymbiosis, in its provision of additional support for the methodology of endocytosis. However, it must be stated that this is in fact only an association. The fact that the functioning and morphology of membrane proteins and channels in eukaryotic mitochondrial membranes, and membranes of bacteria is not in itself conclusive that the former is a derivative of the latter. Yet visual observations of endocytosis by eukaryotes illustrate the plausibility of this idea, and when we consider the presence of eukaryotes in the historical context previously discussed, the fundamentality of this evidence is apparent.
One of the most significant discoveries in experimental biology was that mitochondria and chloroplasts contain their own genetic material (Chiba, 1951 and Nass, 1963). Electron microscopy has revealed that the organelles contain circular DNA of a fibrillar nature, very much like that of the prokaryotic nucleoid. This DNA is assumed to originate from the prokaryotic ancestors via endosymbiosis, yet it is significant that animal cell mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), is approximately 0.005mm in length, which is more comparable to the genome of a standard virus or bacterial plasmid, than it is to bacteria (Tribe et al, 1981).
The theory of endosymbiosis is based primarily upon research that is illustrative of the remarkable similarities between organelle DNA, and bacterial genomes. Yet the discovery that mtDNA, as a covalently closed molecule between 0.005 and 0.032mm in length, bears a much greater resemblance to bacterial plasmids (which are usually between 0.0023 - 0.033mm in length), than it does to bacterial genomes, is revolutionary.
Raff and Mahler suggest that mitochondria evolve from a larger prokaryotic cell in the absence of any exogenous contributions. The Plasmid Theory suggests that invaginations of a prokaryotic cell membrane were necessary to compensate for the larger volume of the cell. Thus, vesicles were produced in which pieces of naked DNA of a sufficient length to generate specific macromolecule generating systems, were caught and incorporated. The existence of bacterial plasmids, small circles of DNA common to bacterial cells and capable of self-replication independent of the cell, provides the basis for this theory. Genetic exchange between plasmids and DNA via conjugation has been proven common even today, thus demonstrating that this theory is more than conceivable. Although this brings into question the accuracy of endosymbiosis, it cannot imperatively prove this alternative view to be correct.
An extended version of the Plasmid Theory states that cells in a phase of growth produced DNA which, along with a small number of ribosomes and cytoplasmic fluids may have been caught in a vesicle as a result of invaginations in the cell membrane. Development of specialized vesicles concerned with ATP-synthesis accounts for elimination of genes unconcerned with providing respiratory components (Reijnder, 1975). This explains the inconsistency of genetic content between organelle and prokaryotic genomes.
Experimental findings when investigating the nature of mtDNA initially appeared to present evidentiary support for the endosymbiosis theory, but now bring into question the accuracy of the theory. It is true that the length of mtDNA could be related to plasmids, but it also has great relativity to viral genomes. Interestingly enough, research into eukaryotic cell fusion and somatic cell genetics has illustrated the ability of a virus to cause aggregation of cells, by binding to a constituent of the eukaryotic cell membrane. Fusion of the two organisms quickly follows, and it has been shown that upon every meiotic division of cells a section of the eukaryotic DNA is expelled to leave a more stable genome of a viral nature. It is clear that viral DNA can also be incorporated into eukaryotic cells, and so modern research in a related field of biology introduces the fact that the evidence for the theory of endosymbiosis can also provide support for alternative explanations.
Despite this, by its very size and structural similarity to bacterial DNA, the presence of chloroplast DNA (clDNA), which is 0.04-0.06mm in length, is supportive of the endosymbiosis theory. It is difficult to explain by an alternative viewpoint why the organelles of a eukaryote have a remarkable structural resemblance to prokaryotic cells in addition to being the only organelles which display autonomy at the level of DNA replication. A discussion of the similarities between genetic factors of chloroplasts and primitive life provides a coherent argument for the endosymbiosis theory.
Studies of Chloroplast Development in Euglena, VIII by Marvin Edelman et al (1964) employed chloroplasts isolated from plant cells in the exponential phase of growth. Analytical density gradient centrifugation was employed prior to the measurement of absorbance, to illustrate the presence of both main band and 'satellite' (clDNA) band DNA. The presence of satellite DNA has been experimentally proven on many occasions by the triangulation of different studies. Figure I (below) illustrates the data obtained from this particular investigation:
The numerical values on the graph refer to the UV absorbance, 1.706 being representative of main DNA and 1.685 being indicative of clDNA, which produces a significant peak only in the presence of chloroplasts. It is clear from this information that clDNA is present only in chloroplasts, but the figure would indicate that main band DNA is also found in the organelle. However, the 1705 peak on the lower graph was accounted for by experimenters by contamination of a whole cell in the chloroplast solution, which was detected by electron microscopy.
The presence of DNA in chloroplasts is explained by the endosymbiosis theory as originating from primitive cyanobacteria during endocytosis. The consistency of the photosynthetic systems of cyanobacteria and chloroplasts are also supportive of this assumption. Yet despite fundamental supportive evidence employing very sophisticated and reliable scientific techniques it was later discovered that the cl/mtDNA are sufficient to code for only 5% of the total organelle protein content. MtDNA is known to encode rRNA and tRNA in addition to one ribosomal protein, four subunits of the enzyme ATP-ase, one subunit of cytochrome b and four subunits of cytochrome aa 3, but the enzymes and biological machinery needed to produce the remaining components required by the organelle to function independently are, quite ironically, provided by the nuclear genetic system. The implications of this reliance are rather controversial.
One could argue that the discovery of organelle dependence on nuclear DNA is illustrative of the beneficial nature of endosymbiosis. As hypothesised by Margulis, this mechanism for evolution should mutually benefit both organisms involved, and as the benefit to the host of ingesting energy-rich organisms capable of metabolizing oxygen in an oxygen-abundant atmosphere has already been presented, the concept of protection and assistance in synthesising more advanced biological molecules may be the benefit of the prokaryote that we are searching for. That is, becoming a symbiont would allow the free-living organism to employ a wide range of mechanisms and enzymes of a higher organism to develop its range of synthesis, biological transport system, methods of interaction with other organisms etc., to become a selectively favourable, more evolved system. This would enhance the probability of survival against other organisms if ever exocytosis from the host were to occur.
A more cynical, or perhaps more realistic, perspective may present the difficulty in explaining how the prokaryotes survived prior to endosymbiosis. If their DNA was sufficient to produce only minor subunits of essential enzymes, it is not really plausible to state that they were at any time free-living. Although this is a very valid criticism of the evidentiary support for the theory, it is not sufficient to disprove it. It can be argued that these organelles may have had a larger genome when free-living, but their existence as a symbiont was actually the causative agent of the genome reduction. Specific genes may have become less useful, and thus been selected against. Therefore, it is perfectly likely that the opportunity to employ host cell proteins would be energetically favourable to the lower organism, as opposed to utilising energy resources when synthesizing their own. This is consistent with the extended Plasmid Theory previously discussed (Reijnder, 1975).
Research into the chemical byproducts of primitive organisms has lead to the development of the Hydrogen Hypothesis, which assumes that eeukaryotes arose through symbiotic association of an anaerobic, strictly hydrogen-dependent, strictly autotrophic archaebacterium (the host) with a eubacterium (the symbiont). The symbiont was able to respire, but generated molecular hydrogen as a waste product of anaerobic heterotrophic metabolism, and so the host's dependence upon molecular hydrogen produced by the symbiont is the principle that selected for this association (Muller and Martin, 1998).
Contrary to this opinion, it is commonly believed that eukaryotes branched off from the archaebacteria long before the archaebacteria had divided into their present-day groups. The hydrogen hypothesis implies that the first eukaryotes appeared much later in the evolutionary picture, meaning they are more closely tied to the archaebacteria. An analysis of the complete sequences of eukaryotic and archaebacterial genomes must therefore be completed to confirm this hypothesis (Vogel 1998).
Much more evidence has accumulated to dispute such alternative theories, and strengthen the theory of endosymbiosis. Research has revealed that eukaryotic organelles produce their own ribosomes, which consist of the same size sub-units, 30S and 50S, as do prokaryotic ribosomes (Lyttleton, 1962 and Gillham et al, 1976). Antibiotic inhibitors of bacterial protein synthesis such as streptomycin are hence also effective against eukaryotic organelles, which is indicative a common chemical composition on a more advanced level. Furthermore, RNA-ase inhibition is achieved in bacteria by rifampicin, which is also an inhibitor of mtDNA and clDNA replication. This provided an early indication that the method of genetic replication in eukaryotic organelles is dissimilar to that employed by the nucleic acid in the nucleus, but identical to the way in which prokaryotic DNA is replicated. This is an additional, very detailed area of study that this discussion does not ignore, but does not fully explore.
It is apparent that much evidential support has been produced to credit the proposals of the endosymbiosis theory as the origin of eukaryotic evolution. Yet it is significant that all of the evidence presented can also be accounted for by one of several alternative theories. The presence of mtDNA and clDNA is certainly indicative of a relationship with another organism, and although the evidence suggesting that mtDNA is similar to bacterial DNA has been discredited by further research and analysis, it remains that the more modern developments in studies of clDNA present the concept of a cyanobacteria origin as very conceivable (Edelman, 1964. Furthermore, notable structural similarities to bacterial cells illustrate that mitochondria in particular do have a close relationship with primitive organisms. Table I (below) summarises the fundamental similarities between prokaryotes and eukaryotic organelles:
It has been objectively shown that eukaryotic organelles and primitive prokaryotes contain common structure, such as the ribosomal sub-units and genetic material and method of replication. This aspect of the theory is not under debate. Questions arise regarding why they share common aspects of morphology, and how genetic material came to be contained in a eukaryotic organelle other than the nucleus, when additional research has shown the nucleus to be effective enough to contain, protect and process all genetic material required by the cell. If it is unnecessary to harbor DNA in an organelle, surely evolution would have selected against this containment? Further research into the chemical interactions between a host and symbiont during endocytosis may serve as an additional area of study, and provide a more adequate indication of how exactly genetic material became incorporated into sub-cellular compartments.
It is apparent that the evidence sustaining the theory of endosymbiosis is applicable to alternative theories, but the behaviour of modern eukaryotes illustrates that endocytosis of smaller organisms in many different cases, is a common action of modern cells. The endosymbiosis theory provides an explanation for eukaryotes continuing to display this behaviour, as obtaining mitochondria and chloroplasts in this way has been so energetically favourable and beneficial. Support for the theory of endosymbiosis is not, therefore, conclusive, and the origin of the eukaryotic cell remains under speculation.