Carbon steels are iron based metals, containing carbon, small amounts of manganese and silicon, and traces of other elements. Carbon steels can be specified by their chemical composition, mechanical properties, method of deoxidation or thermal treatment. Carbon steels are often classified by the relative amounts of carbon content which is found in their composition. The following table indicates the percentage range of carbon content found in steels, and their subsequent classification.
The carbon content present in plain carbon steels, along with the heat treatment that is performed on the steel during manufacture largely dictates the mechanical properties which are found.
When carbon steel is cooled, after heat treatment for example, it undergoes a number of phase changes, depending on the carbon content. The equilibrium phases which form between Iron and Fe 3C are shown diagrammatically by the iron-carbon phase diagram (see appendix A). Since the carbon steels in question do not contain more than 1.7% carbon, the phase diagram can be shown as follows:
For varying carbon contents, the phase diagram indicates the composition of steels at certain temperatures. The phase diagram of figure 1 also shows the Eutectoid point. The eutectoid point describes the phase transformation of one solid into two other solids. In the case of the Iron-Carbon system, this lies at 0.8% Carbon, at 723C. At this point, the Austenite phase begins to form Pearlite, a two phase microstructure of Ferrite and Cementite. If a carbon steel alloy is of composition greater than 0.8% carbon, it is termed hypereutectoid steel. Conversely, if an alloy is of composition less than 0.8% carbon, it is described as hypoeutectoid steel.
In figures 3 through 5, the austenite phase is shown in its transformation to a pearlitic structure. As the cooling rate increases, the gaps between the pearlitic structure shown in figure 5 become narrower, as there is a grain size reduction. Since the microstructure is affected by the cooling rate, the associated mechanical properties can also be affected by increasing or decreasing the cooling rate. A reduction in grain size caused by increased cooling rate results in an increased strength and hardness. If the cooling rate is increased to an extent where the carbon is unable to diffuse from the austenite, rather than forming pearlite, the austenite transforms into a body-centred lattice with the un-diffused carbon residing in interstitial solid solution. This constituent is known as Martensite, and is very hard and very brittle. Often Martensite is produced for its hardness by quenching heated steel, into water or oil. However, this increased hardness comes at the expense of ductility.
By cooling the carbon steel at a lower rate, the pearlitic structure which forms will be of a much coarser texture, caused by a small amount of undercooling, before nucleation and growth occurs.
The most common composition for a brass, is that containing 40% zinc, and is termed Munzt metal. It is reasonably corrosion resistant and can be machined. With reference to the Copper-Zinc phase diagram (see appendix B), the molten metal begins to solidify at approximately 900C. Upon cooling through the solidification period, the alloy consists of homogenous phase (Figure 9), until at approximately 770C, the alloy enters into a dual phase field. At this point, the phase begins to precipitate (Figure 10), particularly at the weaker, more unstable grain triple points, shown below in figure 11.
As the alloy is cooled further, to approximately 400C, the beta phase transforms into a ' phase. This phase is identical except at this temperature the crystals are more ordered. At room temperature, the microstructure of the Copper-Zinc alloy appears as shown in figure 12.
The grinding process performed on the alloy produces the characteristic "Tramlines", termed mechanical twins. This twinning is a characteristic of the Copper-Zinc alloy. Figure 12 shows some areas of dark spots, these inclusions are cause by acid attacking the stress concentrated regions, and is caused during the etching process.
A simple Aluminium-Silicon alloy usually has very poor mechanical properties due to the Silicon phase occurring in coarse flaky grains. To produce an alloy with more useful mechanical properties, the alloy is commonly modified by adding a small amount of sodium (~0.01%). The resultant Silicon changes from coarse grains to smaller fibres. The modified silicon helps reduce crack propagation, preventing fracture.
Alloys containing Silicon are suitable for the manufacture of sand and die castings, and less commonly, can be used for welding. Typically, modified eutectic Aluminium Silicon alloys display somewhat higher tensile properties and improved ductility. Improved performance in casting is also characterised by improved flow and resistance to elevated-temperature cracking.
During cooling, the molten alloy transforms at approximately 600C, a Liquid + phase begins to form. The primary alpha phase begins to form in heaps, and the observed growth is termed Dendritic growth, and appears as shown in figure 13. as the alloy reaches the eutectic point and beyond, the liquid phase fully transforms to give an + phase as shown in figure 14.
The photographs of the microstructure are shown periodically below, in figures 15 through 18.
Figure 15 and 16 show a relatively even mixture of light and dark patches, indicating a possible two phase microstructure, whilst the size of the clusters suggests a coarse mixture. Due to the coarse nature of the structure, this eliminates the possibility that the images represent Martensite.
Figures 17 and 18 at a higher resolution indicate a lamellar pearlitic structure occupying some of the dark regions, with some solid dark areas remaining. The light regions are believed to be due to the formation of the phase, where as the coarse dark areas are caused by the phase transformation into cementite. During grinding and polishing, the relative softness of the ferrite with respect to the much harder cementite, results in the ferrite being much finer, allowing more light to reflect back, hence the light areas.
The large white regions are believed to be proeutectoid cementite, with the darker lamellar pearlitic structure representing alternating layers of Ferrite and cementite. The areas which appear completely dark in figures 17 and 18 show that there is considerable variation in the spacing between ferrite and pearlite, and hence some of the pearlite is unresolved at this magnification. The photographs therefore suggest a hypoeutectoid carbon steel, possibly composing of 0.35 wt% C.
With reference to the iron-carbon phase diagram, the steel of hypoeutectoid composition covers a large range (0.02-0.765 wt% C), and hence it is very difficult to make an accurate estimate of the composition based on the photographs alone.