The debate on the memory of the Holocaust is perhaps the latest issue in the vast ocean of literature concerning other aspects of the Nazi holocaust, and this trend can be traced to the 1980s and 1990s when there was a sudden proliferation of Holocaust memorials, in the form of books, films, paintings and in particular, monuments and museums. The academic value of this enterprise must be judged, and the historian Norman Finkelstein astutely points out that 'currently all the rage in the ivory tower, memory is surely the most impoverished concept to come down the academic pike in a long time." Yet despite this, 'the intensity of the debates about memory and the Holocaust has never abated." The task at hand is perhaps even more disdainful because it is expressed in a normative statement, and seemingly, it beckons to the writer to take part in a doomed enterprise. The role of the impartial judge is one that is hard to play, and though it is acknowledged that the historian's task is not to judge, it is not entirely possible for the historian to distance herself from this issue, because she is necessarily the product of her time. As such, the writer does not profess impartiality, but attempts to bring in the professionalism of her discipline to tackle this issue by first calling into question the assumption that the Holocaust should be memorialised; the social and political functions of these memorials; and finally, by examining the various memorials, aim to show that the forms that memorials take often reflect their position in time and location, and more importantly, is a reflection of the society that has created them, hence the futility of this question, because the form that a memorial takes is not dictated by a single universal principle, but obeys a number of intertwined forces.
It is imperative to inquire into the assumption of the above question by first examining the basis by which the Holocaust should be memorialised. Should the Holocaust be memorialised on the basis of its uniqueness, as some historians have been fast to claim? If the Holocaust was truly so unique, does it not preclude the same event from ever happening again? So why is there this supposed need to commemorate for remembrance? What does one aim to achieve by commemorating it? The above questions become even more pressing with the emergence of the Holocaust Industry. Is it not ironic that the proliferation of monuments comes only in the later half of the twentieth century when the generation of survivors had largely perished? Perhaps it is because of the passing of private, living memory of the Holocaust that a vicarious and surrogate public, fixed interpretation of the past is promoted. 'Collective memory, it would seem, begins where the individual memories of a group cease, along with its members, to exist." Or maybe it is precisely because so many decades have passed from the event that people now dare to look back at their past, and that 'the further events of World War Two recede into time, the more prominent its memorials become." The flourishing of memorial politics in France, Germany, Israel and America do perhaps lend this question a certain direction. In places such as Germany and France where the Jews were persecuted, the upsurge of a need to know the past was perhaps a reaction against the code of silence and the 'absolute negation of the black years (les annes noires)." Building memorials was therefore seen as safeguarding the memory of the Holocaust against the cover-up of the State. Memorialisation however, is a double-edged sword, and the late historian Martin Broszat cautioned that monuments may not remember events as to bury them beneath layers of national myths and explanations. Hence, as cultural reifications, monuments coarsen historical understanding as much as they generate it.
As the title of the question suggests, what is being commemorated is not the historical event (Nazi holocaust), but rather, ideological interpretations of it. Films (such as Holocaust the television series, Schindler's List, The Pianist, Life is Beautiful etc.) in particular fuel such interpretations of the holocaust, and by trying to recreate its likeness, is in a sense trivializing it. There is not one nazi holocaust, but many versions of the real thing. Despite the attempted homage to the holocaust, the necessary dramatization of the real event in order to make it more palatable for Mass Culture is perhaps a sacrilege to the memory of the holocaust, because it distorts how one perceives it. However, this is not to deny the fact that 'such cinematic dramatizations of the holocaust have helped to shape memory of the Holocaust in the popular consciousness' allowing such films to become defenders of memory. The films raised awareness amongst the generations that had no connection to the Holocaust, and as without knowledge there is no memory, memorialisation of the Holocaust is a necessary evil.
Determining the functions of the Holocaust memorials is integral to the answering of the question. How the Holocaust is memorialised, and the form it takes is largely dependant on the perceived functions of the memorials. Memorials can be built as a result of a government's need to explain a nation's past to itself (in the case of Germany and France); to educate the next generation and to inculcate a sense of shared experience and destiny; as expiations of guilt and self-aggrandizement; and even to attract tourists. An extreme case in which a memorial was built for political ends was when President Jimmy Carter proposed the building of a national memorial in Washington D.C. in order to placate Jewish supporters angered by his sale of F-15 fighter planes to Saudi Arabia. Much of the USA's enthusiasm for memorial building was in part due to the declaration of solidarity with the influential American Jews, as well as in support of her ally Israel. Similarly, the initial code of silence surrounding the Holocaust immediately after the war was due to the more urgent need for reconciliation with West Germany, in the face of the Communist threat. Hence, as James E. Young concluded 'All such memorial decisions are made in political time, contingent on political realities.'
Memorials are also essential to the foundations of political legitimacy in that 'by themselves, monuments are of little value, mere stones in the landscape. But as a part of a nation's rites or the objects of a people's national pilgrimage, they are invested with national soul and memory.' This is particularly true in the case of Israel, whose political foundations rest firmly on the back of the Holocaust, to the extent that according to the historian Peter Baldwin, 'the singularity of the Jewish suffering adds to the moral and emotional claims that Israel can make ...on other nations." Having defined themselves as a people through commemorative recitations of their past, 'the Jews now depend on Memory for their very existence as a nation.'
The social functions that are fulfilled by memorial building can be quite diverse. On the one hand, it is useful for consensus building: 'in the absence of shared belief or common interests, Art in public spaces may force an otherwise fragmented populace to frame diverse values and ideals in common spaces. By creating common spaces for memory, monuments propagate the illusion of common memory." On the other hand, memorials relieve the population of the burden to remember, 'under the illusion that our memorial edifices will always be there to remind us, we take leave of them and return only at our own convenience." Despite the various facets of remembrance, there is a general consensus that monuments are meant for public consumption, and hence, a part of the answer to the question of how the Holocaust should be memorialised would rest on public opinion and expectations.
The main debates on the form a Holocaust memorial should take will be discussed here, under the main themes of Abstract vs. Realist, Jews vs. Non Jews, Secular vs. Religious and the anti-monument. It would be worth noting that the backing of the State, as well as public opinion, is necessary for the memorial to serve its purpose.
In every case, Holocaust memorials reflect not only national and communal remembrance, but also the memorial designer's own time and place. For contemporary artists (working in an era of abstract expressionism, conceptual art, post-modern and de-constructionist design), though there is a recognition that they are accountable to both art and memory, Albert Elsen reminds us that for them 'the needs of art, not the public memory come first." However, this is in direct opposition to many survivors, who 'believe that the searing reality of their experiences demand as literal a memorial expression as possible.' Hence the dilemma of the artist, an example of whom is Nathan Rapoport, whose Warsaw Ghetto Monument 1948,is probably the most widely known, celebrated and controversial. Conversely, Sol LeWitt's unconventional Memorial to the Missing Jews, 1989, in Germany had to bow to popular opinion to have it removed from the Platz der Republic, in Hamburg.
It must be remembered that Jews, as well as non-Jews perished during the Nazi holocaust, and it should be the latter's entitlement to share in the remembrance and mourning of the former. In a particularly volatile situation in 1988 Germany, Leah Ross, a journalist demanded that a memorial be set up for Jews alone. This provoked an outcry from Romani Rose of the Central Council of the Sinti and Roma that this 'represented a hierarchization of victims, which is insulting for the victims of the genocide and for the survivors of the Sinti and Roma majority." It would make sense in Israel to dedicate the memorial exclusively to Jews, but given the racial composition in Germany, it would be impertinent to do so.
Due to the intertwined relationship of Jewish suffering (the Shoah) and religion, commemoration of the former inevitably involves the latter. As James E. Young suggests, 'Israel's over-arching national ideology and religion may be memory." Victims of the Shoah are portrayed as martyrs who died for their faith, fighters who are remembered for their part in the state's founding. Contrast this to the secular state of France, who, during one of the national competitions for the Vl d'Hiv Monument, picked the literal figurative design of Walter Spitzer over that of Shelomo Selinger because the ministry felt that the latter's proposal was 'Too Jewish.' As such, it is highly apparent that how the Holocaust should be memorialised depends largely on cultural and national factors.
An interesting development would be that of the counter-monument. This is particularly so with regard to the new generation of German artists, who 'have a deep distrust of monumental forms in light of their systematic exploitation by the Nazis, and a profound desire to distinguish their generation from that of the killers through memory." These artists explore both the necessity of memory, and their incapacity to recall events they never experienced directly, hence in capturing the memory of events, remember therefore only their own relationship to it. The Gerzes' counter-monument is perhaps the best example of this. Theirs is a self-abnegating monument, a 'vanishing monument' which, instead of graciously accepting the burden of memory, throws it back at the town's feet, forcing them to remember for themselves. This audaciously simple idea challenges the idea of monumentality and the permanence of collective memory, and provokes the population to examine themselves as part of the piece's performance.
The writer's main emphasis on public monuments reflects her bias in thinking that such forms of public art are more effective in inculcating a common sense of destiny, and fulfilling the social and political functions attached to them, more so than films, books and painting can. With the boom of the Holocaust industry however, films have become an essential medium by which large populations can learn more about the Holocaust. The writer has avoided a direct answer to the question up to this point, but has attempted to illustrate the many debates and considerations that have arise from the question. In conclusion, the Holocaust should be memorialised according to its time and location, asserting its relevance in the lives of the denizens there. Also, it is worth noting that 'new generations visit memorials under new circumstances and invest them with new meanings', and since there is no one universally accepted way of memorialising the Holocaust, the normative connotation posed by the question above is self-defeating, and ought not to be answered by a historian.