With the development of high resolution rapid prototyping, the ability to fabricate parts with microscopic geometry has become more readily available. One area, in which MSL (microstereolithography) can be applied, is the fabrication of microneedle arrays, to provide non-invasive, virtually painless drug delivery.
In order for the microneedle arrays to be functional, they must be strong enough to be handled, and have the ability to penetrate the skin without fracturing. There are a number of parameters which will affect the performance of the microneedles such as; tip radius, wall thickness, bore diameter, needle height and material strength. The ability to explore the effect of each of these parameters allows the optimal design to be chosen for the application.
To predict the fracture force of the microneedle designs, manual analysis methods can be applied which model the needles as thin shells, and using equation 1, the force required for fracture can be predicted:
(1)
This approach assumes the needles fail when the level of stress reaches the ultimate stress of the material, and so using this approach the design can be optimised. This type of analysis is also limited as the ratio of tip radius to wall thickness must be more than 10, for the equation to be valid.
Another method for determining the failure force of the microneedle array is to press a test block against the tips of the needles, and apply a force until actual failure occurs. This failure would be identified by a discontinuity in the force/displacement curve, provided by the test station. Each design would need to be fabricated with the various parameters, and the performance of each determined. This would require many models to be produced for testing due to the large range of design variables.
As well as assessing the failure force of the microneedles, the ability to penetrate the skin must also be addressed during the design process. Using manual methods, there are a number of options to determine the insertion force. For instance, one method involves monitoring the electrical resistance of the skin, as the microneedle is inserted. Previous experiments indicated that the electrical resistance of the tough outer layer of the skin is greater than the lower layers. By connecting a wire to the base of the needle and measuring the resistance, the insertion force can be determined. The same test station which was used for analysing the needle failure can be used in this case, and by monitoring the point at which the resistance drops, the insertion force can be established.
The use of computer aided analysis can provide an alternative to manual methods, in order to determine the optimum design based on minimising insertion force, and maximising needle fracture force. In order to analyse the needle failure force using COSMOS, a 3D CAD model must first be produced for each design, with varying design parameters such as tip radius, bore diameter and wall thickness etc. Once the CAD models have been produced, the COSMOS analysis tool is used to apply an axial force to the tip of the microneedle. By increasing the force iteratively, and monitoring the Von Mises Stress, the point of failure can be approximated, once the stress reaches the ultimate stress of the material.
Figure 1 indicates the pre-processing setup for one design of microneedle array:
The force is applied at the tip, and the base is held by a fixed restraint.
A design scenario is defined in COSMOS, which varies the force in 0.03N increments, and creates a solution for the stresses, for each of the force values.
Once the max. Level of stress reaches the ultimate stress of the material, failure can be assumed.
The following tables are taken from the COSMOS design scenario results summary, which indicates the level of stress and strain for the model, with respect to each force value. The material chosen in this case is a photopolymer resin, which has an ultimate stress of ~4.78E+007. Using this value, the failure force (per needle) is shown to be approximately 0.27N.
In order to asses the effects of each design parameter (tip radius, wall thickness, bore diameter etc), the 3D model can be changed to incorporate the variety of features, and the same simulation can be repeated. A comparison can then be made, based on the failure force of each design.
For example, the conical design as shown above in figure 1 can be analysed with varying tip radius and bore diameter, and the failure force for each design can be determined. Using the design scenario results tables from COSMOS, the failure forces can be found. These are shown below in table 2 and graph 1:
As can be shown from the data, the failure force increases with increasing tip radius, and the addition of a hole slightly lowers the failure force. The distribution of the stress which is observed can be provided by COSMOS, in the form of a nodal stress plot, as shown below in figure 2:
Figure 2 indicates the level of stress for a given force, and shows the way in which the stress is distributed around the tip of the needle. COSMOS is also equipped to show the predicted deformation of a design, as shown below in figure 3:
The deformation shown is a prediction based on the type of load which is applied. The deformation is scaled to over 100X as the current force value does not cause any noticeable yielding.
As mentioned previously, the performance of the microneedle array can be determined by the failure force, and also the skin insertion force. In order to model the insertion characteristics, a model of the skin can be produced using COSMOS, by inputting the properties of the human skin into the materials library. By assuming the skin to behave non-linearly, the material can be defined as follows:
For the above skin model, the material properties are taken from previous research performed by the Eindhoven University of Technology. To model the effect of the microneedle being pushed against the skin model, an assembly is produced using SolidWorks, and the simulation constraints are applied (see figure 5):
A force is applied at the base of the needle, and the skin model is fixed.
A surface contact set is defined between the needle tips, and skin surface. This allows COSMOS to solve for the stresses and strains, once contact occurs.
The microneedle array is given a displacement constraint which will effectively move the array into the skin model.
The following plot (figure 6) shows the COSMOS solution to the contact problem, and provides an indication of the stress distribution:
Although COSMOS cannot model the actual insertion, the stress which is observed on the skin surface can be compared to the level of stress required for skin puncture. Each design can be modelled in this way to determine if skin insertion will occur before the microneedles fail.
As demonstrated above, computer simulation packages such as COSMOS can provide valuable information during the design process, which can enable a design to be optimised for a particular function. Modern techniques described previously, require many models to be fabricated in order to assess the performance of each design. This process can be very time consuming, and expensive, in terms of material usage, with many photopolymer resins costing upwards of 200 per litre. Computer aided simulation eliminates this requirement, therefore reducing the design time, and cutting cost.
The COSMOS tool uses the finite element method to solve each problem, in terms of the stresses and strains. The finite element method involves the discretisation of a continuous medium into a mesh, and the application of matrix methods to solve for the applied boundary conditions. The processing time of the solution depends primarily on the complexity of the model, computer performance and the mesh size. The mesh size also has a direct affect on the accuracy of the simulation. For instance, a coarse mesh will produce quicker solution times; where as a fine mesh produces more realistic results, but may require vast computing power.
The simulation of any problem using COSMOS requires that the loads and restraints be as close as possible to the actual problem. This requires that the designer must have sufficient perception of the types of loads and restraints that will be applied in real life. This alone can produce un-reliable results, for example in the skin insertion test described previously; the skin is modelled to be fixed on all sides. This may not accurately represent the way in which the skin behaves, and so the test may only produce very approximate results.
Similarly the non-linear model of human skin which is approximated may not accurately represent the multi-layered aspect of human skin, where as an actual insertion test would produce much more reliable results, although at a higher cost.
Ultimately, the use of COSMOS can provide a valuable contribution to the design process, although it should not replace the manual methods entirely. The use of simulations can greatly reduce the cost of producing many prototypes, but the simulation can only approximate the performance of each design. Computer aided analysis in this case is best used to compare designs, and eliminate poor models early on in the design process. The analysis is also very good at considering the affect of each parameter (tip radius, bore diameter etc) and optimising their selection. However, manual methods should be maintained during the design process, as the only certain way of accurately assessing the suitability of each design to the application.