One theory or model that seeks to explain cultural differences is Hofstede's model. With specific reference to the example in China, it is contended that Hofstede's model elucidates to a certain extent why some businesses fail, and where this failure can be attributed to a lack of understanding of the host culture. Therefore, Hofstede's Model is deemed significant in international business as it provides the key strategy to study the potential of foreign markets.
In my opinion, Hofstede's model is considered a significant means of describing cultural differences between countries since it is based on empirical research and therefore offers the advantage of quantifiability. It provides the closest measurement and comprehensible comparison between countries with its easily linked and identifiable figures. For instance, in reference to Appendix 1, one is able to immediately ascertain that emerging markets produced a greater degree of collectivism, when compared to the developed markets. As such, in my opinion, businesses that are in possession of such quantitative information are more able to plan and decide strategically.
However, it is arguable that the model may not be very accurate or precise. This is meant in the sense when one asks "what exactly is culture? Some definitions of culture include it being values and societal norms, which are qualitative elements and intangible items that obviously are not inclusive of numbers and figures.
Subsequently, it must be pointed out that the model is in fact derived from data obtained from questionnaires that were distributed to IBM employees in 72 different countries, and it is this fact in itself which may indicate some inaccuracies (or inadequacies). The model which is based on one company's (IBM) data reflects that its findings are limited to the views of IBM employees. This suggests that this model include to a certain extent some degree of western bias and it is not designed to identify 'national culture' but designed mainly for IBM corporate purposes. In addition, it is observed that the findings are limited to countries which have IBM subsidiaries indicating further that it covers only a partial geographical area of the world.
On the other hand, I feel that it would be a lot more useful to know if the survey is time-bound, i.e. dated or not. This is because an out-of-dates survey would mean that the model is at present simply irrelevant and must be discounted in light of the changing views of the world economy today. With increasingly open borders and the technological advances in the use of computers and the internet; the perceptions of and value placed on culture within a society or a nation might be changing.
Nonetheless, it is noted that when considering such a qualitative question as culture, one should not rely on only one particular framework. The application of different models brings with it different advantages and drawbacks. In my opinion, TC's Model, with its five dimensions of culture, include most of Hofstede's beliefs and ideas on culture but is somewhat easier to understand. However, TC's framework does not provide a measure for comparison and contrasting cultures as opposed to Hofstede's which include indexes. TC simply elaborates on the cultural differences. Possibly, a better understanding of a nation's culture is achieved if both models are used hand-in-hand.
Besides that, another model observed was Trompenaars and Hampden-Turner Dimensions (re: TC's academic paper). When I embarked on my research, I found that this model is relatively similar to Hofstede's as its data is based on questionnaires and provides the measurement for comparison. However, the Trompenaars and Hampden-Turner Dimensions were based on questionnaires distributed to a large number of executives from different organisations. Therefore, it seems to suggest that this model may be more accurate in terms of its views as it does not only include the perceptions from within one organisation unlike the Hofstede's model. Analysing various models, I realised that the results of these efforts (models) have created the clustering of countries and dimension that yielded the general definition of 'Western' and 'Eastern' culture.
In conclusion, the presentation has given me additional insight in understanding the model and appreciating its usefulness, especially when it was clarified by linking the model with examples that have occurred in China. Now that I have finished my assignment, I aim to not just understand the concepts and views of a particular model but to understand its application and usefulness in the real world.