Corporate governance may be narrowly defined as the relationship of a company with its shareholders or broadly, as its relationship with society. One framework or theory that seeks to provide a rationale for corporate governance is the stakeholder theory. Essentially, this theory provides a wider range of objectives for a company which suggest that managers of a business should take into account responsibilities to other groups and not just shareholders when making decisions. The approach adopted by Shell is an example of how this theory is implemented.
Most companies use the stakeholder approach as part of their business strategy to gain advantage over competitors, in terms of better reputation and more protection from risk. However, it is my opinion that Shell's decision to adopt a stakeholder management strategy is a knee-jerk reaction which arose out of the Brent Spar and Nigeria controversies, respectively. Shell hoped to mitigate the negative publicity that it was facing by putting a stakeholder management framework in place. It is contended that the decision was purely practical; as a damaged reputation needed to be immediately restored since it may impact future business deals as well as share prices.
One very useful aspect of the framework is that it provides measures to monitor performance with Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). I believe that this element ensures the framework's overall effectiveness because it not only shows the extent of stakeholder demands satisfied but also provides managers with a valuable management tool that would help set targets and motivate continuous improvement. In addition, it is observed that having KPIs in its stakeholder approach, demonstrates the level of commitment and seriousness that Shell as a responsible corporate citizen has towards its stakeholders.
There exists a perception that having a stakeholder management framework in place would result in better financial performance. However, it is worth noting that such a framework requires sustained investment over a long period of time. As such, I feel it would be prudent to first ascertain the financial viability of the framework with a detailed analysis of the costs and the benefits. This is because financing an expensive framework would ultimately be detrimental to the primary objective of improving the company's profitability. It is also worth noting that there is no clear evidence which proves that adopting such an approach would lead to improved financial performance.
One criticism of the stakeholder theory is that it is only descriptive, i.e. it only explains the complexity of stakeholder issues but does not provide solutions (non-prescriptive). However, I believe that Shell's approach has imbued the theory with a more prescriptive element, for example, by including guidelines for the Board of Directors and CEOs on its implementation. Therefore, I would contend that Shell's approach has provided the initial framework for considering the main factors that are indispensable for the development and implementation of a comprehensive stakeholder management strategy in a global corporation.
For further evaluation, it is worth comparing Shell's approach to that of a competitor, such as ExxonMobil. The evaluation of different frameworks affords us a different perspective. Comparatively, it is worth noting that Shell's framework clearly provides a more guided and institutionalised framework. In contrast, the ExxonMobil approach has a much lower profile than Shell's as it has avoided major NGO and media scrutiny on Corporate Social Responsibility. Upon reflection, it is arguable that the differences in approach results from the different stakeholders these companies have. For instance, ExxonMobil may be said to face more scrutiny from Americans given that its home base is in the States.
In conclusion, it is my opinion that in light of the above, Shell's approach, while providing clear indicators to measure progress in terms of fulfilling its obligations as a responsible corporate citizen, is still evolving and ultimately, a work-in-progress. Now that I have finished my assignment, I aim to not just understand the concepts and views of a particular model but to understand its application and usefulness in the real world. Reflecting on the Shell's framework has clearly improved my understanding on the concepts of the stakeholder theory.