Taking a brand internationally is highly attractive as it provides further opportunities for growth and greater profits. This is especially true with the emergence of new untapped market like China and India. For example, with the open door policy, China became one of the biggest markets in the world with a population of around 1.2 billion people. This brings potential for companies to make significant profits from a high unexploited consumer demands. Other motivations to go global which expands the market also includes the advent of the World Wide Web (www), newly industrialised countries (NICs) in Asia and trading blocks like EU and ASEAN.
However, going global comes with a challenging set of obligations that many are not able to anticipate or plan for. One vital factor in international marketing revolves around having the right branding strategy. Branding in the classic sense is all about creating unique identities and positions for products and services, hence distinguishing the offerings from competitors. Issue includes the extent of implementing a global corporate branding strategy.
Hugo Boss, Clairol, Gillette, Bertolli and Dove; what do these brands have in common? What about Disney, Coca-cola and Sony? While the first list can be grouped into 2 different manufacturers: Procter & Gamble and Unilever, the second list suggest a single umbrella image that casts one glow over all of their products and this is referred to as corporate branding. Corporate branding is a marketing strategy which involves selling several products under a single brand company name. The aim is to leverage corporate identity and image. Disney for instance; includes the word "Disney" for all of its products applying it to theme parks, movies to credit cards.
In recent years, corporate brands have become enormously valuable assets - companies with strong corporate brands can have market values that are more than twice their book values. In fact, corporate brands are often much better known than nations. For instance, the global sales for Ford Motor Company in 1999 were higher than the GDP for Greece, Ireland and Luxembourg combined.
It is observed that no matter what corner of the globe, who did not want a Visa credit card, a bottle of Pepsi, a pair of Levi's jeans or a Big Mac from McDonald's? These are corporate global brands that have reached the peak of their success. Referring to the table 1 below, corporate branding strategy has seemed to make its way across globally better than that of individual branding strategy; the top 9 world's most valuable brands in 2005 as observed are using their company brands as their branding strategy. Marlboro an individual brand, which is under Philip Morris however ranked number 10th.
This suggests that to ensure a successful global brand, corporate branding would be the way to go. However, before coming up with a valid conclusion, its advantages and drawbacks must be first evaluated thoroughly.
Corporate brands are special because it explicitly and unambiguously represents an organisation as well as a product. Therefore, a corporate image will symbolise the product's image. In many cultures, a good corporate image will have a strong positive impact on the evaluation of the characteristics of the product endorsed by a corporate brand name. For customers, the presence of the corporate brand's logo on the product means trust, a seal of approval and a guarantee for quality and excellence. Realising the advantage a corporate brand can offer, the Nestle brand name is now seen on a huge range of products: from baby formulas to ice creams. The ACNielsen report stated that;
In relation to having a well-approved corporate brand name to encourage better sales, it is noted that even P&G has taken an unprecedented step of using its corporate brand name in certain countries to associate its product brands with a high repitable company. Jim Stengel stated that;
Subsequently, a good reputation of a company can further strengthen sales in which corporate brand promise is kept. For instance, it was reported that because The Body Shop's commitment to the environment, customers are willing to even pay $3.00 for a bar of soap. Therefore, it is analysed that corporate brand strategy ensures a positive correlation between both corporate image and sales.
Furthermore, with respect to the relations of corporate brand with assurance of quality and heritage, it is contended that corporate branding is very appropriate for companies within the service industries engaging in international expansion. Since service industries are more intangible in nature, the company brand name ensures customers a seal for approval for the service offerings.
Nevertheless, it is argued that it maybe two-sided as well. The downside of corporate branding is steep especially for companies which are faced with repeated amount of scandals. The negative publicity associated with the company will spill over onto all its products. To illustrate further, the issues relating to problems of Shell in Nigeria (the Brent Spar scandal) is used as an example. Because of Shell's exploitation and injustices in Nigeria, Shell has found it quite hard to actually explore oil reserves in other new countries as its corporate brand reputation is tarnished.
Competition in the global business environment is tough and becoming more expensive as there is a need to maintain high level of investment to meet the rising cost of R&D. Therefore, there is an urgent need to cover up these heavy investments.
By using corporate brands, companies are capable to gain significant economies of scope in terms of its savings in marketing and advertising as it replaces budgets for individual product marketing. Developing and managing a single corporate brand is far less complicated than managing a portfolio of country or region-specific brands, each with their nuances. This achievement in cost efficiencies can be observed: Coca-Cola is estimated to have cut $10-$15 million a year from its production costs and British Airways to have lowered its cost from 17 percent to 5 percent of its total marketing budget. Moreover, looking at HSBC as an example, it is elucidated that it has successfully implemented a stringent corporate branding strategy by employing the same common expression through the globe with a simple advertising strategy based on the slogan "The world's local bank". This reduces cost as there is a uniformed promotion strategy used globally which simultaneously enable the corporation to bridge between many cultural differences.
Subsequently, as technology rapidly advanced itself, it is contended that product life cycles are getting shorter for many industries and products. This implies that companies will have to seek solutions to recover their development and marketing costs faster to suit the shortened life cycle and to continually creating new brands. Therefore, it is argued that corporate brands help wary customers "buy the maker", not the ever-changing product. Also, helps management to have an improved cost structure as well as better networking across product categories. It is observed that even Nestle and Unilever are moving into this direction, each reducing the number of product brands they market to gain economies of scope.
Nevertheless, it is claimed that cost efficiency of corporate branding maybe counterbalanced by some competitive advantages of branding individual products. This is observed from the results of ACNielsen data which showed that brands using individual brand names gained more market share than brands using existing or umbrella brand names. This finding is also consistent with the fact that by using several brands, a manufacturer, such as Pedigree in dog food, is able to gain more shelf space and hence leaving very little space for competitors.
Despite the many challenges that a company has to face when going global which include the external environment of the markets in which they wish to participate like the differences in culture. It is thought that corporate brands strategy ensures uniformity across all borders and this creates a sense of familiarity to consumers despite the geographical differences. As observed in table 1, the entire successful corporate brands name are mostly familiar to the majority of consumers around the world.
It creates a "common ground" in which its name is universal and also paradoxically facilitate differences of interpretation that appeal to different sets of consumers. This is especially true of corporate brands whose symbolism (logo, slogan, etc) is strong enough to allow people across cultures to share symbols which sometimes interpreted differently or do not have the same meaning. An example includes the McDonald's golden arches. Although the golden arches maybe interpreted differently by different cultures, it is able to capture the hearts and mind of the people all over the world.
James L. Watson stated that;
This suggest that the familiarity of a strong symbol of a corporate brand that is created by advertising in various media, be it directly or indirectly are able to encourage the trial or first purchase of a product even in an unfamiliar terrain.
However, it can be argued that because of its familiarity, once a company changes its symbolism, corporate brands strategy may fail. A case in point is the British Airways (BA) case. BA has established a brand that instils confidence, and which is able to manage consumer expectation, using a brand name that is what it says - a British airline. In line with a downturn in the global perception of Britain, BA dropped its Union Jack tailfin brand and began to adopt 'ethnic designs' on its tailfin and this has caused major confusion as opposed to familiarity. Hence, passengers that associates the brand with the experience of 'Britishness' are outraged and sales began to fall drastically. As mentioned in BBC News Online (2001) dated 30 th September;
Furthermore, it can be argued that corporate branding strategy may not be applicable in every parts of the world. China for example has a reputation as a challenging country for overseas organisations to explore. As its embedded culture is totally different, many companies failed to enter or faced with significant losses. Therefore, it is contended that a corporate brand may not fully guarantee that familiarity encapsulate success. For instance, Boots failed to understand the Thai market as it fails to recognised that eastern females prefer 'fairer skin' products instead of tanning products (like western females). Albeit its well known and familiar corporate brand in the United Kingdom, Boots failed because it did not understand the demand of the Thai market.
The positive image of a strong company brand can extend to boost the credibility of the products it offers. Because new products especially may find it hard to break into mature markets, the endorsement of strong and credible corporate brands will facilitate new product acceptance as potential customers are already familiar with the corporate name to have the same quality level as existing products. Sony for instance, capitalise on their image as trustworthy makers of high-quality and durable electronics to support the marketability of their products. Therefore, any new products that are associated with Sony can often be regarded as high quality products be it applied to a television set, a computer game or any house appliances.
To elaborate further, this strategy serves as a competitive advantage when launching products with either little or no innovation and without meaningful features in the consumers' eyes. As consumers will associate the new 'useless' products with the positive image of a company brand, it is thought that they would ultimately become more receptive to the marketing message. This advantage is also applicable when consumers encounter the purchase point of a new high-tech product such as plasma TV or MP3-capable stereo, consumers would generally rely on the trustworthy corporate brand name to unload the burden of dissonance off their back when considering trial or purchase.
However, in another light, it is thought that for promoting a 'useless' product, it is better to use individual brand strategy as it prevents the reputation of 'useless' product to contaminate other existing ones. Also, it allows companies to market competing products, with customers being unaware that they are choosing between products of the same supplier. Hence, for a company entering a new national market with individually branded product, risk maybe spread easily should failure happen. This is because, in theory that company is able to reintroduce itself into the same market under a different individual name at a future date. However, if a corporate brand were used to enter that particular market, failure would cause irrevocable damage to the company and may curb future participation.
Furthermore, another benefit of corporate branding is that the cost of launching and supporting brands is making corporate branding a "marketing imperative". Corporate branding ensures a company to promote all its products by just advertising a single product. It is said to have a dual advantages as it will strengthen the introduction of a new product with a "power pack of corporate identity" while at the same time reinforcing customers' awareness of all other existing brands. This is contended to be a 'free' additional marketing which ultimately improve the marketing expenditure in terms of extensive advertising for creating awareness and preference. Besides that, user response will tend to be faster and hence reducing the introduction stage in the product life cycle where profits are negative. This again relates to the fact that corporate brand ensure efficiency in cost.
Although this strategy helps brand extension, companies run the risk of loss of brand identity if a company overstretches a brand name to product categories that do not match the brand established association. Therefore, it is argued that corporate branding strategy limits a company's ability to expand into some unrelated categories. In similar vein, a significant drawback is that products may not be treated individually and this reduces the product's characteristics as customers might get confused of its offerings and hence, damages the brand equity.
But on another note, ironically, companies like Motorola discovered that it needed more corporate brand equity so that it could 'move it around' to more promising product categories when the market shifted, rather than being perceived as a company associated with just one product category which is a plight shared by many technology companies.
Hence, it is thought that the success of having a corporate branding strategy depends on the kind of products the companies are dealing with. Technological based company may benefit from using a corporate brand to suit the fast moving technological advancements which seemed to offers the credibility of new high-tech product introduction and at the same time offers the opportunity to exploit new product market not within a single product category.
In conclusion, corporate branding has come into the business spotlight in recent years. It is noted that Porter Novelli queried 700 corporate communication professionals on their view of the importance of managing corporate or company name as if it were a brand in the future. Results showed that a 64 percent of the respondent said 'yes' to being very important, 30 percent said they were already doing so and only a minor 6 percent felt this was not necessary (mainly non-profit organisations). This suggests that corporate branding is not just the trend but has instilled within the minds of corporate managers with 'success stories' that gave them the assurance of having a strategic corporate branding incorporated in their businesses.
The persistent success of Sony in sustaining mind share as a household name in electronics goods may justify the option for using corporate brands. However, for more than fifty years P&G and Unilever have proven that settling down in the background can be a lifesaver during the time of crisis.
Although, the extent of having corporate branding strategy has its drawbacks, there have been suggested recommendations to ensure long term success for companies wishing to go global. This may include 'lessons from experience'. It has been noted that the ultimate downfall of having a corporate brand strategy maybe related to its 'reputation' and the irreversible damage that it will cause to its corporate name (re: subheadings 'Reputation - a seal of approval, trust, quality' and 'provide credibility for newly introduced and existing product'). This can be avoided by having a Corporate Social Responsibility strategy incorporated in its business vision and mission and corporate governance. Consider The Body Shop. When a journalist accused the company of lacking integrity in its testing of beauty products, the company overtly appealed to the public by citing its corporate brand, which was firmly associated in people's mind with strong ethical standards concerning animal rights. Besides that, any negative reputation and credibility may still be corrected and not entirely irreversible. The Johnson & Johnson's renowned handling of the Tylenol cyanide contamination is an example. Despite the fact that 7 people died, J&J's concern for the public has managed to regain 95 percent of its pre-crisis market share within 3 months and as of 2001, J&J was ranked first on the Harris Interactive/Reputation Institute RQ Gold survey of companies with the strongest reputation.
On another note, it is suggested that maybe the use of both corporate and individual brand (a mix strategy) will reap the benefits and eliminating both of its downsides at the same time. For example, The Gap has three successful product brands - Banana Republic, Old Navy and Gap of which many customers are unaware of their relation to one company. However, this strategy may further enquire more detailed information to evaluate its benefit against both corporate and individual branding strategies.
Subsequently, branding strategies be it corporate or individual branding, depends also on other constraints such as the current condition of the market explored, nature of business, economy and social environments. An American company wishing to enter Middle East countries must bear in mind for example the strong Anti-Americanism that is strongly integrated within their society.