Multinational corporations (MNCs), sometimes called transnational corporations (TNCs), are a very important feature of the modern, globalised economy. MNCs are corporations that have direct ownership of operations overseas in terms of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in two or more countries. In a broader perspective, these are companies that have the power to manage operations in more than one country, even if it does not own them. In fact, MNCs generally do not own such assets, but co-ordinate and control operations through licensing, joint-ventures, franchising, sub-contracting and strategic alliances.
The emergence of MNCs is often related as being the main driving force in the internalisation of the world economy. This means that its significance in the global economy is particularly proven through the substantial expansion in the number of MNCs especially through the FDI mechanism. Worldwide, FDI has been growing three times as fast as total investment (see Appendix 1.0) for the past 20 years. Moreover, some MNCs turnovers are almost as large as that of some countries. To illustrate further, the turnover of Exxon Mobil accounts for $63 billion of net worth whereas Pakistan accounts for only $62 billion of net worth (Year 2000 Figures). As such, it can be concluded that on the basis on these figures, Exxon Mobil is a more productive and is more efficiently run than Pakistan.
MNCs set up subsidiaries abroad for various reasons and in many different ways. The motivations for going multinational could be narrowed down to three main aspects; resource seeking, market seeking and strategic advantages. However, before going through it in greater detail, it is important to note that the transnationalisation of a firm is motivated by aims to increase profit; achieved through either raising the revenues or reducing the cost.
As mentioned above, one of the motives that drove companies to invest abroad was resource seeking (Dunning, 1993). This pursuit for capital includes both expanding resources deposits and having access to plentiful labour at low cost. Generally, very few assets needed by firm to produce goods and services are available everywhere. This is particularly true with the natural resource industries such as oil reserves, hard mineral and cocoa. Bearing this in mind, it is unsurprising that, companies like Anaconda Copper, International Nickel and Standard Oil emerged as the first few multinationals to establish production facility overseas.
However, technological changes in production and in transportation have tempered the importance of geography, e.g. the location of natural resources as an explanation of why firms turn multinational. It is arguable that labour would be a more important factor for companies to become multinational simply because of the potentially advantageous variations that exist in labour knowledge and skills, wage costs and in labour productivity. For instance, multinationals are often accused of exporting jobs to low-wage countries. This may be true in some industries, such as textiles and electronics. To illustrate further, Nike has resorted to invest its production in countries like Indonesia and China to gain advantage of its cheap labour. It is said that it cost only $500 a year on average to employ an Indonesian worker. This proves to show that, MNCs are profit motivated and therefore will explore foreign markets to reduce its cost of production.
Another important trigger of internalisation could be described as market seeking behaviour. Firms enter into new markets to gain access to a new group of consumers to whom they can sell products to. Raymond Vernon's idea of Product Life Cycle also states that companies should initially introduce new products where there is a market for it. Therefore, the most obvious attraction of a specific market is in its size as it indicates the level of demand and the ability to buy (income levels). However, according to Dunning, a firm must possessed assets or skills to counter the disadvantages of servicing a particular foreign market (ownership specific asset). Hymer's influence on this is also very clear. Therefore, this motivating factor is usually strong in companies that have some competitive advantage, typically related to their technology and brand recognition. This is basically internalising the use of a firm's ownership-specific advantages.
An illustration to this idea of market seeking behaviour is the joint venture of Germany's VolksWagon (VW) Group's operation in China. With fewer than 10 cars for every 1000 of its more than one billion people, the government forecasted a market of 6 million vehicles a year by 2010, equal to 10 percent of global demand. Germany VW saw the growth in demand in the Chinese car market and has captured over half the Chinese market for passenger cars and is reaping tremendous profits from this particular business venture.
Finally, the last motivating factor is the strategic advantages. The first such rationale of a strategic advantage is the access and combine knowledge. Elaborating further, this implies that a company drawn abroad by market opportunities is often exposed to new technologies or market needs that in turn stimulates innovative product development. The end result of locating more efficient sources would very well be a more advanced product. Coca-cola is a case in point. What has actually driven Coca-cola to become a high value multinational is in fact through the effects of learning from their counterparts in other countries and reinforcing its global marketing effort to adapt its product to local taste and standards.
Additionally, corporations also venture abroad with a strategic motive to minimise risk. Firms are able to do this by spreading the risk of investment through diversifying its business into different countries and investing it in various products or areas. A further elaboration to this factor is the case of Nestl. Nestl
, although classified as one of the largest food companies in the world, does not only produce food but has in fact diversified its investment in non-core business assets as well, such as in Alcon, a maker of ophathalmological equipment and also L'Oreal, a French cosmetics manufacturer. Booming demand in the West for products such as Alcon contact lenses had managed to offset the sales decline during the Asian and Russian economic crises and in fact, helped increased Nestl's overall profit by 2.6 percent. This goes to show that although sales in Asian market in particular were not as strong, Nestl could still gain profit from other products which are marketed to different countries.
Another motive to go multinational is by using strategic advantages to exploit geographical differences in factors of production. As explained above, production factors such as raw materials and labour cost varies in different countries. These variations exist also due to government regulations. Government intervention is evident by taxes, subsidies and other regulations such as tariff and non-tariff barriers. For most governments, FDI is a major means of solving problems such as unemployment. Therefore, most countries especially developing countries seek to attract multinational companies by lowering taxes and providing subsidies. An example is Ireland, a "low tax haven" which has attracted many multinationals by giving the lowest tax on profits in the EU (12.5%). However, the imposition of certain laws by certain countries is argued as creating unhealthy competition. In the example, a low tax policy is argued as reaping off the tax revenues of other countries. However, multinationals seek to use this location factor advantage that has lenient laws and regulations as an opportunity to lower cost of production and therefore gaining more revenue. This motive agrees with Dunning's location-specific advantages.
Finally, companies that become a multinational are able to shift production and resources between territories on a global scale. This simply means that firms are able to move around its resources or production strategically within any countries without incurring a large amount of cost. For example, many (formerly) American and European based companies who have traditionally had a high reliance on customer oriented call centres such as Prudential (Insurance) and HSBC (Bank / Financial Services) have now resorted to 'outsourcing', whereby such call centre operations have now been relocated to developing countries such as India and Malaysia. The cost savings that resulted was large enough that it actually offset the cost of relocating the whole operations permanently.
In conclusion, corporations have subsidiaries abroad for three main reasons as stated above. However, there are plenty other reasons that somehow push a firm to become multinational and it is normally due to more than one reason that will bring a firm to invest broad. Besides that, it is to note that the profit maximisation motive is the main motive that has actually caused the intention for MNCs to have subsidiaries abroad.