The Freddie Mac scandal has been one of several high profile corporate scandals in the recent past. The scandal has added to the falling reputation of auditing and crucially emphasises the case for tighter regulation and more stringent rules within the auditing profession. The question is whether the public demands on increased responsibility of auditors to detect fraud is really one that can be reasonably expected of the audit. Ultimately, this relates to the expectations gap and the issues that have surfaced as a result.
The purpose of this report is to highlight the areas of accountability involved in the Freddie Mac scandal focussing particularly on independence, liability and corporate governance and to discuss their impact on auditing and the profession. The report also gives some recommendations to improve the credibility of auditing.
In this scandal, there are several issues in auditing, which the industry needs to address.
This scandal is one out of a long list of similar scandals such as Enron and WorldCom, which collectively have damaged the reputation of the auditing profession. The outcome resulted in the further downfall of Andersen where it adds to the more than 100 auditing related civil legislations pending against the firm.
The Freddie Mac case is one of many corporate scandals that have brought attention to the failure of audits to detect material misstatements in the financial reports associated with fraud. inij As a result, there have been tangible developments in auditing, focussing on independence, corporate governance and auditor liability. However, this scandal was revealed six months after the introduction of SOX which addresses many of the weaknesses in auditing which were relevant to the Freddie case.
Nevertheless, many feel the SOX is flawed despite it being a step in the right direction. With regards to remuneration, departing executives continue to leave companies with huge severance packages which many feel is undeserved. Furthermore, as declared by Imhoff, despite the new five-year staff rotation rule, it is
We can only expect similar practices regarding the new rule.
Imhoff then went on to suggest a three-year mandatory rotation arguing that auditors would then worry far less about losing their clients, and this in turn enhances auditor independence. In our opinion however, the benefits of decreasing rotation periods to three years would be outweighed by the costs, contributed mostly by increased set-up costs. Although such frequent rotation would break up the monopoly of the big 4 by presenting more opportunities to smaller firms, the larger firms may resort to low-balling to attain clients. To evaluate the benefits of rotation, it is contended that OFHEO should perform feasibility studies to determine if periodic changes of the external audit firm enhances the soundness and safety of corporations such as Freddie Mac.
We also feel that the recent initiatives to monitor auditing firms' activities are crucial in restoring confidence to the auditing profession, despite irritating the firms themselves. However, co-operation from the auditing firms is imperative for this to be successful. Additionally, it is widely pointed out that companies should take a more pro-active role in detecting and eliminating accounting misstatements and decrease their reliance on the auditors on the matter. In this case, however, whilst there was clear negligence on behalf of Freddie, evidence suggests that Andersen was partly liable.
Finally, the Freddie case, explicitly reveals the need for all US companies, private and public, to be governed by the same rules. Scandals at Fannie Mae, Freddie's sister company, further emphasise that no company or institution should be given favourable treatment.
In conclusion, auditors should realise and embrace their social responsibilities, thereby increasing their detection of material misstatements, aiding the identification of fraud. We believe the issues of accountability raised by the Freddie case and other scandals are embodied in the expectations gap; auditor responsibilities are unclear therefore when fraud can scandals occur, it is difficult to point fingers at who should be held accountable for misconduct. Before the auditing profession can successfully tackle the problems, it must first establish the objectives of auditing. However, objectives evolve through time to meet market demands and clearly, much of society expect external auditing to detect fraud. Scandals such as the Freddie case have underlined the recent weaknesses in the auditing profession. Although scandals continue to surface to this date, there have been credible efforts to address these problems. However, in what direction auditing develops in the near future will be determined by the strength of the market to influence the audit objectives and how the profession responds to such pressure.