The Empire Glass Company uses the 'budgetary control system' to create a corporate direction. Company is organised in a divisionalised structure where it gain benefits of: reduce scale of complexity and becomes more adaptive to its environment.
Current situation of Glass Product Division: competition relating to cost and quality. Need cost management systems which ensure cost reduction, continuous improvement and customer satisfaction.
The Planning and Budgeting Procedures, Structures of Accountability and Reward Structure are analysed and recommendations are explained to counter weaknesses.
Planning and Budgeting: Advantages includes; Head office's role is to standardise, sufficient control through reviews by top management's visits to the plants, and planning which ensures commitment. However, drawback makes the system somewhat unreliable. This includes rigid control; sales budget process is lengthy; profit determined by plant managers themselves may de-motivate cost reduction; variance analysis encourages budgetary slack and short termism; and planning may easily be discarded.
Structure of accountability: Sales unit as revenue centre is a danger as costs maybe increased to maximise revenue and this creates bad sales-manufacturing relations. Besides, manufacturing unit is treated as a profit centre. Contended to be efficient as profits are in line with organisational objective but unfair for plant managers for they are not involved in the sales forecast preparation.
Reward Structure: There is only a system for plant manager but what about plant employees?
Issue also includes the 'produced to order' system where customer is to be prioritised even at the expense of plant manager's cost. Hence, customer profitability analysis is recommended.
Recommendation includes better budgeting procedures, kaizen costing, treating both units as profit centres to achieve mutual dependency and balance scorecard framework for customer profitability and service analysis.
The Empire Glass Company is a diversified company organised into several major product which includes the Glass Product Division. Its principal management tool is its 'budgetary control system' in which head office coordinates the efforts of the various segments of the company towards a set objective. This is precisely an example of using accounting as a form of control. It is noted, in a survey supported by the ACCA, over 300 companies were reported to use some form of budgeting and budgetary control suggesting the wide benefits it promotes as a form of control to companies.
Furthermore, it is observed that the division of an organisation into self contained units, each with its own manufacturing, development and selling operations, reduces the scale of complexity for any one unit to a more manageable proportion. By delegating decision making authority down the hierarchy, it facilitates prompt adaptation by each division to its environments efficiently.
In conclusion, the existing is evaluated and its pros and cons have been discussed. It is observed that the Glass Product Division is currently in the stage II of the cost system (Cooper and Kaplan) where it is more financial report driven. Although, drawing on discussions and observations drawn from across the organisational and functional hierarchy, many organisational members sought to use accounting to achieve situated functionality of accounting, it is crucially important to move on into stage III of the cost system where cost reduction and continuous improvement would ensure the profitability of products that are already matured.
However, it must be noted that the understanding of the Glass Product Division is only by the observation taken from the interview with James Walker i.e. the point of view of the controller who is in the management group. For further and concrete analysis, it is suggested that interview should be conducted with lower level management and employees.