The weaknesses of the current ABC system includes: heavy reliance on past data, cost allocations are inevitably arbitrary and product focused.
Alternative method to customer profitability: Extension of ABC towards focusing on customer cost and Balanced Scorecard.
Extension of ABC - focused towards customers, using the whale curve to understand profitable customers and to identify segments.
Balanced Scorecard - Market share and customer loyalty and satisfaction is observed to see its potential in increasing market share and profitability; Life cycle profitability analysis is used to measure outcome of loyal and satisfied customer. However, BSC maybe hard to implement because managers are used to measuring performance using financial measures.
It is recommended that new methods are adopted to improve market share and profitability. However, further information is needed.
The current Activity Based Costing (ABC) system arises to close the gap between strategic objectives of Large plc to focus on customers and management accounting system. The ABC seeks to recognise that it is activities which cause cost and helps in reducing costs and identifying non-added value activities. However, its weaknesses are analysed to understand why Large plc's has been losing market share and having lower product profitability despites attempts to use the ABC.
One drawback of the current ABC system is that it relies heavily on historic data. Hence, affecting the accuracy of product's full cost. It is arguable that since products are priced basing on past data, it will not ensure the true competitive price in market terms. This in effect, lowers the product profitability as true costs are not generated.
Another flaw with the ABC system is that cost allocations are inevitably arbitrary. It is observed that not all costs are directly attributable to activities and from there to products. This is especially true in relation with the 'facilities sustaining costs'. This for instance includes audit, research and health and safety cost. Because these particular costs are subjective in its allocation, it impairs the true full cost and would affect the product profitability.
Creating a satisfied customer is the only valid definition of business (Drucker, 1954). However, it is observed that the current ABC system is product focused. It does not seek to allocate activities according to customer segments. In reference to the Emma Restaurant seminar, it is observed that the ABC system produces different costs results from having focused to customers instead of product. Hence, because current ABC system is not customer-focused, Large plc may have lost its market share to competitors who understands their customers better.
Because of the weaknesses identified in the current ABC system, (i) alternative methods for calculating customer profitability and (ii) its evaluation are as follows;
It is recommended that either both methods are suitable for calculating customer profitability. However, it would be more useful if further information is given to ensure the most appropriate method to ensure good judgement. For example, it would be more useful to know the culture within the organisation as this may affect the likely method taken. It is vital to know whether organisation is receptive to changes or not. Hence, in this instance, maybe the extension of ABC towards customer cost maybe more suitable as it does not include an entirely new system like the balanced scorecard for all levels of organisation to adapt to.
Moreover, it is imperative to weigh the cost against the benefit. It is argued that employing a new system may involve a hefty financial cost and resources in terms of staff training. It would not be viable if the cost exceeds the benefits. Subsequently, it is vital to know whether competitors are moving towards customer-focused approach or not. This is because, Large plc may enjoy significant head start in understanding customer relationships if competitors are not moving towards these approaches yet. Hence, immediate action should be taken to counter the negative effects towards market share and profitability.