The European Union is considered to be suffering from a crisis of legitimacy because it lacks the essential pre-requisites of a democratic polity as traditionally conceived in Western political doctrine. The debate concerning the EU's legitimacy is generally centred on two main normative conceptions of governance in Europe. Firstly, the ardently supranational, state-centric approach, which attacks the legitimacy of the Union for lacking the qualities that constitute liberal-democratic nation states - the only truly legitimate political organisation in European thought to hold the allegiance of the masses. And, secondly, the functional, regulatory-type, multi-level governance approach that criticises the EU's dubious legitimacy since it has ventured beyond rational, pragmatic association and clashed with the nation state. Overall, effective assessments of arguably the most crucial aspect of legitimacy - identity - are rare. From both perspectives, the establishment of a European identity which recognises the EU as a legitimate polity, either in the United States of Europe, federalist sense, or in the multi-level governance sense of rationally divided competencies between various levels of government, identity is critical. Without popular support and recognition the EU will remain in a state of limited legitimacy regardless of whether or not contingencies are made for popular participation, or whether or not the EU is limited to purely economic co-operation.
The issue of legitimacy in the European Union is fundamentally a normative question of political association. The EU is often recognised as suffering from a 'democratic deficit' in which its institutions and legislative system do not appear accountable to the voice of the people. The cause for concern comes amid the culmination of the integration process which now commands increasing socio-political expectations. The EU is not seen as a legitimate because it is lacking the fundamental requirements of a political association or political community. In many instances, the EU is compared to the only standard political organisation which exists in the modern European conscience, the nation state, and is predominantly found wanting. Arguments abound as to the essence of the political organisation the EU is aspiring to become and whether or not potential destinations are desirable or not.
The EU is regarded as illegitimate because of the absence of a common European identity. In the meantime, in order for the EU to rectify its increasingly dubious legitimacy two solutions are put forward in the literature and are critiqued here. The first is that the EU should reform its institutions in order to achieve a greater level of participation. This means a more direct popular input into the EU legislative system and a certain weakening of national autonomy. The second - reliant on a perception of democratic legitimacy which values technocracy and functionalism - is that the EU must develop in conjunction with the nation state to better provide for the protection of human beings from transnational exigencies. In both cases, either via popular participation in transnational governance or via functional co-operation among states, the fundamental issue of achieving a common identity and legitimate political community is not challenged and can be resolved. The normative elements of the discussion are coloured by the perennial debates that exist within European Union scholarship in general, revolving around the functionalist, intergovernmentalist, and federalist triad.
To avoid entering what is perhaps an essential debate concerning the concepts of democracy and democratic governance, for the purposes of this short study, these two terms will be understood as synonymous with legitimate authority in Western political doctrine. In this sense, it is essential to acknowledge the arguments of scholars such as Yves Mny and Andrew Moravcsik who believe that the applicability of the term democracy has changed over time to represent changing attitudes as to what distinguishes popular consent in relation to legitimate rule. It stands to reason that EU governance has moved perception beyond liberal democratic, nation-state notions of democracy and that even these concepts are considered 'impure' compared to the ideal type. Others disagree; suggesting that the EU ought to emulate the nation state as it is the only form of legitimate political organisation available to us. Therefore, the debate rages on fuelled by this normative discord. In the final assessment it is perhaps more convincing to conceive of the EU as a supplementary authority and a "post-modern polity" whereby 'the EU rules alongside, rather than in place of, national governments'.
It is on this backdrop that the issue of legitimacy has played out. Jeffrey Anderson's study of European national democracies effectively highlights the existence of a panoply of democratic models, despite the increasing scope of the EU, which demonstrates the lack of a common European concept concerning what ought to constitute democratic governance. Moreover, it implies that 'political and social rights' remain the obligation of the state and that although the EU now provides a great deal in the way of 'economic citizenship rights' the allegiance of the European people remains with their nation.
As Ken Featherstone put it, the EU was seen to be 'meddling in matters beyond its legitimate concern'. As the EU has moved more in to the political conscience the more technocracy appeared to fly in the face of democracy, failing 'to give the public the means of control over, or active engagement in, the very political life whose transformation is being sought'. Featherstone argues that the legitimacy of the EU is lacking because of the nature of the system. Monnet's vision was of a functional polity that would evolve through "spill over" to incorporate political and social, as well as economic, goals. The technocratic and elitist mould in which the EU was fashioned is the reason why it has this supposed 'weak and fragile democratic legitimacy'.
Hence, as the process became politicised the EU has been marked by a distinct lack of democratic accountability and political legitimacy. Featherstone asserts that technocracy 'served earlier purposes, but its continuation...threatens instability and an increasing lack of legitimacy in the system'. He also believes that the problem of legitimacy in the EU does not just rest on the balance between the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers, but 'concerns the relationship between all three institutions, as well as the balance between national and supranational responsibilities'. These structural problems, according to Featherstone, are the root cause of the EU's legitimacy crisis. Accordingly, 'it seemed technocrats had to build Europe first, before the politicians and the people could get their hands on it'.
Featherstone asserts that in this process the Commission, given its elitist nature, has become 'weak and vulnerable in the face of democratic change'. Thus the EU sits in contrary distinction to the state in the public conscience. It is national governments that represent 'democratic accountability over the exercise of power', whereas Brussels appears somewhat autocratic. The functionalist rationale requires an almost entirely 'depoliticized process', but this has not been the case. Politics has ravaged the functional legitimacy of which the Commission in particular, and the EU in general, was intended to represent. As the EU strives to exert 'political leadership' it is found 'wanting'. It is difficult to imagine democracy extending beyond the nation state while the state itself remains fixated with its status 'as the ultimate locus of authority'. To foster participation 'across national boundaries without treading on sensitive issues of government and while working with relatively modestly financed and very narrow bureaucratic confines requires a good deal of ingenuity'. The Commission is concerned to establish facilitators for cross border co-operation and association, which include a transparent and comprehensible legislative system, in order that 'disaffection, scepticism and hostility will decline' which represent 'an undercurrent of public concern as to the meaning and implications of union'.
Inadvertently or not, national governments have fuelled this groundswell of scepticism. By taking credit for the economic benefits of intergovernmental co-operation and EU assistance behind closed doors in Brussels, member states' governments enjoyed enhanced popularity while the EU gained little recognition. In elevating their status, governments in favour of harnessing the EU to bolster their capacity for good governance mobilised sentiments that became largely anti-Union. Political parties in member states that opposed further integration in turn found it easier to exploit public opinion to their advantage. Thus, the EU became a prisoner of partisan politics. This is clearly an overly simplified image because the nature of party politics is much more complex, however there is much to suggest that domestic popular opinion regarding the EU has been shaped by the machinations of national partisanship. Hence, 'Europe is poorly served by national parties and politicians whose local interests often lead them to resort to obfuscation about European matters. If there is a crisis of legitimacy in Europe today, it seems...that national parties and their leaders are far more responsible then the people of the European Union or the Eurocrats of Brussels'.
Juliet Lodge asserts that the EU system must be tweaked in order to enhance its legitimacy. 'The institutions need to address problems including their relationship to one another... to confront the basic unwillingness to accept the European Parliament as a credible and effective player and accept to grant it access to the kind of information that would better enable it to play its scrutiny role. The results maybe uncomfortable but they are nevertheless necessary if the requirement of openness is to be met'. The EU has reached an impasse. On the one hand, in order to refrain from championing the goals of transparency and participation that would be an affront to the authority of the sovereign member states the EU must remain subtle in its approach. On the other hand, this subtlety is often portrayed, by the member states that so desperately wish to retain authority, as a rigidly opaque system in which only elites and technocrats can participate for the good of the people.
In 2001, the Commission asked "how should democratic legitimacy and effectiveness of the Union be improved?" It is common that the "democratic deficit" is linked to a lack of 'European public opinion, no European electorate, no "European demos"'. In short, a lack of consensus. That said, according to Christophe Crombez, the institutional structure of the EU is not, as some believe, fundamentally inaccessible to democratic principles. However, 'the legislative process is simply too secretive...closed to the public'. Hritier also recognises the EU's structure as solidly democratic in design, with 'the diversity of...actors and the fragmented nature of its architecture'. Consequently, improving effective, transparent and accountable outputs rather than overhauling the legislative system itself is sufficient to provide the legitimacy and popular consensus required.
Christopher Lord disagrees. 'The 1990s saw various developments in mechanisms of representation and accountability' and measures such as co-decision demonstrate the attempt to affect greater institutional legitimacy. However, they do not immediately remedy the perennial problem of democracy - the standard European synonym for legitimate governance. Lord is among those who do believe that, although comparison with the nation state is not effective, the EU must strive to achieve the same standards of legitimacy, for the liberal democracy that the state reifies is the hallmark of good governance in Europe. The basic assumption is that the EU 'can no longer be legitimate without being democratic' and that the participation of democratically elected member states no longer guarantees legitimacy.
Lord and David Beetham argue that since democratic principles hold firm across Europe, the EU must aspire to the same principles of legitimate governance so valued in European society. They suggest that a process of 'adjusting' the institutional structure to provide for 'post-state' democratic governance is under way. In order that this be realised, the EU must achieve credible standards of 'performance in meeting the needs and values of citizens; public control with political equality; and a sense of identity without which the legitimacy of the unit will be contested, however impeccable its procedures'. The EU has been marred by accusations of unaccountability, opaqueness and illegitimacy and the assumption that just because the EU is not a state it should not be held to similar standards of legitimation is anathema in their account.
Therefore, "post-parliamentary" forms of governance are assumed to be inadequate in the absence of 'a uniform system of representation at Union level'. Although the same 'standards' of legitimacy apply to the nation state and the EU this does not mean that the same 'methods' are desirable. According to Lord and Beetham, 'full representative democracy is often thought to be precluded on the grounds that it is majoritarian, centralising and difficult to link to public opinion in the European arena'. However, 'the dispersion of power through institutional checks and balances, multiple transparent agencies, participatory initiatives and even overlapping circles of flexible integration has many attractions but also one [major] deficiency: it provides no mechanism for the public control of the cumulative unintended consequences of scattered forms of decision making'. Therefore, the ultimate solution is a European Union level version of a parliamentary system because it is that which can best provide for 'the need for representative institutions...to deliver the core attribute of democratic governance...public control with political equality'. Rather than alternatives to parliamentary governance, 'post-parliamentary' mechanisms must be seen as supplementary.
Such assessments are uncompromising in their normative preference for supranational parliamentary democracy and alternate forms of legitimacy appear inconceivable. Moravcsik rejects this and emphasises the democratically inspired institutional structure of the EU and asserts that it is in theory as legitimate as most modes of national governance with 'vertical and horizontal separation of power'. Moreover, in many cases the EU is structurally more democratic than many nation states. For instance, 'national governments enjoy a monopoly on policymaking in many areas, primary responsibility for implementation, critical veto rights or requirements for majorities larger than fifty per cent, control over federal legislation, and the power to block constitutional change'. This is a very Madisonian construction whereby 'pluralism and polyarchy' are designed to curtail the powers of individual factions and protect against the 'tyranny of the majority'. In the EU, 'de facto bicameralism offers a strong counterweight to any potential centralisation of power. Although the European Court of Justice...tends toward judicial activism, ultimate legal implementation occurs almost entirely through national courts - an even more decentralised system, than the parallel state and federal legal order of the United States'.
Fritz Scharpf, like Moravcsik, rejects perspectives that ascribe state-like characteristics to the EU. According to Scharpf, 'the EU will not, in the foreseeable future, become a democratic polity'. For the time being the legitimacy of the EU must be maintained via 'output oriented effectiveness' and 'government for the people'. This will allow nation states to enhance their capacity for good governance, with the EU providing the necessary solutions to transnational problems. 'Government by the people' is not possible because a common identity is not yet apparent. Scharpf argues that this 'collective identity' is in fact not possible. No European-wide political community can be expected because the heterogeneous physiognomy of the EU prevents the consensus necessary for this to occur. Therefore, according to Scharpf's analysis, the disparate people of Europe are in need of decisions to be made which will provide benefits upon which they would never have been able to agree. In Scharpf's study 'it is assumed that government by the people is impossible in the EU, rather than normatively undesirable, it is assumed that maintaining legitimacy primarily requires improved capacity to solve welfare state problems'.
Thus, Scharpf does not dismiss outright the potential of functional arrangements to give birth to common principles and values. However, he is sceptical that the legitimacy problem in the EU can 'overcome the triple deficits of a pre-existing sense of collective identity, the lack of Europe-wide policy discourses, and the lack of a Europe-wide institutional infrastructure that could assure the accountability of office holders to a European constituency'. Scharpf's argument is that participatory and democratically accountable government cannot preclude functionality and that it is quite common that democratic governance be non-majoritarian. Thus, what must be taken into consideration is the impact European institutions may have on the 'preferences, interests, values, identities, causal beliefs and codes of appropriate behaviour' of the European people'.
Olsen criticises Scharpf for not including any definitive theory of how functionality in the EU might provide for democracy, but the crucial element of his perspective is the belief the EU cannot be legitimate in the same way as the state. Scharpf differs from those scholars that argue for the EU to develop as a liberal-democratic state rejecting the idea that it must be judged by the same criteria. He maintains that in the nation state input and output legitimacy 'coexist and reinforce each other'. However, in the EU, for numerous reasons, 'input legitimacy is at best very weak'. Therefore, since it is reliant on output efficiency for its legitimacy, the EU is limited in the extent of its governance capacity. It is supplementary to the state, beneficially so, rather than an alternative form of political organisation. Still, what is missing is a nuanced assessment of identity formation consequential of functional co-operation. If an identity were to develop which recognised the supplementary and functional nature of EU governance as advantageous to government at the national and regional level then it may well be regarded as legitimate.
Giandomenico Majone argues that 'the debate about Europe's democratic deficit is still in the 'standard-setting stage', therefore consensus on legitimacy norms is not possible. The debate is fundamentally a debate over the 'nature, functions and goals' of the EU. Majone defends the Monnet-method development of European integration as a profoundly astute comprehension of the necessities of such international co-operation. Integration could not have occurred without the practical separation of the economic and political arenas. As long as 'national electorates' advocate economic integration but reject the socio-political implications of moving beyond it then the EU cannot be expected to overcome the "democratic deficit" by entering the political fray. Moreover, the "democratic deficit", as a description of an apolitical, non-elected polity is 'democratically justified'.
The institutional constellation, so criticised by advocates of parliamentary legislature at the EU level, is purposefully labyrinthine according to such hypotheses. EU institutions are constrained by limited competencies; for instance, the power of the executive is not intended to subordinate the representative branch but to tie 'more closely the Council and the European Parliament to European law'. The seeming expansion of EU competencies post-Maastricht is false. Institutions remain well constrained by numerous articles limiting the potential action the EU can take in certain policy areas. Moreover, legal constraints are exacerbated by 'material' ones: 'The Community has no general taxing and spending powers similar to those held by national governments...standards of accountability historically develop to control an omni-competent state with virtually unlimited powers...[which] cannot be applied without substantial modifications to a system...such as the EU'. This line of reasoning offers an insight into the way in which legitimate governance can develop in ways that are not traditionally conceived of as "democratic".
Democracy, in many cases, is not best served by majoritarian principles and the suggestion made by many is that it would not work in the case of an integrated Europe. The EU is composed of a variety of disparate political, ethnic, economic and cultural communities, therefore majorities would be slim and minorities substantial in the sense that large numbers of people would be subject to the rule of relatively unrepresentative agenda. The argument that the EU's legitimacy is provided for by the participation of democratically elected national governments is, likewise, insufficient. In this example too, the tyranny of the majority prevails. Majone also rejects the notion that a common EU identity would develop as it did in nation states by increasing provisions of social welfare. Such politically sensitive domains are perhaps better managed by the national level authority that already has the legitimate support of the masses and is materially equipped to implement necessary policies.
If the notion of democratic deficit is to convey the sense that the EU is lacking the institutional structure commonly associated with democratic political communities (particularly liberal-democratic nation states) then it is inevitable that a system that represents a entirely different political agenda will be regarded as insufficiently legitimate. However, if it is a critique of 'technocratic decision making, lack of transparency, insufficient public participation, excessive use of administrative discretion, inadequate mechanisms of control and accountability' then it is not just a critique of EU per se, but of the impure non-majoritarian democracy that is so prevalent in modern governance. Such criticisms are normatively rooted in a preference for a particular brand of parliamentary democracy. Delegation, regulatory and independent agencies, and 'procedural legitimacy' are all determinants of non-majoritarian governance and are all conspicuous in the EU system. The objectives and jurisdiction of agencies are set by elected officials and accountable to them by law. This arrangement is bolstered by a 'substantive legitimacy' in which the effective outcome of decisions denotes the merit and worth of the agencies to the people and their legislative system. In this sense, 'the simplest and most effective way of improving transparency and accountability is to require that regulators give reasons for their decisions'.
Improving transparency is acknowledged by most analysts as essential to improving the legitimacy of the EU system. Elite politics are a distinct source of malaise among the populace of Europe. At Maastricht, the parameters for which legitimacy improving measures could be implemented were agreed. 'Thus', as Majone put it, 'the same Treaty that stimulated the current debate over the democratic deficit also laid the foundations on which the autonomous legitimacy of [EU] institutions could be firmly established'. Accordingly, 'careful institutional design can provide a number of instruments which political principals may use to minimise the danger of bureaucratic drift and reconcile independence with accountability'. The regulatory system of EU governance is legitimate 'as long as the tasks assigned to this level are precisely and narrowly defined, non-majoritarian sources of legitimacy - expertise, procedural rationality, transparency, accountability by results - should be sufficient to justify the delegation of necessary powers'. It is essential in such circumstances that that political identity in Europe develops in order to acknowledge such a system as legitimate. This is not included in Majone's hypothesis. Popular consensus relies on the imagined natural and essential nature of political organisation, and such a state of affairs cannot achieve the support of the people until it becomes an element of their conscience rather than a construct of the intelligentsia.
Neither giving the European Parliament, the technocrats, nor the member states greater power will prove effective. In its formative years, intergovernmental co-operation, the rule of law and the functional efficacy of the Community ensured legitimacy without affecting the democratic authority of the state. The lack of majoritarian consensus is often seen as a determinant of the "democratic deficit" in the EU but this is actually a good thing in a pluralistic community as it ensures the rights of minorities. The 'homogeneity' thesis, therefore, is unconvincing. The Habermasian idea of "civic solidarity" does not necessarily require a naturally predetermined conscience but, rather, an imagined togetherness that is perceived to be natural yet emanates from functional co-operation and coexistence. However, as long as EU legislative practices remain obfuscated and detached from the populace then any affinity between the two is largely impossible. Furthermore, as the EU remains contingent in many aspects, particularly in the public arena, upon national political machinations it is difficult to achieve a coherent association with the people.
National governments need to start championing the cause of the European association - which benefits them - or else the system will wither. 'To solve common problems more effectively...major decisions and supranational authority at the European level must be given dependable recognition'. The assumption that the EU can only exist if it protects the legitimacy and identity which exists only at the national level as a result of the organic homogeneity inherent there is incorrect. The existence of a multi-level polity is a vital asset of transnational governance but it requires the people of Europe to develop an identity that recognises it as such. It is of particular importance, in the meantime, that the EU does not develop into a quasi-autocratic political machine, attempting to swallow up the competencies of the state, for this will only trigger a negative popular reaction. For now, perhaps, with the lack of community identity, this loose association and functional efficiency best provide for democratic legitimacy.
Moravcsik, along with Majone, Thomas Zweifel, Scharpf and others, paints a convincing picture of the nascent, non-majoritarian, multi-level system of governance in Europe in which the EU is designed to aid the resolution of transnational governance issues that affect sovereign states. For instance, the Commission's legislative initiative on issues where greater public involvement is customary - say, environmental regulation, consumer protection, and executive appointments - is in practice falling to the directly elected European Parliament, which must give final assent to such legislation'. In other instances, governance practices occur exactly as they do in any other non-majoritarian democracy. Issues such as central banking and the constitutional court are generally 'insulated...from powerful (and sometimes protectionist) special interests'. Furthermore, spending and taxation are severely capped and the EU has no formal armed forces. The 'constant scrutiny' involved in EU politics makes it 'more transparent and less corrupt than almost any other national government in Europe...were the EU the only means for political representation in Europe, one might have reason to be more concerned'. Unfortunately, the legitimacy of the EU is undermined by the vested interests of national political parties which in turn undermines the efficacy of the EU to supplement the power of the state which it was designed to do.
Other criticisms of state-centric legitimacy hypotheses include arguments that emphasise the contestable nature of democracy as a concept. David Held has pointed out that 'governance itself has to be conceived today as already divided among a number of agencies - national, regional and international - and limited by the very nature of this plurality'. Even 'national democracy has become largely a contested concept itself', which gives rise to a situation where the empirical, democratic 'reality' is detached from the democratic ideal. Moreover, 'access to democratic participation...has become diffused'. Influential scholars such as Jurgen Habermas and Andrew Linklater have proposed similar ideas. Traditional models of democracy are thus incongruous with the development of the EU. Therefore, new concepts are required to explain how and why 'Member States have referred part of their sovereignty'. Alexis de Tocqueville's claim that "a new political science is needed for a world itself quite new" is remarkably applicable again today yet ignored by the champions of liberal democracy and advocates of a rigidly state-centric approach to studying the EU.
What is left out of the debate is the concern for how people see themselves as members of a community 'with reciprocal rights and duties'. 'It seems possible that a feeling of belonging may be created based on participation of groups of citizens in various areas of the European non-state polity. Such a fragmented creation of belonging raises questions about the classical democratic idea of rationally derived belonging and identity attached to a demos'. There have been suggestions that a constitution marks out a framework for governance and the rights and obligations of individuals, and would, therefore, go someway towards helping create a European identity. However, if that constitution is imposed from above, without consensus from below, then it is likely to remain obsolete and the legitimacy problem itself will remain. Thus, 'merely filling in the procedural gaps does not necessarily mean that the process for defining the terms of citizenship and the organisation of political power will gain widespread acceptance'. A 'socially constructive' approach, which seeks to harness popular recognition of EU governance, is required.
'Scepticism toward the EU' has become a public issue with notions of popular representation and 'emotional attachment' coming to the fore. Critics of the functionalist rationale argue that the EU lacks the necessary factors to provide a united political organisation based on a common identity. However, it is a mistake to separate imagined, 'mythical' ideas such as these from the realm of functional co-operation. This is the subject of an important study by German sociologist Ferdinand Tnnies whose theories of Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft form an analytical distinction between two forms of human societal organisation. The former is a perceived natural and organic form of political community that creates intense and enduring bonds between individuals and groups of people. The latter is a perceived rational and scientific form of co-operation that is deemed 'mechanical', unnatural and pragmatic. In actual fact, society and political organisation is an amalgamation of these two perceptions of human relations. Identity can develop from the mechanical and through practice and experience become part of human habit and memory. For an organisation to be more than mere co-operative association this development must occur so that the Gemeinschaft element becomes apparent. Thus the organisation becomes seemingly essential and natural, and consequently enduring and cohesive.
Many criticisms of EU legitimacy refer to the need for a political community to develop in the same way that it did with the rise of the nation state in which the EU must mirror 'the structures of the modern liberal-democratic state'. Particularly, the EU must seek to make 'participation and accountability' much more open to the people in order to bring 'citizens' into the system. Such arguments propose that a 'European citizenry' must be constructed and provisions built in to the institutional structure. Other hypotheses contend that it is not possible for a political community to develop from these mechanical elements, as it requires 'shared histories, identities, cultures and...myths'. This argument is grounded in the belief that such organic essentials are predetermined and natural rather than social constructs. In this understanding of political organisation, Euro-scepticism is inevitable given the idea that the nation state has 'recourse to...pre-modern mythical foundations in opposition to the EU'. This conclusion seems strangely ahistorical given that such a perspective takes history as one of the prerequisites of political organisation. Both perspectives are hampered by a state-centric conception of political organisation and results in the assumption that functional association 'precludes the possibility of a move to deeper forms of community'.
What exists in Europe today is a tension between competing identities - the mythical nationalism of the European nation states and the mechanical functionalism of unified Europe. State-centric assessments ignore the argument that the EU is founded in the very essence of Enlightenment sentiments of rationality, progress and modernity rather than in ethnic, cultural, linguistic or territorial exclusion. In that sense, it is linked to the 'liberal political' model of governance but moves beyond concepts of the bounded communities of old. Hence, technical progress and expertise are granted special respect and a certain amount of legitimacy. However, this only exists in the corridors of power. There is, therefore, a plausible argument that rejects the technocracy rationale and asserts that a purely functional arrangement cannot operate without the complementary development of a political identity. The more sophisticated assessments of EU legitimacy such as those given by Moravcsik, Majone and Scharpf are somewhat lacking in this respect. A unified European political identity can certainly be one that grows out of the integration process. Only time will tell if EU association can develop a seemingly natural and unified identity that will bond the people of Europe together, with governance beyond the state seen as desirable and democratically legitimate.
The cultural homogeneity thesis included in many arguments about the illegitimate nature of the EU is ignorant of the power of 'pragmatic political practices' to generate shared principles and motivate a common identity. Functional co-operation provides an impetus for would be members to aspire to the shared norms of the EU, in which 'economic welfare, human rights, liberal democracy, and the rule of law' generate a solid basis for consensus. 'Recent EU initiatives', such as social policy, foreign policy and defence policy are voluntary associations which further supplement the ability of nation states to deal with common problems if they so wish. In lieu of this, 'the single market and currency increasingly appear not as the first major steps toward political union, but as finishing touches on the construction of a European economic zone'. However, such 'sophisticated evaluations of the prospects for EU democracy' remain at the level of haute politique. This is where demands for transparency and accountability become significant and notions of identity have to be communicated to the people. Absent this identity, the EU will remain embroiled in a crisis of legitimacy.