The approach to the North Korea nuclear crisis requires a more balanced and historically aware perspective in order that North Korea can be constructively engaged. One only has to listen to the multitudinous and compelling invocations from the top authorities on the subject in academe and the policymakers of the past, armed with the enlightenment of hindsight, to be confident that seeking to wholeheartedly engage North Korea may prove worthwhile. In an analysis of approaches toward the crisis it is important to look at how crucial events in recent years have unfolded, how policymakers have managed them, and how they have been conceptualised by erudite observers. Almost without exception in the latter case there is a belief that the essential security fears of the D.P.R.K regime have been neglected and thus the crisis continues. Even pessimistic assessments assert that some form of engagement is superior to a policy of coercion or neglect which will simply force the Kim regime to take more desperate measures to survive. North Korea must be made to feel that incentives are more advantageous than coercive bargaining, which will potentially jeopardise its relatively propitious position. In the final assessment it must be understood that 'without resolving North Korea's security fears' the crisis is never likely to abate.
The approach to the North Korea nuclear crisis requires a more balanced and historically aware perspective in order that North Korea can be constructively engaged. Currently, this so-called "rogue state" simply has no incentive to reform given the strategic climate. While it is tempting to succumb to a kind of ivory-tower hubris, a scholarly understanding of the nature of the conflict does not automatically prescribe for the implementation of a radical new policy, even if it appears that one might be needed. Clearly, there are immense domestic and international constraints that often limit even the best of intentions. However, one only has to listen to the multitudinous and compelling invocations from the top authorities on the subject in academe and the policymakers of the past, armed with the enlightenment of hindsight, to be confident that seeking to wholeheartedly engage North Korea may prove worthwhile.
Inevitably, the focus of the nuclear crisis centres on U.S.-D.P.R.K relations. From North Korea's perspective the key to its national security and the door to the international community is held by the United States. Therefore, normalising relations with the world's primary power is regarded as essential to survival, not just of the regime, but of the North Korean state itself. From the perspective of the United States, rogue polities such as the D.P.R.K have potentially stark consequences for the non-proliferation regime and provide an unwelcome challenge to its global predominance, although this is often couched in the rhetoric of universal norms. Moreover, although other powers cannot be ignored the United States has been ardently unilateralist wherever possible and especially when necessary.
In United States foreign policy towards North Korea there has been much vacillation between limited, co-operative engagement and cautious containment. Policy has fluctuated and played into the hands of a shrewd strategy of coercive bargaining by Pyongyang which will continue so long as the United States fails to alleviate North Korea's security anxiety. In an analysis of approaches toward the crisis it is important to look at how crucial events in recent years have unfolded, how policymakers have managed them, and how they have been conceptualised by erudite observers. Almost without exception in the latter case there is a belief that the essential security fears of the D.P.R.K regime have been neglected and thus the crisis continues.
North Korea, its foreign policy and its security strategy 'cannot be understood apart from a terrible fratricidal war that has never ended, the guerrilla struggle against Japanese imperialism in the 1930s, its emergence as a state in 1945, its fraught relationship with the South, its brittle and defensive reaction to the end of the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union, and its interminable daily struggle with the United States of America'. Washington has gravely misunderstood the situation time and again and 'bureaucratic infighting between hawks and doves' obfuscates the essence of the crisis. Throughout the 1990s, overzealous intelligence estimates only gave impetus to Pyongyang's strategy. North Korea was 'a Rorschach inkblot absorbing anticommunist, Orientalist, and rogue state imagery', and during times of crisis 'North Korea was not our daily enemy of forty years' standing, but a new "renegade state"'.
Hence, 'the first nuclear crisis rested upon the American desire to get Pyongyang to commit to the inspection regime of the NPT [Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty]...and Pyongyang's desire to get out from under a nuclear threat that had been palpable since the 1950s'. In fact, 'this is still the basic nub of the problem today'. The rhetoric of the 'unilateralists' and Republicans in Washington flies in the face of history and ignores regional concerns and the determination of the D.P.R.K to survive. The stereotypical images of the regime and its leader, Kim Jong Il, likewise fly in the face of facts. Bruce Cumings' remarks about the state of the crisis today are not objectionably scathing. He believes that 'diplomacy with the North is anathema because the Republican right wont allow it and because the same group that brought us an illegal war with Iraq wants to overthrow Kim Jong Il, too'. Cumings maintains that 'American foreign policy...often resembles amateur night at a halfway house'.
Contemporary doctrine, atop a lofty foreign policy to "rid the world of evil", has brought back the idealistic crusading of old that had been precluded by Cold War containment pragmatism, 'as if nothing was learned, back to the quiet American - "impregnably armoured by his good intentions and his ignorance"'. Critics accuse policymakers of missing the point and ignoring the fact that the North has countless times shown itself to be willing to trade away 'its entire nuclear complex'. Moreover, Pyongyang actually perceives American regional preponderance as beneficial to national security, preferring that the U.S. 'continues to station troops in the South'. Despite this, in the recent history of the crisis, 'threats seemed cheaper and more expedient than promises, at least in the political currency of Washington'. Consequently, in the half decade between the end of the Cold War and 1994, U.S. policy was guided by a reluctance to engage North Korea, preferring to condemn and sanction the regime for transgressing international norms. Throughout this period, 'North Korea was playing tit-for-tat - co-operating when the United States co-operated, retaliating when the United States reneged - in an effort to get the U.S. to negotiate in earnest'.
Clearly there is a real threat posed by North Korea, and Pyongyang has never been afraid to heighten crises in order to show its teeth to the world. Concerns about the potential of the North Korean regime to partake in illicit activity are widely regarded as legitimate and it would seem foolish to disagree. However, the situation has been exacerbated by the extent to which foreign powers continue to hound the regime and try to force it to reform or attempt to restrain its power. Leon Sigal asserts that 'an appreciation of North Korea's insecurity might have led America to abandon coercive diplomacy altogether'. Between 1993 and 1994, the U.S. and the D.P.R.K narrowly escaped being plunged into a state of military hostilities and, potentially, full-blown war. In the end, this realisation forced both parties to the negotiating table to try and reach a compromise. Eventually, the 1994 Framework Agreement set the tone for the following years of relative tranquillity. The deal 'was structured so that the United States would not have to give anything away without getting something in return', hence, 'it could also retract its inducements if North Korea did not comply'.
The 1994 accord goes against the assessment of many American policymakers that the D.P.R.K is inherently untrustworthy and desirous of the nuclear capability to protect its abhorrent political system from the forces of democracy. 'There is significant evidence' that North Korea has been attempting to woo the United States and that it is seeking dtente rather than a powerful military arsenal. It has been suggested that in its formative years, the regime's nuclear programme had this latter aim, however it is unlikely that this is now the case. 'If North Korea had been determined to acquire nuclear arms in the early 1990s, as most people in Washington believed at the time, it could have shut down its nuclear reactor any time between 1991 and 1994, removed fuel rods, and quickly reprocessed the spent fuel to extract plutonium'. The explanation for this is that the D.P.R.K 'seems to want the United States to help ensure its security against a South Korea it fears, a Japan it hates, and a China it distrusts'. In the late 1990s, 'in Pyongyang's view... Washington has been unwilling to extend co-operation beyond the Agreed Framework or even to keep its end of the nuclear bargain'. Furthermore, 'Washington was reluctant to move beyond the 1994 accord to greater political and economic engagement'. In signing the agreement, 'Pyongyang reasoned, if Washington was willing to supply more reactors, improved diplomatic, trade, and other ties would surely follow'. However, 'Washington did not even take the modest steps to ease U.S. unilateral sanctions that North Korea was promised in February 1995'. The Framework Agreement worked to avert an unprecedented nuclear crisis 'once broadened to include energy, economic, security, and diplomatic incentives'. It failed when none of those guarantees appeared legitimate.
Consequently, 'the spurt of activity at the suspect underground site at Kumchangi in autumn 1997 should be understood in this context'. At this time, 'had North Korea wanted to break the nuclear accord, it could have thrown out the international inspectors, opened the casks, and removed the spent fuel for reprocessing. Instead, the North resumed excavation...which U.S. intelligence [had] been observing for over a decade'. The typical tactic of the North Korean regime is to combine such provocative acts with uncompromising bombast. Ignoring such obfuscated pleas for negotiation and co-operation simply ignites frustration and desperation in Pyongyang. This time, the North Koreans took it as a 'reluctance or disinterest', motivating them to carry out their 'Taepong test on August 31, 1998 - a test that violated Japanese airspace'. The test created 'virtual panic in Tokyo - as if the missile had barely cleared the treetops'. Obviously, 'there was a deep-seated issue at the crux of this a conflict for which economic bargaining and foreign assistance can only be a means to political dialogue, not an end in itself'. It was at this time that many analysts, such as Selig Harrison, believe that the D.P.R.K 'lost patience with American unwillingness to fulfil its commitments under the Framework Agreement'. Its threats and posturing a part of its peculiar way of begging the U.S to renegotiate the 1994 accord.
The U.S. never offered a comprehensive security guarantee; it refused to lump nuclear, political and economic concessions together. "Basically", according to Charles Kartman's assessment of the first crisis, the U.S. "had it wrong". He said, "we had been going down the wrong road for a long time". 'In Pyongyang's view, it was being asked to give up its bargaining chip first, and only then would the United States talk about quid pro quos'. However, 'in Washington's view, it was not about to pay for North Korea to do what it had already agreed to do by signing the Non-Proliferation Treaty'. Sigal maintains that 'Washington had yet to learn that in dealing with Pyongyang, it would not get something for nothing'. Rather than a "cheat and retreat" strategy, a better explanation may be one of 'show and tell', whereby North Korea revealed 'enough to demonstrate willingness to make a deal while withholding enough to retain bargaining leverage'.
North Korea needs 'reassurance to ease...insecurity, a lesson most proliferation experts have been loathe to learn'. Coercion is a risky business in this particular conflict: 'short of attacking, defeating, and occupying a nuclear-arming state, the use of armed force - like sanctions - can at best set back a nuclear weapons program or drive it underground; it cannot stop it'. In the late 1990s, 'if North Korea had nuclear arms or enough plutonium to make bombs, U.S. intelligence had no idea where they were; air strikes could not target what could not be found. Even striking the reactor at Yongbyon risked spewing radiation over Japan'. However, the severity of the situation does help the U.S. justify immense defence budgets and pet-projects such as missile defence. Keeping North Korea threatened and thus threatening may suit some in the American military establishment, but it is a very risky and irresponsible strategy that undermines its own non-proliferation regime. Particularly 'when the state in question has a history of egregious or seemingly irrational behaviour, when evidence of internal change is difficult to discern or deliberately obscured, and when contact with the country is so limited that potential allies with its political system are not easy to find'. North Korea is thus inherently insecure and notoriously determined to get what it wants. Sigal emphasises that 'so long as the United States persists in criminalising proliferation and demonising so-called rogue states in order to confront them, it will leave itself politically unpalatable options: to live with more nuclear armed states or to go to war to disarm them'.
'No country has been the target of more American nuclear threats than North Korea'. Since the Korean War, the U.S has 'conducted numerous military exercises with nuclear-capable artillery and aircraft on the Korean peninsula and carrier aircraft just offshore'. Moreover, the effects of devastating total war and the possibility of nuclear destruction that bore upon the D.P.R.K have never been forgotten. The U.S. military agenda 'puts Pyongyang's activity into perspective: much of it has been responsive to U.S. pressures...consistent with the logic of a Korean civil conflict and the nuclear confrontation since 1958'. Such a state of affairs can convincingly be regarded as one of the most crucial determinants of the North Korean nuclear programme of the 1960s which was augmented as a result of 'clear signs of nuclear-arming by South Korea in the 1970s'. The security climate steadily declined over the next two decades as the R.O.K outstripped the D.P.R.K militarily and the U.S. achieved rapprochement with the Soviet Union and China. By this time, 'some North Korean officials were seeing the American troop presence in a new light, a restraint on South Korea and a counter-weight against Japan, Russia and China'. North Korea still now perceives American preponderance to be the key to its desperate security situation. Given this assessment, North Korea's behaviour becomes all the more understandable. In fact 'forward deployment, instead of showing North Korea's aggressive intent, maybe its way to compensate for qualitative inferiority'.
The current situation in North Korea, by no stretch of the imagination, is the result of a 'crash programme' initiated by a maniacal dictatorship to satisfy despotic urges. No doubt, the regime is unwaveringly autocratic and loathsome, but its governance methods do not bear direct responsibility for its choice of security strategy or foreign policy. Since the mid-1950s, the D.P.R.K has sought out a solution to its 'precarious' encircled position as well as its economic shortcomings and its energy dearth and concluded that if the U.S wont provide it, then a nuclear programme will certainly help, one way or another. Sigal believes that 'economic stagnation' has worsened the security situation in North Korea. Moreover, with the demise of the Soviet Union and China, and South Korea's development of 'diplomatic relations with all of North Korea's one time allies', Pyongyang is in a sorry state politically. The problem is thus threefold: North Korea assumed it had to develop an arms program that would give it some measure of protection militarily, mitigate for political isolation and allow the regime to extort financial sustenance from the powers a nuclear capability threatened that would not otherwise be forthcoming. Thus, 'Yongbyon... began in pursuit of energy self-reliance, and ended up as a bargaining chip to trade away for a new relationship with the United States'.
Pyongyang has not put all its eggs in one basket as it were, and at times allowed its 'autarkic economy' to open up to some limited foreign trade. This occurred mainly between the two Koreas and peaked at times of dtente, 'tapering off' in times of hostility. The D.P.R.K regime was aware that - without building a new relationship with the U.S. that provided security - unbridled economic resurgence might be an unsettling force and consequently offered the hand of friendship to Washington. Pyongyang's behaviour in the early 1990s is testament to this notion. When 'American security assurances...took nuclear forms: withdrawal of all American nuclear warheads...suspension of Team Spirit... North Korea reciprocated, putting the breaks on bomb making' and ratifying 'historic accords' to formalise the reconciliation.
Current hawkish assessments admonish the latest crisis as unsurprising in an inevitable sequence of underhand tactics from Pyongyang. These 'unchanged and "evil" intentions" demand that engagement strategies of the past be abandoned in favour of 'isolation and containment' and a rejection of Kim Dae Jung's 'policy of unconditional engagement'. The antithetical, 'more doveish' hypothesis is that 'North Korea's need for such a secret program, albeit in violation of standing agreements, derives from basic insecurity fears'. In this sense North Korean behaviour is a "cry for help", intended to tie the United States into a desperate situation in order that it give the security guarantees it would not otherwise consider. Thus, 'to the hawks, the doves are weak-kneed appeasers, while doves dismiss hawks as irresponsible ideologues'. Clearly, the military teeth of the D.P.R.K are not an elaborate sham and pose a grave potential danger in the East Asian region and the economic crisis there has provoked a range of illicit activities by the Kim Jong Il regime.
Truth be told, 'Pyongyang is the world's worst nightmare - an illiberal and irrational regime that is the number one proliferator of ballistic missiles and enabling technology, and is willing to sell them'. Consequently, the North Korean crisis 'has become intricately tied to partisan politics: rivalries between the executive branch and Congress; controversies over intelligence assessments; the viability of the non-proliferation regime; the efficacy of homeland defence; and differing assessments of the utility of deterrence versus pre-emption in U.S. security doctrine'. That said, 'North Korea is not irrational nor undeterable'. In fact, 'whether one is optimistic or pessimistic with regard to the regime's intentions...some form of conditional engagement with North Korea - barring extremely deviant behaviour by Pyongyang - remains the best policy for the United States'. Hard-liners disagree with those willing to 'compromise American values'. A touch ignorant and conceited one might think. However, the belief remains that 'dealing with dictators in a principled and determined manner...is more likely to see positive results'. This is often based on a 'papier mch
 version of the D.P.R.K as a "rogue, irrational" state'.
Possibly an equally nave perception is the direct antithesis of this. While North Korea certainly remains a pawn in the political chess-game of the major powers it is perhaps a little gullible to assume it has shown 'whole hearted attempts...to reform its system'. Yet, the solution put forth by advocates of this approach offers a more constructive alternative than coercion. Encouraging the D.P.R.K to emerge into the international system and helping it to reform 'emphasises the responsibility that the world's most powerful nation has in resolving the crisis through negotiation'. A coercive policy could conceivably trigger a war that, in the words of General Gary Luck, would cost "one million and one trillion". Unfortunately, '"area specialists" who actually know something about North Korea are spectacularly incapable of communicating with the public and policy makers in a useful manner'. As a result of this and the deliberate obfuscation of information that emerges from Pyongyang we 'are left with a policy and scholarly chasm'. In addition, containment and engagement by the U.S has always been restricted to a very narrow remit of tactical non-proliferation objectives which has caused the crisis to reach an impasse where tit-for-tat diplomacy goes round in circles.
The 1994 Framework Agreement set an important precedent although many hawks do not recognise the fact. The accord, 'under which North Korea froze its major nuclear weapons programs and promised ultimately to undo whatever nuclear weapons progress it had made', was widely condemned as 'giving in to North Korean blackmail'. However, others believe that 'at worst the 1994 accord bought time'. In fact, 'a few years of difficult relations marked by smaller crises and mutual recriminations followed...but then a process of diplomacy and engagement began...especially after President Kim Dae Jung took office in South Korea in February 1998'. Furthermore, in 2000, Clinton proposed a package to effectively buy out the North Korean missile development program. This was a seriously tempting proposition for the Pyongyang regime given the dtente on the peninsula since the Framework Agreement and the inception of the "Sunshine Policy".
Depending on one's normative position, it was perhaps 'right' that Clinton attempted to buy out the North Korean programme. After all, the D.P.R.K's missiles 'are commodities for sale' and a package that would cost around $1 billion paled into insignificance against the staggering amount that National Missile Defence was costing the U.S. - by the end of the 1990s the figure was somewhere in the region of $60 billion. This newly proposed assistance went even beyond the 1994 agreement and could have possibly injected renewed vigour into what is once again becoming a desperate situation. Unfortunately, it still did not get to the heart of the problem and allowed the tit-for-tat diplomatic relationship to maintain. By not offering a peace treaty or initiating a process of conventional arms reductions, North Korea was to remain inherently insecure and economically fragile.
From another point of view, it 'risked encouraging North Korea to develop dangerous weapons...as its primary means of gaining hard currency and diplomatic respect'. Consequently, 'President Bush has taken a hard line toward North Korea', and, in fact, 'turned a cold shoulder' even to South Korean doves. Many analysts have been critical of President Bush's unsophisticated "axis of evil" condemnation of North Korea, particularly given the highly tenuous claim that North Korea has links to significant terrorist organisations. Bush's hard-line policy comes in the wake of renewed vigour on the part of the D.P.R.K to provoke and altogether bully its way to secure guarantees from the United States. By 2002, the North's efforts saw it violate the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, which it signed in 1985, the accord it signed with Seoul, in 1991, and the 1994 Framework Agreement. However, the U.S reaction to this age-old D.P.R.K tactic was to yet again toughen its stance. Inevitably, causing Pyongyang to remove 'monitors and seals from its stock and waste fuel...and [expel] UN monitoring personnel', which 'put it in a position to add to its probable stock of one or two bombs by...perhaps half a dozen'.
True to previous policy, 'the Bush administration eventually relaxed its terms...agreeing to a session in Beijing in April of 2003'. The Beijing negotiations heralded little, 'except the possibility of more talks', and in fact set the stage for the North Koreans to up the ante, supposedly admitting to possessing the nuclear arsenal that U.S. analysts had 'long suspected'. The 'theatrics' that followed further U.S reluctance are evidence of North Korea's perception that only America can provide the security the nation craves. Without meaningful American input the Six-Party Talks thus yielded little since the 2002 crisis. The upshot of this most recent antagonism saw President Bush enthuse about concessions that would be made to Pyongyang if they reduced the conventional military threat and the possibility of comprehensive multilateral dialogue. However, Bush never elaborated the 'specifics', and the current administration appears reluctant to engage North Korea with intrinsic tact.
The 1994 Framework Agreement 'showed that North Korea was willing to trade away a substantial nuclear capability for a package of benefits that included alternative sources of energy and the hope of gradual diplomatic engagement and economic recovery'. These days, the situation in North Korea is even bleaker with economic collapse seemingly just over the horizon. 'Accordingly, Kim Jong Il has demonstrated at least a limited interest in trying economic reform, as attested by his numerous visits to China's special enterprise zones and temperate but frequent efforts to test new economic ideas'. 'North Korean leaders seem to want change; they just cannot figure out how to do it successfully while also holding onto power'. Therefore, unless the international community, and its self-appointed leader, offer guidance then North Korea will likely continue to be prepared to go to the brink in order that the regime survive.
Containment and engagement strategies are often debated in a heated, circus-like rhetoric that is entirely unhelpful. Victor Cha and David Kang's eminent study takes the scholarly debate beyond what is often a farcical intellectual abyss and presents an excellent critique of current policy hypotheses. Containment need not be an empty vessel fuelled by blustering, reactionary discourse. Sophisticated containment premises assert that the Pyongyang regime is fundamentally averse to reform and any deviations from its conspicuously secretive, introvert and aggressive carapace is merely a 'change in diplomatic tactics' designed to reap maximum rewards from the prevailing political climate. The regimes 'intentions' remain the same. Thus, 'absent changes in the military situation...that go beyond "smile summitry" and political atmospherics...it is difficult to assume that tactical warming by Pyongyang carries deeper meaning'. Despite this, it is maintained that the default policy, 'even for "hawks" in Washington, Seoul and Tokyo', should be a form of limited engagement. This means that it is possible to 'engage, while gaining a window on the degree of change in D.P.R.K intentions...[and] also laying the groundwork for punishment if necessary'.
Although the D.P.R.K is desperately weak, it is not lacking the potential to go to extreme measures to survive 'despite the many premature eulogies'. Therefore, coercion is more likely to lead to pre-emption or a preventative attack by Pyongyang. 'While fears of an imminent South Korean attack are not a salient pre-emptive/preventative motivation for Pyongyang today, the yawning deficit in capabilities vis--vis the South undoubtedly raises the anticipatory fears of extinction-through-absorption in North Korean eyes'. North Korea's militarisation is no longer intended to conquer the South; it is now a fearful, defensive equipoise dedicated to the survival of the state - 'precisely the type of fear behind a preventive lashing-out type action'. Moreover, the D.P.R.K no longer has a military advantage over the South and has no potential allies. Clearly, pushing North Korea to the brink is not advisable and it is certainly not supported by East Asian powers.
North Korea's behaviour is thoroughly informed by intelligent strategy and 'it utilises deliberate, limited acts of violence to create small crises and then negotiates down from the heightened sense of tension to a bargaining outcome more to [its] advantage than the status quo'. The more extreme the circumstances, it should be expected that, 'short of all-out war', the D.P.R.K will employ more extreme tactics to cope, thus the regime's behaviour is 'context dependent'. The Cold-War status quo gave Pyongyang the 'impression that with time, gaps could be closed...[its] decisional frame was at worst neutral, and more often than not in the domain of wins'. This is unarguably not the case now.
Cha accepts that critics are adamant that events circa 2000 to 2001 marked a watershed in Pyongyang's political behaviour. South Korean rapprochement and a U.S. government finally willing to seriously negotiate turned the tide in favour of resolving the crisis of some fifty years standing. However, Cha argues that this was a consequence of a temporarily favourable status quo that historically does not last. Hence, 'without meaningful reciprocal responses from Pyongyang' to the R.O.K's "sunshine policy" and President Clinton's initiatives there was no evidence to suggest that this was anything substantial. What is necessary is 'a distinction between permanent changes in the status quo and temporary deviations from it'. According to Cha, 'understanding the North Korean threat in terms of this logic highlights the misdirected focus of D.P.R.K engagement debates in Washington and Seoul'. The international community must seek to induce the Kim regime - rather than to coerce it and push it to more extreme measures - in order to reach a new status quo in which the North has an advantageous stake.
This is a much more sophisticated assessment of the crisis than many of those emanating from the political policy debates that enter the public arena, however, it is still absent any substantial assessment of the crux of the crisis: North Korean insecurity. From this perspective, 'North Korea's threatening rhetoric and large army exist to deter...and convince the U.S. that the costs of war are too high'. Kang states that, 'in a nutshell, the problem is this: the United States refuses to give security guarantees to North Korea until it proves it has dismantled its weapons program. The North refuses to disarm until it has security guarantees'. Kang's thesis is utterly convincing in respect to the possibility that the D.P.R.K will use or export nuclear weapons should it develop them. Under no circumstances whatsoever - other than in the gung-ho, unsophisticated, irrational, rogue state imagery - does Pyongyang believe it will achieve anything other than its own destruction should it do so. Nevertheless, a nuclear arsenal does provide the 'status quo ante 1991, before the U.S.S.R collapsed'. 'For deterrence to be stable, it requires a level of force that is adequate to make an attack seem senseless, but not so high that it would make pre-emption tempting to the other side'. More crucially, 'deterrence also means that North Korea will not use its weapons - if it actually develops them - for offensive purposes. The consequences would be annihilation by the U.S.'
Considering contemporary Beltway rhetoric, it follows that 'the North Korean regime would interpret...signals as conveying that the use of force by the United States remains an option'. It is also the reason 'why North Korea has a nuclear weapons program'. Given Cha's hypothesis, the U.S. ought to refrain from such coercive behaviour. 'Whether...a bargaining chip or an effective deterrent, the pursuit of nuclear weapons by North Korea should come as no surprise'. In the end, 'North Korea has made very clear that they intend to be treated with respect...no matter who is morally right...the United States needs to realise that a policy that expects North Korean capitulation has fairly predictable - and negative - consequences'.
The historically sophisticated perspective recognises that North Korea has no fundamental flaw that will prevent it from shrugging off its dire recent past. 'North Korea can be brought into the community of nations'. However, 'even if Pyongyang wants to go in the same direction that the West wishes it to go, that process will be cautious and halting, and North Korea will not quickly let its guard down. Slow change is not bad - rapid change on the peninsula will be disastrous'. While Cha's contention is admirable, it still fails to recognise that the D.P.R.K will continue the same mode of coercive negotiation until it is given the security guarantees it so desperately needs. In the economic arena, reforms suggest that the D.P.R.K is in fact changing the nature of its polity as well as extorting the international community in order to survive. This does not mean that the Kim regime advocates "open society" or is contemplating 'wholesale economic reforms anytime soon', but it does reflect a general shift in North Korean society which marks a more optimistic opportunity to engage the outside than ever before. The United States would be foolish to disregard this and push for the unrealistic change its zealous political oratory and ideology demand.
In focusing on not just military North Korea, but on the country's 'political and economic behaviour in a broader historical context, there is a story to be told of slow plodding reform'. Despite the apparent resistance of the Juche ideology, 'engagement works...it sends the right signals to the insecure regime that the United States, the Republic of Korea, and Japan are interested in trading the North's proliferation threat for a path of economic reform and integration'. Even from the contrary, pessimistic view contingent engagement must be seen as superior to a policy of coercion or neglect which will simply force the Kim regime to take more desperate measures to survive. North Korea must be made to feel that incentives are more advantageous than coercive bargaining, which will potentially jeopardise its relatively propitious position. In the final assessment it must be understood that 'without resolving North Korea's security fears' the crisis is never likely to abate.