The history of empires is a long one: beginning with the Greek, Roman and Persian empires, which pitted race against race; the empires of Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands and Britain in the sixteenth and seventeenth century, which saw the rivalry between monarchies; and finally, the 'New' Imperialism of the mid-nineteenth century, which saw a renewed interest in and frantic scramble for, new colonies, between nation-states. 'By early twentieth century, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, Spain, and Portugal together held sway over almost 84 percent of the earth's surface." Imperialism had become not only fashionable, but also defined the era from the mid-nineteenth onwards to World War I. Despite many attempts to attach priority to a certain aspect of imperialism as being the driving force behind the phenomenon, it is perhaps more helpful to understand it as a product of a complex web of motives and concerns. Also, imperialism must be examined in the context of its time (post-enlightenment ideas, rapid industrialisation, the formation of scientific theories which supported the superiority of one race over another, nationalism, and the economic depression of 1873), without which, the phenomenon either would not have occurred, or might have taken on a different form.
Imperialism, according to Hobsbawm was 'the child of an era of competition between rival industrial-capitalist national economies which was new and which was intensified by the pressure to secure and safe-guard markets in a period of business uncertainty." Lenin also suggested that 'Imperialism emerged as the development and direct continuation of the fundamental characteristics of capitalism in general." Despite the acknowledged importance of economics, there is a tendency for Marxist historians to over-emphasise its role. 'The importance of economic interests and calculation in the expansion of European influence and control over the extra-European world is undeniable." It is one thing to concede the importance of economic interests, and another to assert that imperialism was primarily an economic phenomenon.
'New' imperialism was only possible in the light of rapid industrialisation, which peaked during the mid-nineteenth century. Industrialisation required raw materials such as tin and iron to make steel, which could be obtained cheaply in the colonies; the movement from rural to urban areas, the subsequent shift from agriculture to industries, and the surge in population put severe strain on food production in the metropolis, which would be alleviated if the colonies took on the function of being the 'granaries of Europe'. Also, with the efficiencies of machinery, colonies could provide the markets needed to absorb the increased production. 'Moreover, cheaper markets were required to offset the general fall in prices from the 1870s to the 1890s (economic depression); with most industrial powers adopting protectionist tariffs, colonies could serve both needs." Finally, there is the theory of 'surplus capital' as expounded by Hobson 'aggressive imperialism...is a source of great gain to the investor who cannot find at home the profitable use he seeks for his capital, and insists that his government should help him to profitable and secure investments abroad...'
It would seem that all of the above mentioned was best associated with British imperialism more than any other. At a glance, Britain's colonies were the most economically viable, with particular regards to India and South Africa. Using the data from the geographical distribution of British long-term capital investment overseas (as of 1913), out of the 1,780 million pounds invested in her empire, 378.8 million pounds was invested in India and Ceylon, while 370.2 million pounds went to South Africa. Moreover, the existence of chartered companies, such as George Goldie's Royal Niger Company, Sir William Mackinnon's British East Africa Company, Cecil Rhodes' British South Africa Company and the British East India Company (EIC) in Asia would seek to reinforce the pattern of British colonial rule: the ideal situation being that of an informal empire, which would allow effective economic exploitation without the additional costs of setting up a governing administrative body and the moral responsibility attached to a formal colony.
There are however, cracks in the theory of over-riding economic concerns in British imperialism. Firstly, it must be said that possessions that paid off handsomely, such as India and South Africa, were extremely rare and were lacking amongst the possessions of the other colonial powers. Hence 'with few exceptions, colonial trade remained throughout this period an insignificant proportion of metropolitan commerce...'. Instead, most of Europe's long-term overseas investment went significantly to areas outside of the formal colonial empires: French capital went into Russian bonds, German to Austria-Hungary and British to Latin America (in particular Argentina) and the other white-settlement former colonies (Canada and Australia). Moreover, very few colonies were actually profit-making entities, with the Germans colonising large areas of the African desert, and French indo-china being incomparable to the economically viable British colonies in the region.
The role of ideology in imperialism cannot be overlooked, though many have dismissed it as a cloak for economic exploitation, there is still much to be said about Social Darwinism, the "White Man's Burden" and the moral responsibility attached to it. In the light of the Enlightenment ideas of the link between change and progress, and Darwin's theory of evolution, to remain stagnant was to be weak. This change in ideas also marked a change in the perceptions of the colonial masters, who increasingly stressed the difference between the cultures of the metropolis and the colonies. Also, the advent of Science in promoting such racist ideas succeeded in explaining irrational beliefs in rational terms '...evolutionary explanation of racial differentiation and the mechanisms of natural selection seemed to explain and justify cultural differences in terms of inherent racial capacity and a natural hierarchy..." This sense of superior culture brought with it the moral responsibility, that 'societies which had travelled ahead...had some duty to offer guidance, instruction and even to rule." This was manifested in the ways the colonial masters tried to 'educate' the natives about proper 'Western' hygiene, setting up public schools to educate the natives in the colonial language, proper dressing (wearing shoes), western consumerism, and very importantly, through the spread of religion (Christian or Catholic faith). Another feature of the 'White Man's Burden' would be that of humanitarian concerns (whether rhetoric or reality), such as the abolishment of slavery in all French and British colonies, as the parallel movement alongside economic exploitation.
Though all the colonial powers claimed to be civilising their colonies, it was 'only in republican France (that) this claim (was) elevated to the realm of official imperial doctrine." Nineteenth century France was the great missionary power of the Roman Catholic world, and it can be argued that the colonisation of Vietnam was partly the result of the French desire to protect their missionaries in Vietnam from official persecution. However, the French were unique in believing in the universality of French values, and the perfectibility of human kind, and this perception was not evident amongst the other European colonial masters, who generally, as a rule avoided 'over-education' of the natives.
To look at imperialism from a cynical point of view, it must be said that where economic and humanitarian interests were conflicting, the former would always triumph. Empirical observations regarding the sale of opium to Britain's Southeast Asian colonies, and that of 'trader gin' (a noxious but potent narcotic) in West Africa are telling of the priority of economic over humanitarian concerns. Abolishment of slavery was possible because it benefited both parties. Also, the presence of missionaries/explorers such as David Livingston could not compete with that of the international community of businessmen and investors. A very poignant example would be that of Belgium Congo, where King Leopold colonised it on the basis of 'humanitarian reasons', only to use the local population as slave labourers.
Though it is extremely difficult to argue that cultural influences were the direct causes of European imperialism, it nevertheless 'assisted in creating the general circumstances within which specific instances of imperial domination...became for contemporaries, not only imaginable but acceptable." The consequences of cultural transfers are still seen in our modern world, where the colonies largely taken on the parliamentary model of their former colonial masters. This change has its roots in the era of colonisation where the indigenous political and often social hierarchy was replaced by the political institutions and protocol of the metropolis. The adoption of the colonial language as the working language, the western architecture of new buildings and the assimilation into the cash-economy, are all examples of the transfer of culture. Similarly, there were many ways in which the natives have inspired European art and lifestyle.
An examination of purely economic and cultural aspects of imperialism has failed to truly grasp the essence of this significant event in history. The economic and cultural aspects were more of consequences rather than the causes of imperialism, and should be put in their correct places, under the broader themes of Power, Rivalry (stemming from Nationalism), Fear and Regeneration, which are interrelated concepts. Even so, the economic and cultural consequences were in fact additional benefits to be gained from imperialism, and not the actual aims that the imperialists wanted to achieve.
The acquiring of colonies was seen by many countries as the means by which they could attain the status of world power. This is particularly so for new countries like Italy and Germany, which saw their participation in imperialism as heightening their world standing. For an established nation like Britain however, imperialism was a defensive reaction, derived from a sense of insecurity and threats from newly industrialising powers like Germany, America and Russia, and the subsequent assertion of her power. As for France, she saw imperialism as the opportunity for the expansion of her army and navy; the role successful imperialism would play in exorcising her defeat in the Franco-Prussian war of 1871, and rebuild her status as a world power. Germany's fear of encirclement also played a part in the formulation of 'Weltpolitik'. It was not only the external fear that countries were trying to undermine each other in the race for colonies, but more importantly, there was the fear of internal degeneration, and that imperialism was the cure to the diagnosis of national ills, revitalising the country, restoring its self confidence, and reinforcing its power abroad.
Imperialism was often the exclusive prerogative of a small group of elites, but when the issue of national pride was at stake, and rivalry ensued, the public could often be aroused into supporting imperialist policies (clearly seen in the example of France.) Germany's aggressive 'Weltpolitik' (World policy) to secure her 'place in the sun' was an extension of the Anglo-German rivalry towards the end of the nineteenth century. Perhaps it can be suggested that, the above arguments regarding economic and cultural aspects were merely the manifestation of the broader concept of European rivalry. Linked to this concept is the theme of nationalism. The situation in Europe was balancing on a knife-edge after the unification of Italy and Germany, and the outward movement of expanding into a vast territory of unconquered plains was profitable not only as a safe outlet for the consumptive force of nationalism, but also to maintain the balance of power in Europe (Africa as the periphery of Europe).
Finally, there is the suggestion put forward by some historians that it was the domestic situation in Europe itself that led to imperialism. Social Imperialism, whereby '...expansionist policies are consciously devised to unite the nation and to defuse tensions at home, while simultaneously avoiding significant domestic reforms." In addition, the German 'Sammslungpolitik' (the gathering together of the elements that would naturally support the state) against the domestic threat from the Social Democrats, which coincided with their enthusiasm for imperialism, would seek to reinforce this theory.
In conclusion, it is inadequate to understand imperialism primarily either as an economic or cultural phenomenon, simply because both were secondary concerns in the impetus to colonise. Economic determinism is the prerogative of Marxist historians, and it should be kept this way; for the vast majority of the other historians who have attempted to write about imperialism have placed due recognition to the other factors that have contributed to the motives of imperialism, which provide a more balanced view of this phenomenon. Moreover, the question specifically refers to European, and not British imperialism, hence, the assertion of economic interests as the primary force in imperialism would seem highly Anglo-centric in the light of the arguments put forth in this essay. It is perhaps more accurate to see the economic and cultural aspects as being the consequences of imperialism, and since 'primarily' suggests some sense of causation, it would be myopic to insist upon a direct answer to this question.