The multi-level governance approach provides the conceptual framework for a new agenda in European studies which is concerned with comprehending the paradoxical nature of the policy system. Multi-level governance may be regarded as an advance in the comprehension of the EU polity because it provides the possibility to break free from the traditional preoccupation with the contradiction between national and supranational authority and prescribes for an explanation of how the system works. Multi-level governance is analysed here in order to show how the shortcomings of traditional explanations of the EU can be overcome. Moreover, this analysis demonstrates how the multi-level governance approach advances our understanding of the EU's complex polity. The multi-level governance framework conceptualises a system of governance open to a variety of theoretical perspectives in order to explain an abundance of constitutive issue areas. The assumption is not that the multi-level governance approach constitutes a theory in its own right. However, this essay attempts to demonstrate that theory can be developed within the multi-level governance framework with an assessment of three areas of scholarship: Europeanisation, New Institutionalism and Policy Network Analysis. Finally, it is argued that Giandomenico Majone's theory of regulatory policy in the EU provides an example of how a coherent theory of EU policy can exist within the multi-level governance framework.
Multi-level governance advances our knowledge and comprehension of the European Union (EU) by providing a conceptual framework for analysing the multi-faceted and paradoxical way in which the policy process works. The distinction here is between multi-level governance theories, which exist within this framework, and traditional theories of European integration, which, in contrast, are preoccupied with meta-narratives and explaining the origins of European Union. Multi-level governance will be assessed in order to show how the shortcomings of traditional explanations of the EU can be overcome. Moreover, this analysis demonstrates how the multi-level governance approach advances our understanding of the EU's complex polity. The assumption is not that the multi-level governance approach constitutes a theory in its own right. However, this essay will attempt to demonstrate how theory can be developed within the multi-level governance framework with an assessment of three areas of scholarship: Europeanisation, New Institutionalism and Policy Network Analysis. Furthermore, Giandomenico Majone's seminal work concerning EU regulatory policy will serve as an exemplar of theorising EU governance and provide food for thought on how theories attempting to explain the EU may develop within the multi-level governance perspective. In this essay, the term 'multi-level governance' is regarded as the general conceptual framework for which other scholars simply refer to as "governance", "new governance" or 'the governance agenda'.
Unfortunately, it is far beyond the scope of this essay to enter into a detailed critique of the governance theory which Hooghe and Marks have developed, save some allusions to the crucial issues. Therefore, what follows the first section, concerned with contextualising the multi-level governance approach, is not a critique per se, but an attempt to emphasise that the application of theories of EU governance must pursue a more nuanced explanation of how the system functions and that such theory can be accommodated within the multi-level governance approach. In the subsequent sections, the essay will take a look at 'multi-level governance theorist[s]' which seek to explain the complexities of various polity processes which occur within the EU system. In doing so, it should become apparent that the multi-level governance approach can also accommodate a wide range of theoretical explanation, from rational choice models to reflectivist ones. Throughout the essay, the multi-level governance approach is juxtaposed, but can also be seen as complementary, to classic integration theories which seek to explain how the EU came into being.
Governance can be understood as 'the intentional regulation of social relationships and the underlying conflicts by reliable and durable means and institutions, instead of the direct use of power and violence'. In the case of the EU this is a multi-level phenomenon as effectively explained by the works of Liesbet Hooghe and Gary Marks, widely regarded as the most thorough account of this dynamic. For the purpose of this essay theories which take the governance approach towards the EU, for this reason, are understood to exist within a multi-level governance framework. The turn towards conceptualising governance in the EU, as a 'policy oriented perspective', occurred as a vacuum emerged in European studies when International Relations theorists became disinterested in the EU meta-narrative because it did not appear to offer new, dynamic implications for the international system. The new generation of theorists became interested in 'single policies or policy fields', 'public opinion studies', and the specific analysis of the EU polity. Research agenda that are usually confined to the domestic political arena became the focus of scholars seeking to understand the complexities of the EU. This process was invigorated in the 1990s with the renewed impetus for integration after the passing of the Single European Act. With this came the rejection of 'the assumption that the external and internal relations of states were neatly separated'.
Governance theories work beneath the meta-theoretical level in order to examine the effects of specific actors and specific issue areas in order to enhance an understanding of how the EU works. In this sense, although multi-level governance theories acknowledge the immense importance of the state as an international actor, there is recognition of the importance of other actors - the influence of regional governments, interests groups, supranational institutions, trans-national corporations and non-government organisations are included in the analysis where applicable. In short, multi-level governance theories are not intrinsically and inflexibly state-centric. Traditional theories, or grand theories, are 'preoccupied with the "big bangs" of integration'. This becomes a problem in so far as it does not advance our understanding of how the EU works. Traditional theories left scholars stuck in the stalemate between 'the relative importance of national versus supranational actors'.
Therefore, there is a distinction here between multi-level governance theories and grand theories of European integration. The latter attempt parsimonious and all-pervasive explanations of how the EU came into being; they attempt to understand the EU as a particular form of political entity. Scholars working within the multi-level governance framework attempt to explain the distinct, policy specific issue areas and show how the policy process affects different actors and vice-versa. The flexible nature of the multi-level governance framework, which assesses individual issue areas independently of any EU meta-narrative, can certainly deal with more contentious issues that are not easily assimilated within the traditional approaches. In terms of European enlargement, particularly the latest phase of eastern enlargement, multi-level governance theories are effective in explaining the deepening of the policy imbroglio and the contradictory nature of the mechanisms designed to deal with it. Traditional theories, with 'strict and uniform rules', are much more rigid and unable to deal with the paradox of flexible governance structures. Theories that work within the framework of multi-level governance have 'led to a substantially better understanding of the actual functioning of the EU system'. In attempting to understand the EU this is profoundly important.
Jeffrey Anderson points out that 'strategic choice' analyses can play a role within the multi-level governance approach therefore it cannot simply be regarded as rejection of traditional epistemologies. For rational theories, the multi-level arena is simply a more complex system whereby supranational, national and sub-national actors form their interests through the 'interaction of ideas and institutions, which generate "constructed focal points" that are essential to the content of [EU] bargaining outcomes'. Robert Geyer also accounts for the suggestion made by Simon Hix that the multi-level governance approach is open to a wide range of theoretical standpoints. Whilst it certainly accommodates empirical studies and analyses from the traditional positivist perspective - such as rational choice theories - it can also accommodate post-positivist theories which reject the theoretical tenets of traditional scholarship. Given the contradictory nature of the EU exposed by the concepts of multi-level governance, theoretical and methodological diversity to broaden our understanding of the constitutive parts of the 'system' must be welcomed. The EU exists as a result of "imperfect" processes and is based on 'a multi-faceted combination of historical events and political economic structures'. Therefore, a flexible approach to comprehending how it works is necessary.
The potential of the multi-level governance approach lies in the possibility to move beyond the conventional idea of state power as understood in terms of the traditional concept of sovereignty. This conceptualisation of the autonomous state is linked to sovereignty as an immutable positivist phenomenon. One way in which the multi-level governance approach can explain the international relations that occur within the EU is via a revision of the concept of sovereignty so that it is understood as socially constructed and, hence, changeable. In this sense, the EU as a multi-level system of governance can effectively coexist with nation states - one does not imply the impossibility of the other. Where perhaps Hooghe and Marks have erred is in relying on the traditional distinction between the international, or, in this case, the supranational, and the national to the extent of simply reversing rather than rectifying the old problematic. In their theory of EU governance, it is the supranational level that is emphasised, whereas in the traditional literature it is the nation state. Simply replacing one with the other does not move us beyond this intellectual impasse.
An effective use of the multi-level governance approach must include the following concepts: first, that the policy process, or any number of policy processes, are influenced by a variety of actors at different levels (the supranational, the national and the sub-national); secondly, that this dispersal of influence engenders a dispersal of authority whereby the nation state no longer monopolises governance; and, thirdly, that cross-border interactions within the EU have blurred the traditional distinction between the domestic and the international spheres. This represents the 'upwards', 'downwards' and 'horizontal' dispersal of authority "beyond" the state to supranational and local institutions as well as non-government organisations. What it does not represent is the death of the nation state because it remains a vastly important level of governance. In the work of Hooghe and Marks there is an emphasis on the empirical verification of state sovereignty as 'diluted' by these processes. There is a preoccupation with proving that supranational institutions are now "in control" of European governance. Attempting to prove "sovereignty in retreat" simply cannot move us beyond the traditional impasse of state-centricism versus supranationalism.
What is required to advance our knowledge of the EU polity, therefore, is precisely what the multi-level governance perspective offers: 'if cross border social processes are on the increase, then we should learn more from studying the interaction between units of a trans-national system than from a simple cross national comparison'. The contention here is that Hooghe and Marks remain bogged down in attempting to theorise the decline of the importance of the state. As Bernhard Ebbinghaus has commented, 'we need a Janus-faced approach that takes into account the interaction between national and international systems, a conception of the interaction as a feedback spiral in which domestic changes and international interdependencies become mutually contingent'. To some extent Hooghe and Marks do this, but the impression is that they are too preoccupied with a meta-theory of supranationalism. However, it must be said that their work remains a lucid and coherent account of EU governance despite the inherent shortcomings of their theory. What they do provide, despite the problem of their errant departure from analytical conceptualisation to theoretical explanation, is a highly sophisticated platform from which other, more useful, theoretical works can develop. Our understanding of the EU cannot advance unless we move beyond conceptualising of the international system as divided between the national and the international per se. As Jachtenfuchs has asserted, 'a [multi-level] governance perspective has the potential to avoid a reification of this distinction'.
Tanja Aalberts' 'constructivist reading' of multi-level governance helps identify some of the problems suffered by scholars who wish to break the traditional reification of state and in doing so reify supranationalism in its place. Hence, Aalberts may not have it quite right when suggesting that 'Hooghe and Marks distance themselves from supranationalism'. It can be argued that theory of Hooghe and Marks, which is clearly based on the multi-level governance approach to explaining the EU polity, is stuck at the supranational level. As such, it ignores the major concepts for analysis that they set forth in their conceptualisation of EU governance. They appear fixated on the implications of what they have explained for the future of the state and the organisation of the international system. They seek to locate their discussion in the historical and political context and multi-level governance is juxtaposed to 'state-centric governance' because it seeks to provide the conceptual lens through which an explanation of the EU may take place without being constrained by traditional concepts of the state.
The implicit agenda appears to be that 'the dispersion of governance across multiple jurisdictions is both more effective than and normatively superior to central state monopoly'. It is clear that this is more in line with traditional theory and does not advance our understanding of the EU's complex polity. The theoretical agenda is, arguably, an ineffective one. 'The complexity of policy making actors disparate territories and multiple actors, the changing patterns of mutual interaction among policy arenas, the sensibility of EU decision making to international and domestic exogenous shocks...contribute to a fluid and inherently unpredictable environment which dilutes the extent to which Member State decisions...can control supranational actors'. However, it is precisely this fluidity and instability which likewise means that supranational actors cannot be the most influential actors all the time. This is the problem of Hooghe and Marks' theory. Multi-level governance in their case is often used to explain an apparent transition from the nation state to the supranational state. Given the complexity attributed to this system, there is no consistent or provable authority which can be located in any individual level - neither the national nor the supranational.
Despite the problems one encounters with the Hooghe and Marks' theory, they unarguably put forward a sophisticated conceptual approach from which theorists can analyse a wide variety of policy issues in order to explain how the EU governance system operates. The complexity and paradoxical nature of this system means it is not desirable to attempt to explain the system as an imagined whole. Hooghe and Marks acknowledge the need to 'explain...by disaggregating policy making into its component parts'. However, they suffer from reifying the EU as a new form of state. Having stated that European integration is 'shaped by deep disagreements among political actors about how to organise political life in Europe', explaining conflictual processes in isolation from each other is the only way to understand them.
New institutionalism is generally regarded as: 'three institutionalisms...largely autonomous developments linked together by a renewal of interest in the institutions in several areas of the social sciences. Historical institutionalism grew out of critiques of conventional group theories of politics, while rational choice institutionalism reflects the successful import of the axioms of microeconomics into political science. At the same time, sociologists became interested in the capacity of cultural and organisational practices (institutions) to mould the preferences, interests and identities of actors in the social world (hence "sociological institutionalism")'. Each of these can be applied to explaining the EU as a richly diverse and disparate polity. In the context of the EU, the prevailing interpretations are rational choice institutionalism, which regards institutions as a tool of state actors, helping them pursue their predetermined interests in overcoming "transaction costs" and so forth, and historical institutionalism, which is 'associated with a more generous interpretation of the influence of institutions' whereby they act as the mediators through which actors interact. Moreover, for historical institutionalists, institutions also have some autonomy of their own, with the ability to shape and influence the behaviour of actors and thus the policy process.
New institutionalism in general seeks to explain how EU institutions represent "persistent and connected sets of rules (formal and informal) that prescribe behavioural roles...and shape expectations". It is a new form of institutionalist analysis because it entails an enlarged 'interpretation of what constitutes institutions', including less formal issues, and, also, because it is concerned with 'institutional values', what they are and how they come to be. In the new institutionalist explanation of the EU polity, institutions 'structure the access of political forces to the political process', thereby shaping political actors behaviour and influencing the policy that emerges as a result. Institutions can even shape the policy process directly; they have their own level of autonomy and authority - for instance, 'the Commission as an agenda setter'. Studies of how various actors shape their preferences and construct norms amid a plethora of institutional designs at the various levels of governance in the EU is consistent with the multi-level governance conceptualisation of the EU polity. As Hix has put it; new institutionalist 'theoretical explanations are derived from the empirical conception and methodological strategy of the [multi-level] governance approach'.
Mark Aspinwall and Gerald Schneider have commented that there is 'a general and widely shared premise that European integration cannot be properly understood without due reference to the formal and informal rules that govern the political interactions within the EU'. There is a danger, given the diverse nature of theory involved in new institutionalist research - with epistemological, ontological and methodological debates over what should constitute institutionalist theory - that 'a lack of common understanding' may emerge. However, as the multi-level governance approach has shown, there is much to gain from diverse explanations. Indeed, 'methodological [and even epistemological] pluralism is to be welcomed'. Simon Bulmer believes that new institutionalism represents a 'middle-range theory' which can connect micro-level analysis with the "bigger picture" of traditional theory. In keeping with the multi-level governance conceptual framework new institutionalism can also help understand how the EU can manage issues which proliferate beyond the state. Moreover, it can account for the 'diversity of governance between the three pillars of the EU' and 'within the EC pillar' itself, where issues are just as conflictual. Within the new institutionalism theoretical school, Bulmer is concerned with historical institutionalism which conceives of ideas, norms, and values which account for the institutionalisation of EU governance. The focus in this essay on historical institutionalism is a mere analytical convenience given the lucid and coherent account of its significance undertaken by Bulmer. What should be made clear is that the different institutionalisms are at the same time contending but not 'incompatible' standpoints.
The historical institutionalist standpoint focuses on 'systemic change', 'governance structures', 'policy evolution', and the 'role of values and norms' more so than any of its institutionalist rivals. Historical institutionalism can explain systemic change by focusing on a variety of actors which interact through institutions in order to affect the policy process, or indeed 'the transfers of competence at particular junctures of the integration process'. It also acknowledges the changeable nature of these circumstances at different times. Governance structures likewise affect the policy process, for example 'the SEM/SEA package enhance[d] the governance capability of the EC...putting the market integration into operation'. In terms of policy evolution, historical institutionalist theory seeks to explain how 'path dependency influences the course of policy'. The policy process becomes shaped by the norms that have been constructed via interactions at all levels of the governance system. There is also room to include the legal dimension, taking into account horizontal as well as vertical governance structures. Institutions such as the European Court of Justice (ECJ) establish legal principles which are manifested with policy making. Hence, this body of theory 'offers a framework for understanding the judicial and legislative processes as complementary to one another'. By disaggregating levels in this way it is possible to recognise both the stable and the fluid elements of the EU's constitutive parts.
Policy network analysis is concerned with 'the fragmented and fluid institutional structure of the EU', in which 'the lack of a strong power centre leads to an increase in the channels of access and a larger variation of the participants in the policy making process'. According to Anderson, it 'represents...[a] promising line of inquiry' which focuses on governmental and non-governmental actors and the proliferation of policy at all levels of the EU system. There is evidence to suggest that such empirical research can provide the basis for theoretical research even if this transition has not yet been achieved. As such, 'the answers will help us to understand the precise mechanisms that link workaday politics in specific...policy areas to episodic grand bargains, and thus to identify those elements of the former that cannot be derived from the latter'. Indeed, this is an effective tool to escape the intellectual impasse of traditional theories of the EU polity.
However, Hussein Kassim has levelled a large measure of criticism toward the application of policy network analysis to the study of the EU. He believes that EU institutions are characterised by an "elusive fluidity" in the sense that the constantly shifting and fluctuating nature of institutions makes the policy process too unpredictable. The implication appears to be that policy network analysis cannot achieve generalisation or parsimony and that this is a bad thing. Kassim states that this 'might help explain why case studies of EU policy-making tend to examine individual decisions rather than whole sectors or sub-sectors'. However, this should be regarded as a strength rather than a weakness. Kassim asserts that in analysing individual policy processes and policy case studies then policy network analysis cannot live up to its claim to provide a 'meso-level' conceptualisation of the EU polity - with this, 'identifying durable networks is difficult'. Of course it is if they do not exist. It is more useful to recognise that 'stability is not assumed as a condition, but as a variable, and policy networks are just as likely to be absent as they are to be identifiable'.
The application of policy analysis to the EU concerns explanations of how the policy process works, therefore, if that process is a paradoxical and fluid one then this is precisely what the analysis should reflect rather than attempting to provide 'durable' theories. Kassim also asserts that the 'institutional complexity' that exists within the EU is elusive to policy network analysis because it has no conception of the nature of what it is dealing with. He claims that without a meta-narrative to guide it then policy network analysis becomes impotent. If one adheres to the multi-level governance approach which avoids conceiving of the EU as an entire "reality" then policy network analysis can remain important as a source of evidence for how the system works. Finally, Kassim contends that there is a "boundary problem" in which policy areas are indistinguishable from one another and the institutional protagonists within each policy scenario almost impossible to identify. That is, 'in domains where the EU is not the only competent international organisation, there is additional complexity in defining the relevant network'. Paradox, fluidity, uncertainty, multiplicity and so forth play a significant role in EU governance so it would appear essential to analyse individual cases which display all these features and are by nature difficult to explain.
The problem with Kassim's criticism is that it fails to appreciate a more subtle approach to understanding European governance. Tanja Brzel recognises that even within the policy network analysis scholarship there are distinctions between two schools - the "interest intermediation school" and the "governance school". Policy network analysis, in both instances, focuses on a more nuanced appreciation of governance as 'institutionalised exchange relations', between public and private actors, including formal and informal relations. Moreover, the level of analysis is flexible, usually taking place at the sectoral or sub-sectoral level and also includes individual case studies. Brzel concentrates on the "governance school", and for this discussion likewise it is an exemplar of the significance of policy network analysis. For "governance school" scholars 'networks provide a perspective from which to analyse situations in which a given policy cannot be explained by centrally conceived policy action towards common goals'. To quote Brzel's succinct intellection; 'actors, who take an interest in the making of a certain policy, and who dispose of resources (material and immaterial) required for the formulation, decision or implementation of the policy, form linkages to exchange these resources. The linkages, which differ in their degree of intensity, normalization, standardization and frequency of interaction, constitute the structures of a network. These "governance structures" of a network determine in turn the exchange of resources between the actors'.
However, it is crucial to remember that policy network analysis is 'no substitute for a theoretical explanation', but the implication is that this is a useful starting point from which to develop a theory of EU governance. In conceptualising a 'new form of governance' which takes on the multi-level, multi-actor oriented character, as espoused by Hooghe and Marks, policy network analysis provides the empirical foundations for a sophisticated account of the EU polity. Rod Rhodes has suggested that the "governance school" of policy network analysis in particular is "theory impregnated". In this sense, 'the policy network concept is able to conceptualise the emergence of political structures...characterised by "governing without government"'.
The other scholarly trend which can be seen as part of the multi-level governance approach, is Europeanisation theory. Adrienne Hritier usefully defines Europeanisation as "the process of influence deriving from European decisions and impacting Member States' policies and political...structures". However, there tends to be a general malaise towards this concept, in so far as the national public sphere is largely unaffected by such issues. Domestic audiences for the most part still see domestic governments as responsible for policy and setting the national governance agenda. Nevertheless, it has become an important theme in studying the EU - 'by no stretch of the analytical imagination could political process and policy making in an EU Member State now be adequately understood without taking into account the influence of the EU'. Since 'there are no simple links between the EU's activity in a given policy area and the quality of policy outcomes', theories of Europeanisation have come to explain policy crossover and contradiction and contestation within the EU polity. Markus Jachtenfuchs believe that they have done so with a varying degree of effectiveness, yet it is a move in the right direction.
There have been recent attempts to explain the changing nature of domestic institutions as a consequence of this idea of Europeanisation, where institutions have changed to meet the demands of EU policy. Christoph Knill and Dirk Lehmkuhl have identified three ways in which EU policy can affect domestic institutions. Firstly; by way of 'positive integration', EU policies impose direct pressure on national governance structures, usually implying that institutions must change in order to comply with EU law. For example, this has occurred in policy areas concerning 'environmental protection, health and safety...consumer protection' and so forth. Secondly; 'negative integration' - which does not directly impose necessities that force institutional change - causes a sort of national reappraisal of institutions and change may occur in order to maximise the benefits of EU policy at the domestic level. In this sense, 'the abolition of trade barriers for beer, for instance, has no impact on how the production of beer is regulated on the national level', but new forms of competition may require new domestic policies in order to remain competitive. Thirdly; 'framing integration' is a form of Europeanisation which changes attitudes in domestic politics thereby creating 'a degree of support mobilization for domestic reforms'.
Theories of Europeanisation advance our understanding of the 'varying adaptation' which is consequential of 'the extent to which European policy beliefs and ideas have mobilised the support of domestic actors for European reforms; and...the extent to which European support was sufficient to enable domestic reformers to put through national reforms in the light of given institutional opportunities and constraints'. Therefore, there is likely to be less support for implementing EU policies where there is a conflict with long standing institutional governance structures at the national level that require reform. In contrast, 'framing integration' aims at 'providing political leaders with additional legitimacy for their reform models, by assisting in the development of solutions for domestic problems or, finally, by altering the expectations and beliefs of domestic actors'. The distinction between Europeanisation theories and the theory of integration as developed by Hooghe and Marks is that the former provide a useful explanation of the interaction between domestic and supranational actors and institutions without attempting to imply that this has profound relevance for the role of the state or that authority has shifted to the supranational level. As the multi-level governance approach demonstrates, there must be an explanation of how governance works rather than what it represents. Knill and Lehmkuhl demonstrate how the interaction of seemingly dichotomous levels of governance can coexist within theories of the EU polity.
Finally, Majone's theory of European regulatory policy can be seen as one of the most coherent and lucid attempt to explain how a specific EU policy area works. Furthermore, Majone exhibits an ability to conceive of the EU both positively and normatively. In keeping with the flexible framework intrinsic to the multi-level governance approach, Majone shows how it is necessary to explain how the regulatory governance system works in the first instance, whilst allowing for normative explanations of how it can work better. Majone focuses on what he sees as the most influential mode of governance within the EU polity structure and as such his theory seeks to explain how regulatory politics works at the European level. In doing so, he accounts for the influence of a plethora of institutions and actors that have an impact across a variety of policy areas and at various levels of governance.
Majone effectively and skilfully explains the rise of market regulation in Europe and explains how it proliferated within the EU polity. His theory is constructed around the core theme of 'regulatory policy making' and three ideas that help to comprehend how it became a primary concern of EU governance are important: 'the tightness and rigidity of the Community budget; the desire of the Commission to increase its influence by expanding its competencies; and the preference of multi-national firms for dealing with a uniform set of rules rather than with...different national regulations'. He emphasises that traditional theories of European integration cannot explain these phenomena because they are unerringly state-centric and, therefore, ignorant of the role played by supranational institutions, trans-national corporations, non-government organisations and local governments. In traditional accounts, Member States' dictate the decision-making agenda through inter-governmental bargaining which is a much too simplistic analysis.
To over come this problem, a theory must explain the following: 'first, problems of "regulatory failure" in an international context, which limit the usefulness of purely intergovernmental solutions; and second, the fact that regulation, as a very specialised type of policy making, requires a high level of technical and administrative discretion'. Majone rightly identifies the Commission as a 'central node in a vast "issue network that includes not only experts from the national administrations, but independent experts...academics, public interest advocates like environmentalists and leaders of consumer movements, representatives of economic and professional organisations and of regional bodies'. Therefore, given the issues of budgetary concerns, economics, bureaucracy, 'the poor credibility of purely intergovernmental arrangements' and the high level of expertise required to handle regulatory policy making it is not surprising that the EU has experienced a proliferation of market regulation policy which has to take on an 'increasingly innovative character. There is an explicit affinity with the multi-level governance approach to be found in Majone's work.
Therefore, multi-level governance may be regarded as an advance in the comprehension of the EU polity because it provides the possibility to break free from the traditional preoccupation with the contradiction between national and supranational authority. The multi-level governance framework conceptualises a system of governance that requires 'various theoretical alternatives' in order to explain a proliferation of constitutive issue areas. Multi-level governance theories as such can provide a new perspective on European integration that has been ignored by classical theories. As Anderson has noted, 'the greater the diversity of analytical approaches, the better...only in this manner can the mounting complexity of European cooperation be adequately captured'. This essay has argued that the multi-level governance approach provides the conceptual framework for precisely this new agenda in European studies - an agenda which appears ever more important as issues of enlargement confront the European governance system.