This essay argues that Japanese imperialism was a crucial factor in the history of regional cooperation. Wrenching East Asian nations into modernity via economic development and industrialisation, Japanese imperialism left an indelible imprint on the region which remains to this day. The economic interdependency which emerged prior to the Second World War was subsequently consolidated by the post-bellum foreign policy of the United States in order to promote regional stability. From this, cooperation has developed around a core of economic and production networks. This core of functional interdependency still forms the concrete basis from which regionalism in Pacific Asia is occurring today. Despite a proliferation of potentially divisive issues that have abounded since the turn of the century, economic cooperation provides the impetus for cooperation concerning new and increasingly salient issues which are potentially dangerous conflict ridden. Beginning with locating Japanese imperialism in its historical context, this essay demonstrates that notwithstanding the political and military nature of expansion, the Japanese colonial project had a lasting economic legacy which pervaded the cold-war period and to some extent remains today. In the final sections, attempts to institutionalise regional cooperation and the response of regionalism to challenges that are inherent in East Asian relations today are assessed.
Japanese imperialism was the precursor for economic regionalism based on modernisation and industrialisation in East Asia. With an analysis of the economic legacy of the empire and of contemporary regionalism it is possible to assess how useful regional bilateral and multilateral ties have become and whether the economic basis for a united region remains significant. Regional networks that crystallised during the twentieth century as a result of Japan engaging the region have increasingly become strained by new issues in the era of globalisation. This assertion does not signify the impotency of functional and pragmatic economic interdependence but emphasises the need to accommodate the new and highly salient issues which pervade the epoch.
Beginning with locating Japanese imperialism in its historical context, this essay will aim to demonstrate that despite the political and military nature of expansion, the Japanese colonial project had a lasting economic legacy which pervaded the cold-war period and is still prominent today. In the final sections, attempts to institutionalise regional cooperation and the response of regionalism to challenges that are inherent in East Asian relations today will be assessed.
There are rich and profound historical and political discourses concerning imperialism which help to conceive of it as a particular form of political and economic development rather than simply a militaristic, historical aberration. Unfortunately, this essay does not have the scope to include such a discussion at any great length. Moreover, when studying Japanese imperialism in particular - and East Asian relations in general - it is essential to remain aware of the need to ignore the tendency to impose Western-specific theoretical models if they do not apply. Again, such a discussion is beyond the scope of this essay, but hopefully it is implicit in the argument that follows.
Hilary Conroy sets Japanese imperialism within the context of imperialism as a political phenomenon, referring to the theories of Hobson, Lenin, Schumpeter, Aron, Morgenthau and Waltz, in order to explain how imperialism must be understood as a consequence of the political thought of an era in which the "national interest [was] defined in terms of power". Japanese expansionism is no exception and it too must be explained vis--vis the contemporary political interpretation of the national interest. In this sense, the Meiji era in Japanese history can be regarded as the beginning of the modern Japanese concept of national security which defined the political agenda. It was at this time that the Korean peninsula was referred to as a "dagger pointed at the heart of Japan". Japanese imperialism was conceptualised in realpolitik terms of national survival. In a desperate attempt to modernise, or else succumb to the Great Powers, the attainment of territory and wealth was assumed to be an urgent requirement. Japanese expansionist wars were wars 'waged in order to establish Japan as an independent state'. As the Japanese scholar Takahashi Kamekichi stated, "Japan's wars with China and Russia and its annexation of Korea were all wars for the sake of Japan's independence and self-support". Japanese imperialism is best understood as an extraordinary fusion of the political and economic motivations to expand which permeated the era.
At the height of expansion, immersed in the rhetoric of leading Asia into modernity, Japanese elites recognised that in order to realise their goals they 'would need to have at [their] disposal...the greater part of the region's resources'. The intensification of militarist expansion paved the way for conflict with Russia, Britain and the United States. In 1940, at the height of its hubris, Japan officially announced the concept of the Greater East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere (GEACPS). The GEACPS was to have more than just connotations of economic interdependence - it was to be the basis of a political, social and cultural homogeneity extending across East Asia determined by supposedly ethnically superior Japanese elites. In order to fully realise these ambitions, the Japanese decided they would have to completely remove the Western powers from the region. Therefore, at the end of 1941 they launched the infamous attack on the United States Navy at Pearl Harbour and nullified the British naval threat in Singapore. At this point, the Japanese empire straddled a vast unchallenged territory, 'from Rangoon to the mid-Pacific, from Timor to the Mongolian steppe'.
Rejecting the official dogma, which heralded notions of cultural, moral, political and economic philanthropy and 'pan-Asian' prosperity, John Dower highlights the racial perspective of Japanese expansionism, which was inspired by modern Western born concepts of social Darwinism combined with apparently Confucian ideals of "proper place". What becomes clear through such accounts is that the peculiar fusion of Occidental and Oriental ideas resulted in anything but an altruistic conceptualisation of modernising the region to compete with the West. Although the Japanese never achieved a homogenous, identity bound empire, since political conflict against communism raged to the north and clashes of religion and culture were widespread to the south, the barbaric subjugation imposed upon the region served one concrete end - industrialisation and modernisation. The Japanese national interest hinged on 'the spoils of war'. If expansion had not been primarily belligerent, war and oppression became regarded as pragmatic measures through which commercial success would breed political might. Wars were 'to be fought over rice, minerals, markets and farming land'. Quite rightly, Donald Calman warns against forgetting that military atrocities and officially sanctioned oppression were 'monstrosities'. Furthermore, issues such as slavery and the exploitation of "comfort women" still haunt the region's history today. However, it is important here to flush out from the dark history of Japanese imperialism the economic aspects which were very much intertwined with the political motivation to expand. The legacy of Japanese expansion is highly salient in the context of the region's international relations.
The Meiji regime implemented some longstanding economic reforms - the fusion of public and private initiatives in 'protected industries', and the creation of vast conglomerates, zaibatsu - which gave Japan a unique perception of political and economic interests and remained influential throughout the twentieth century. Franois Godement, without ignoring Calman's warning, highlights the modernising influence of the extension of Japanese economic development across the region - although some fared better than others - 'between 1896 and 1936...[Taiwan's] GNP rose by 260 per cent'. Japanese imperialism undoubtedly led to the modernisation and development of its colonial acquisitions. 'Commercial infrastructure was improved by the construction of railways, roads, telegraph networks, harbours, and warehouses, the standardization of currency and measures, and the availability of credit'. Moreover, Japanese initiatives improved 'agricultural productivity', 'industrial development', and "human resources", in which health, medial and educational provisions were made to raise the economic potential of the colonies. 'Rapid growth was necessary to Japan's quest for economic autarky'. In this respect, the GEACPS can be regarded as a regional economic "blueprint". Cumings concurs, stating that 'the place to begin in comprehending the region's economic dynamism is with the advent of Japanese imperialism'. This expansionism was competitive, planned and mimicked the policy of the West. The close knit and oppressive nature of the empire meant that it 'provided a model for state-directed development'. Japan exported industry and economic development to the region in order to consolidate an inward looking autarkic bloc which would feed the metropolis and assert Japan's status as a Great Power. However, by the end of the war Japanese imperialism had been crushed. Regional economic development, on the other hand, continued.
It took Washington until 1948 to devise their strategy for consolidating US regional dominion. Occupation and a thorough dissemination of the Japanese war machine followed in order to satisfy the international community. The 'Kennan Restoration' was subsequently designed to restore Japanese 'economic prowess' devoid of a military capability. This 'rollback' was part of the US policy of containment, to keep the region free of Communism and to keep South East Asia open to Western economies. Hence, Japan's role in regional and international politics after 1945 was a design of American post-bellum foreign policy. The Security Treaty signed between the United States and Japan in 1952 signalled the end of Japanese international 'ignominy'. Moreover, alliance with the world's primary power and self-professed protagonist of democracy afforded Japan the 'muscle [that] would inaugurate a new era in which trade issues came to dominate Japan's foreign relations'. The nature of the cold war security arrangement in East Asia, and Japan's wartime image, forced Japan into a 'passive and cautious' foreign policy - which meant pursuing the national interest could be a commercial venture only - one which was wholly supported by the US because regional stability was high on the agenda. Japan was thus handed an almost carte blanche to undertake a vigorous national and regional economic reconstruction. As far as the US was concerned during the Cold War, the more powerful Japan and its regional allies could become the better. With this, the US underwrote Japanese security in order that all it resources were geared towards rapid reindustrialisation and market exploitation. 'US policy makers recognized that Japan's Asian colonies had provided 33 per cent of pre-war Japan's raw materials and absorbed 40 per cent of its exports. Restoration of these links...would be critical to a Japanese economic recovery consistent with the US attempt to isolate China'. In doing so, the US afforded the region a 'rare breathing space'; under conditions of 'tariffs, overvalued exchange rates and other obstacles for foreign entry' the region thrived and was propelled into an era of 'new export led industrialization in the early 1960s'. This set the tone of economic relations in the region up to the 1970s.
In terms of the economic integration of East Asia during the twentieth century, 'Japan...provided both the engine...and [the] influential model of economic development for the region as a whole'. Japanese imperialism forcefully imposed a particular model on the region which resulted in 'consolidating the role of the state in domestic economic development'. Moreover, the propping up of the regional economy, designed to support the growth of Japanese commerce, was symptomatic of the dispersion of Japanese corporations across East Asia. Industrialisation spread as these businesses sought newer and cheaper locations for production. Japan's successful fusion of politics and economics was such that 'aid and infrastructure packages...effectively lock[ed] host governments into symbiotic relationships with Japanese capital'. The "Asian Way" became synonymous with rapid modernisation and 'accelerated industrial development'. For Western liberal economies a certain disdain for this economic model invoked initiatives to prize the region open. However, regionalism remained a fundamental part of the Japanese national interest and its international relations, 'by the late 1990s, [East] Asia was an extension of Japan's highly relational political economy'. This model has come under increasing pressure but it still remains a vitally important factor in terms of regionalism.
Even when the US was forced to reconsider the massive post-war military deployment in the area in the 1970s they remained committed to the stability of the region based on the economic vibrancy Japanese activity had brought. With the emergence of China - consequential of Sino-Soviet conflict - and the boom experienced in the Newly Industrialised Economies (NIEs) regional economic relationships, particularly with Japan, coaxed the communist giant into the global market and warmed relations with the West. Although the region remained a focal point of its foreign policy, the US was satisfied that it could downscale its military presence and use political measures to assert its hegemony. Since the 1970s, the region was subjected to 'Washington's geo-political shift', which centred on Sino-American rapprochement. The so-called "Nixon Shocks" were designed to realign the regional agenda as Cold War tensions subsided and the need for a military presence eased. The focus of this policy was to reign in Japanese economic development which was occurring at a phenomenal and unchallenged rate.
The Japanese reaction to such challenges has always been distinguished by an effective tweaking, rather than a wholesale reappraisal, of the regional economic system. Consequently, in the mid-1990s, East Asian regionalism was 'buzzing with a competitive energy' that had marked Japan's own economic development throughout the second half of the twentieth century. Clearly, there have been periods of change and fluctuation - in the Japanese domestic economy, the regional economy and the international economy - but this form of economic interdependence has characterised the region for almost a century. The unique public-private linkages of Japanese economic policy extended overseas with the extension of Japanese investment into the region. This was facilitated by three main factors: firstly, the concerted effort made by South East Asian economies to boost their faltering development by opening up to foreign investment; secondly, the move by the US and other economies to protect against large scale Japanese export, forcing Japan to look to the Asian market; and, thirdly, the 1985 Plaza Accord, which forced a dramatic appreciation of the Yen and culminated, not in reducing Japanese exports per se and reducing the massive US trade deficit, but in forcing the Japanese to rethink their economic policy to encourage continued investment.
Rather than simply relying on export oriented production, the Japanese encouraged a great boost in foreign direct investment in order to produce overseas and therefore reduce costs and regain profitability. Investment in the region was a consequence of a concerted strategy by Japanese manufacturers, 'to achieve economies of scale, scope, and networking by capitalising on the regions deepening division of labour'. The impetus for this action was to create "a single market from which to pursue a global corporate strategy". It is this which can be recognised as the 'peaceful ghost of the Greater East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere'. The significance of this 'alliance' is that it serves the political and economic needs of both Japan and the other countries in the region. For Japan, not only does it [help] escape the potentially crushing impact of the high yen, but it reduces the size of the trade surplus directly attributable to Japan, and thus reduces some of the international pressure the nation would otherwise face'. For the rest of the region, it provides an element of stability in the face of a prying international community. This was a conscious process which had 'long been identified as critical to Japan's national security' and it enabled Japan to hurdle successive crises, in the 1970s - with the "Nixon shocks" and the Middle Eastern oil embargoes - and in the 1980s - with the affects of the dramatic appreciation of the Yen. As Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) stated, "the globalization of economic activity has made it impossible to push ahead with economic development within the limited framework of a country defined by strict national boundaries".
However, since the mid-1990s there had been a transition in Pacific Asia regionalism. Two distinct periods are now apparent: first, 'from about 1985 to 1994...the period of the flying geese model and of "open regionalism", or APEC style consensual cooperation among governments'; and, second, 'a period of instability in economic hierarchies and economic relations' since around 1994 which has been characterised, in simple terms, by a divergent contest between the 'Japan-centred' and 'greater China' centred regional production networks. Up to 1994, according to Andrew Macintyre and Barry Naughton, Japan remained as closed as possible to foreign investment yet championed "open regionalism". This 'served as a convenient framework to coordinate some aspects of economic policy and to lower transaction costs faced by Japanese corporations (as investors) and Japanese financial institutions operating in other Asian economies. Thus, the fit was perfect with the notion of Japan acting as "lead goose", maintaining its own economic model intact, while gradually incorporating what were (mistakenly) perceived as junior versions of its model into an Asian community'. Whilst Japan continued to bankroll and provide the technology for regional development and prosperity, East Asian governments realised the benefits of loose political cooperation in order to achieve economic goals. Thus, 'APECs consensual and nonbinding pattern of policy cooperation suited perfectly'.
After 1994, however, 'the flying goose pattern [had] disintegrated, and the countries in East Asia were left to search for other models and definitions of their self-interest'. Moreover, a downturn in the 'economic dynamism' of the region in the mid-1990s mirrored a downturn in the vibrancy of the Japanese economy; particularly its investment capability was waning. The greater China economic network, including Taiwan and Hong Kong, was gradually beginning to outstrip Japan's 'technological and competitive superiority'. This period, therefore, experienced what can be seen as the erosion of the principles upon which the previous conception of regionalism, the "flying geese" model, had been founded. A whole new economic region, more intricately networked, more specialised and more contested than ever before has emerged. APEC proved impotent in the face of this increased complexity. In economic terms the emergence of China signalled the demise of Japanese dominance, to some extent, and in non-economic terms it is of particular significance 'because of...[its] unresolved territorial disputes, the unresolved reunification issue, the [apparent] zero-sum-game approach of China's leaders to foreign and security policy, the Chinese perception of having to regain their country's dignity and place in the world and the region, the huge perception gap between the Chinese lite's self-perception of a peaceful China and that of its Asian neighbours, and China's past record of using military power to achieve political objectives'. Macintyre and Naughton are correct to raise concern about the traditional perception of Japanese led economic development providing the sole impetus for regionalism since the 1990s.
In light of the changing nature of regionalism, Richard Higgot and Richard Stubbs juxtapose the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum with the East Asia Economic Caucus (EAEC) which highlights diverging trends that remain poignant in the twenty first century. APEC, as an open forum devoted to economic liberalisation, came under challenge from the EAEC, a more narrowly defined bloc based on concepts of the 'Asian Way'. APEC formed in 1989 amid a proliferation of initiatives designed to institutionalise regional economic cooperation. Theoretically, it was underpinned by liberal institutionalist notions of relative gain driven international cooperation - APEC was, therefore, seen as a means to pull the region together and assimilate it with the international political economy. Prior to 1997, APEC was built on the optimism of the remarkable economic achievements experienced in the region - for the international community, and America in particular, it was necessary to break open these economies in order to remain competitive. Hence, APEC was riddled with a political agenda, namely the 'spread...the neo-liberal economic creed'.
Despite this, within Pacific Asia, APEC was regarded as essential in order to consolidate regionalism. However, as John Ravenhill has commented, there are 'considerable weaknesses...evident...that limit its capacity to overcome collective action problems'. APEC has failed to either achieve the goals it was designed to achieve or to affect the behaviour and identity of the actors involved. The general consensus among scholars appears to be that APEC has thus far failed to instil any profound adherence to the tenets of economic liberalism - economic, financial and technical cooperation initiatives remain mundane. However, the process is considered a prerequisite to 'deeper integration' which has as yet failed to materialise. As a result, Ravenhill has argued that APEC is a weak institution because it has not affected actor identities.
The EAEC emerged in distinct opposition to APEC as the anti-thesis of a perceived capitulation to Western economic dogma and globalisation. Furthermore, it was intended to reflect the 'political, historical and cultural dimensions' of the region in contrast to American and European regionalism. It was assumed to be "an independent Asian voice". Under pinned by the investment capabilities of Japanese corporations, and, increasingly, Chinese ones, the region had experienced a surge in economic interdependence based on tightly knit production networks. The twentieth century experience in the region, with Japanese imperialism and US Cold War hegemony, marked out an ever more distinguishable politico-economic identity. For many, the time was ripe for an inward looking consolidation of this regionalism to promote social and cultural Asian-ness. However, the EAEC never gained any ground. Governments in the West opposed it and put pressure on its allies in the region, especially Japan, to reject the proposal. The EAEC would have negated the advantages the regions economies reaped from global trade, alienating the US in particular, and would have relied too heavily on Japanese finance - the latter provoked uneasy sentiments given Japan's history in the region. The EAEC was eventually swallowed up by APEC. However, East Asia represents a security interest for America, so in that sense, Japan has not written off the potential of closer regional cooperation. Also, the rest of the region, imbued with a sense of antagonism towards the West since 1997, has not abandoned closer cooperation.
Economic integration still fuels the regionalism process even though its formal institutionalism has remained a benign phenomenon. Continuing the process that began with Japanese imperialism - and was actively pursued under US hegemony during the Cold War - cross border networks still form the basis of regional interdependence. In particular, Japanese corporations provide 'goods and investment' which is warmly received across the region provided that it 'contribute[s] to national prosperity and the Japanese government does not use its economic leverage to impose specific policies'. In this sense, the ambiguity of APEC, which has led to its "standstill", serves the interests of its largest two members - the US and Japan - by promoting the status quo. For Japan, the inherent flexibility of APEC means that it can bend the rules and protect vital interests while putting pressure on other countries not to discriminate against its products. For the US, any symbol of economic liberalism is useful, whilst an ineffective institution allows them to go beyond the APEC forum and apply pressure to individual countries in bilateral negotiations. The profound and deep rooted economic networks consolidated by a century of economic interdependence based on the Japanese imperial design and its strategic role after the Second World War still pervade the region and inhibit formal institutionalism. The lack of formal institutionalism in the region does not imply that the regionalism agenda is in jeopardy. The proliferation of 'transboundary' economic and security issues as the process of globalisation abounds means that there is an increasing necessity for the countries of the region to cooperate in order to maintain national interests. To date, 'ad hoc, piecemeal negotiations' have characterised the system of 'open regionalism' and 'unilateral liberalization'.
In light of this, the successful longevity of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), as 'one of the most...enduring regional associations of the contemporary period', holds some potential. Philip Charier believes that ASEAN formed, not just as a result of historical interactions, but as a result of a common socially constructed spatial awareness in relation to "outsiders". As an abstract, 'imagined' concept rather than an empirical 'reality' the idea of the region has served the purpose of actors both within and outside the region as it exists, not a closed or limited entity but as one which is open to changing circumstances. Up to the mid-1990s ASEAN has also been influential in East Asian regionalism, particularly as a result of its relationship with Japan - based on a common interest in military-security and open intra-regional as well as extra-regional trade as 'global exporters'. ASEAN's importance to Japan and vice-versa is determined by Japan's role as an 'investor, trader, aid donor and political actor' which is reliant on the natural resources of the South East Asian nations. Economic cooperation and interdependence is seen as vital by both parties in order to maintain political stability. However, ASEAN has failed to concretely develop formal economic or military-security institutions. Despite its apparent significance, bilateral trade links with individual countries prevailed as did reliance on external powers to resolve conflicts as a consequence of the adherence to mutual non-intervention norms within ASEAN which had been enshrined in the Bangkok Declaration of 1967.
The 1997 Financial Crisis, which was exacerbated by environmental concerns, such as the "haze", and political conflict in Cambodia occurring almost concomitantly, served to highlight the impotency of ASEAN in practical matters. Although only the latter fell directly under the aegis of the ASEAN framework, the inability to provide regional solutions to these problems was regarded as a failure on ASEAN's part. The impact of these crises on the North East Asian economies imbued the entire region with a sense of commonality which made the ASEAN Plus Three (APT) initiative all the more welcomed. The realisation of the dependency on external actors in particular invoked a sense of vulnerability. ASEAN, as the longest standing regional association, was seen as a useful body through which solutions could be reached'. The emergence of economic, environmental and political crises all at once triggered a reappraisal of ASEAN's role as simply a security community founded on the principle of non-intervention. Rather than succumb to this inherent impotency, ASEAN proved that it was not a 'static' organisation and could 'grow beyond its limitations'. As such, APT was conceived to expand ASEAN and bring East Asian nations together in order to coordinate policy involving economic, political issues and non-traditional security concerns such as anti-drug enforcement. Moreover, cooperation has moved beyond government issues to embrace a 'broad range of commercial and social bodies'. Although economic cooperation still forms the bulk of regional integration, the new recognition of the importance of political credibility should stand APT in good stead to tackle new issues which is of particular significance in the post-9/11 world. Environmental issues remain peripheral as do socio-cultural and education initiatives, but there presence on the agenda is indicative of a move toward a more pervasive regionalism.
APT signals a recognition that 'the global norms that upheld the non-intervention principle have changed dramatically in the last few years', and that conflict resolution may necessitate 'preventative' aspects, not just post-crisis management. The ambiguity of the contemporary world must be met with a flexible approach to regionalism and a desire to coordinate between governments, rather than static concepts of regional problems - there is a sense that this is occurring with the APT initiative. That said, 'Asia should not be complacent...[and] should not delude itself into thinking that its identity can develop solely in regional terms'. Previous attempts have met with crisis throughout the history of the region. The region - however defined - must not attempt to shut out the rest of the world in a 'reactive' and closed response to issues of globalisation. Rather, regionalism should pursue an embracing response in order to harness the forces of the contemporary world to the benefit of the region. To do so, closer cooperation and collective bargaining will be the linchpin of the Asian voice in the international community. APT has a great deal of potential and it is the source of much optimism in the region as a forum to overcome crisis. Perhaps the regionalism initiative and the current convergence towards a common identity hinges on the open and more transparent coordination of economic and political preferences to avoid the recurrence of recent crises which is supported by Japan and the United States. If this convergence remains then a common cultural and social identity may well crystallise. Yoichi Funabashi believe that, given a lack of common history and culture, the Asian community should look toward regionalism based on a common present and look to coordinate in order to face the contemporary challenges of modernity and globalisation. This does not imply ruling out regionalism open to non-East Asian nations.
Consequently, the APT initiative has become, 'the most ambitious and comprehensive of the governmental efforts to create an institutional framework to support East Asian regionalism'. However, APT still faces the two-fold challenge of satisfying conflicting national interests in the practical sense and institutionalising a far from clear cut regional identity. There is a considerable disparity between North East Asian and South East Asian states, both in the practical sense of economic expertise and in the social and cultural sense. This lack of commonality is exacerbated by political issues. For instance, there is no interest from any individual government, or desire among the collective for any single state, to take the lead in advancing regionalism given the nature of previous attempts to do so. The role of the US is also crucial - it is unlikely to favour any closed form of regionalism which takes the strategic economic and security agenda out of its hands. APT must proceed cautiously so as not to antagonise these areas of concern. However, despite the traditional perception of regionalism as a government led phenomenon, there is much to suggest that it is moving ahead in a less formal, less state centric basis. Epistemic communities and policy networks, as detailed by Paul Evans based on influential works by John Gerard Ruggie and Richard Higgott, can evolve through the interaction of previously disparate individuals and groups that consequently forge a common sense of purpose and identity which provides not just optimism for, but a distinct basis from which to advance, regionalism.
APT regionalism does not imply closed regionalism based on previous concepts of an East Asian identity which failed in the past. Contrary to Markus Hund's assessment of APT as unrepresentative of East Asian identity, the argument here is that regional perceptions have changed which are now more conducive to an open form of regionalism as best represented by the APT association. Regional perceptions have changed as a result of globalisation, and in particular, the 1997 Financial Crisis. Clearly at this stage doubts about the commitment of members, particularly the northern three, are an issue as it remains to be seen whether APT will bring about 'significant...achievements'. Hund's pessimistic conclusion that there appears to be a lack of will to achieve concrete goals may be overly pessimistic - the most significant thing about APT to date is the recognition and gradual acknowledgement of a common purpose. Clearly, only time will tell if it is successful or not. Hund himself acknowledges that, 'regardless of APT's internal divisions and uncertainties, its dynamic has nevertheless already had an impact on the political and economic landscape of East Asia'. The point that 'the evolution of an exclusive East Asian identity seems to be a long way off' is a mute one. Beeson points us back to David Kang's standpoint whereby he asserts that international relations in the region may not fit well with purely Western interpretations. In this sense, traditional power relations might well evolve differently in East Asia than they did for example in Europe, if at all. If this is the case then the rise of a powerful China will be more beneficial than confrontational.
In summary, Japanese imperialism must be seen as a crucial factor in the history of regional cooperation. Wrenching East Asian nations into modernity, via economic development and industrialisation, Japanese imperialism left an indelible imprint on the region. The economic interdependency which emerged prior to the Second World War was subsequently consolidated by the post-bellum foreign policy of the United States in order to promote regional stability. From this, cooperation has developed around a core of economic and production networks. This core of functional interdependency still forms the concrete basis from which regionalism in Pacific Asia is occurring today. This essay has attempted to demonstrate that despite a proliferation of potentially divisive issues that have abounded since the turn of the century, economic cooperation provides the impetus for cooperation concerning new and increasingly salient issues which are potentially conflict ridden.