Hedley Bull's state-centric theory of international politics offers an insight into how change can occur in international relations. The tension between order and justice represented in his work marks a sophisticated interpretation of one of the perennial conundrums that belies international politics. Bull conceived of order as the best way to ensure basic justice, that is the minimal justice required to protect the core values of social existence. He chose neither the extremes of realism nor revolutionism that subordinated justice for order or vice versa and employed the criticisms of each tradition to deconstruct the excesses of the other. The Anarchical Society was his principal work and it is a paragon of state centric analysis of international relations that is not bound by rigid positivism. Bull constructed a theory that maintained that, within an international system in which anarchy pertained, order among states was vital and best served by the system of international society. It is in this way, by presenting order and justice in tension - a result of the pluralist and solidarist elements of his theory - that Bull opens the door for critical theory. Bull defended international society as the ultimate political organisation in a state system governed by anarchy and simultaneously criticised its limitations, providing a critical edge to his state centric theory.
Hedley Bull's state-centric theory of international politics offers an insight into how change can occur in international relations. The tension between order and justice represented in his work marks a sophisticated interpretation of one of the perennial conundrums that belies international politics. Bull conceived of order as the best way to ensure basic justice, that is the minimal justice required to protect the core values of social existence. In rejecting the Hobbesian order-over-justice rationale and the Kantian justice-over-order hypothesis, Bull constructed a theory which maintained that, within an international system in which anarchy pertained, order among states was vital and best served by the system of international society. He recognised 'international order as the ultimate foundation for the protection of human values'. That said, the realities of power politics and the states system were constantly presented in his work as limiting factors in the pursuit of ethical and moral concerns.
With his shrewdly aware sense of the historical determinants of international politics Bull was 'especially sensitive to alterations in the historical conditions bearing upon analysis and interpretation'. Accordingly, he was able to side step the structural realism that dominated the scholarship of his era and develop what he considered to be a more enduring theory of the international system. He 'argued persuasively that despite anarchy, states had succeeded in forming and sustaining an "international society" that made life more tolerable, by far, than would result from an uncritical acceptance of the idea that where there is no government there is no law, no security and no reliable ordering instruments available'. International society was 'beneficial for the whole of humanity, and was preferable to feasible alternatives, although admittedly deficient in serious respects'.
Bull defended international society as the ultimate political organisation in a state system governed by anarchy and simultaneously criticised its limitations, providing a critical edge to his state centric theory. His 'outlook tends to be agnostic on structural matters, appreciating the positive and negative aspects of the state as the basis for...participation in global politics'. In Bull's formulation, international society could be made more orderly and therefore more just (and vice versa) by an accretion of consensus and solidarity among states. He concluded that although this was possible and desirable in theory, the conditions did not exist to make it practicable. The implication of this is that what exists is not necessarily the ideal state of things. There is much evidence to suggest that, for Bull, the ultimate political association in the anarchical states system would be a solidarist one of consensus and community. However, the achievable, "second best" scenario was a pluralist international society based on respect for the rule of law. Bull was 'aware that the state and the states system have emerged, evolved, are resilient, are being superseded, and will continue to evolve'. His 'sense of the future is essentially an extension in time of his interpretation of the past and present, but further sophisticated by a sceptical view of human capacity to discern future possibilities'. One could say that Bull's approach is 'self-consciously conditioned by historical circumstance, relying on an interpretive presentation of reality rather than claiming to be scientific in a positivist sense'. By essence this kind of approach is open to change and reinterpretation and Bull himself demanded it.
Bull's work was rooted in what he called the classical approach to International Relations, influenced by the methodologies of philosophy, history and law. 'Its central feature is an explicit reliance on the exercise of judgement'. In contrast to the positivist scientific approach, 'general propositions about international relations can be only tentative and inconclusive'. Bull was concerned to enquire with a 'critical examination of moral and intellectual foundations' and the basic concept for which he undertook his investigations remained that of international society. He argued, as realists would, that war and the balance of power are effective tools for maintaining order in the international system but he moved beyond that static assumption to assert that in doing so states were keen to provide rules and regulations to limit conflict. They acted within the societal bounds they themselves created and this relational behaviour acted to bolster order among them. Order represented the 'central concern of his theoretical efforts and the main theme of his principal work'.
Order, in Bull's construct, is 'in the common interests of all states in achieving the elementary goals of social life - the security of life against violence, the sanctity of promises, and the stability of possessions'. International society provided for these with the acceptance of rules and laws governing behaviour. Thus, one of the essential institutions of order in Bull's theory is international law. Law provided the rationalisation of the principles by which states limited their actions. It helped provide order by 'identifying the constitutive principle of the society of states, setting the basic rules for coexistence, and providing a language for their formal relations'. The expansion of these principles, codified as law, was essential to the homogeneity of international society as constituted by heterogeneous units. This was possible in the Gesellschaft understanding of social identity, in which states would relate to the common principles governing practical association, in this context, international society, and adjust their behaviour accordingly. With this, Bull believed that a common culture of international society could develop and that consensus required for stable interstate relations could and should be realised, but that it would be difficult. This 'progressivism' was mitigated by other factors prevalent in the system of states, namely war, the balance of power and the management of the great powers, which often undermined notions of international law and consensus, in order to provide the fundamental requirements of order. 'Bull drew heavily on the realist tradition' in this respect and interests of power were judged to be incommensurable with societal consensus when a readjustment of the international order was required. Therefore, Bull held a 'rationalist position qualified by realist considerations'.
The rationalist assumption is that 'given the inevitability of relations with other units, a common desire for order is the minimum necessary condition to begin the evolution of international society'. Common goals and values develop and this can occur absent any pre-existing shared culture and hence can 'evolve functionally from the logic of anarchy'. A common identity and culture is not required as a prerequisite, but norms and values do govern the relationships of states in so far as minimal standards and rules enable coexistence. Adam Watson also developed this idea, logically moving from the concept of anarchy to society by reasoning that states conceive of the desirability to limit conflict in order to achieve goals. This is the 'raison de sytme'. A sense of commonality emerges out of the 'Waltzian logic that anarchy develops like units', therefore states view each other as similar entities with similar requirements. Even in a system where the units were unlike, this commonality forms via the 'acceptance of a set of rules that legitimise the differentiation of units and establish the distribution of rights and responsibilities among functionally differentiated actors'.
In the pluralist conception of international society, only common rules and a respect for law bind atomistic states. In the solidarist conception, international society exists beyond simple respect for the rule of law. Moral and ethical consensus develops through frequent interaction and provides the basis for subsequent relations, which creates a more cohesive system. At the extremes of either approach both perspectives are very similar to, in the case of the pluralists, realism, and in the case of the solidarists, revolutionism. Therefore, 'there is...the idea that international society is a kind of way station on the historical road away from raw and un-moderated anarchy toward a world society', and 'Bull hints faintly in this direction'. However, any potential for reform in the states system is held back by realist scepticism.
Consequently, Bull's theory reflects 'three paradigms of world politics: realism, pluralism and solidarism' and tackles the 'themes of...power, order and justice'. In his essay, 'The Twenty Years' Crisis Thirty Years On', Bull displays a 'dissatisfaction with the normative void left by Carr's realism'. It was from here that Bull departed from realist theory, in order to 'construct an international theory which more closely reflected the practices of sovereign states'. The common rules and standards that shape the relations of states with each other are central to Bull's theory of orderly international society. It is best portrayed by his treatment of international law and the fact that despite the conflict between interests and rules, states more often than not conform to legal norms. The rule of law for Bull was evidence that common rules and values had developed in the society of states to such an extent that they became formalised as law. Thus, he 'remained detached from the paradigmatic claim that international politics is a struggle for power among atomistic states driven by the desire for self-preservation'.
The pluralist in Bull recognised, in Andrew Linklater's words, that "states are able to agree on the need for order despite their competing views of justice". Therefore, even if a 'substantive' agreement over shared goals and values is lacking, then at least states are 'legally and morally bound by a common code of coexistence'. For Bull, international society also had solidarist potential, even if this was only minimal - "potential solidarity...with the respect to the enforcement of the law" for example. However, 'the traditional devices of the maintenance of interstate order' reigned in such solidarist elements. Bull's early works incline more towards the pluralist and, therefore more towards the realist, in that order is regarded as the prime goal of international society. For example, the maintenance of order in the pluralist formulation ascribed a large proportion of responsibility to the great powers as the guardians of the international society, which was often at odds with the principles of international law. However, 'such an affront to interstate justice is a necessary requirement for interstate order'.
Given that 'pluralists privilege order over justice in the belief that there is not sufficient solidarity among mankind to provide for the latter' Bull was driven to investigate the possibility of an 'ethics of coexistence'. Thus, in the 1980s, 'Bull set about investigating the possibilities for cosmopolitan solidarism'. In his later work, 'making explicit what had been suggested in The Anarchical Society', Bull turned the unit of analysis to the individual and asserted that what 'has to be reckoned in terms of...rights and interests... [is] individual persons of whom humanity is made up, not the rights and interests of the states into which these persons are now divided'. In that sense, 'he recognised that this emerging "awareness" that states have responsibilities to maintain basic global welfare values was reflected only to a limited degree in foreign policy, and that it was possible to regard the humanitarian activities of governments in a "cynical" and "hypocritical" light'. Pluralism still pervaded his approach to international politics even by this stage and he maintained that international dialogue and consensus is inherently difficult to achieve. He said that, "the cosmopolitan society which is implied and presupposed in our talk of human rights exists only as an ideal, we court great dangers if we allow ourselves to proceed as if it were a political and social framework already in place".
Therefore, those who argue that international society is the ultimate form of world political organisation champion its pluralist physiognomy, which enables "an association of independent and diverse political communities, each devoted to its own ends and its own conception of the good". This pluralist perspective maintains that 'there is no reason why these diverse communities should be expected to agree on any kind of substantive common purpose, but they can be expected to agree on certain common practices which will allow them to coexist, and relate to each other peacefully, securely, and with justice'. Bull cannot be categorised entirely as such because of the tensions that exist in his work between the pluralist and the solidarist, and between concepts of order and justice. There is much to be made of the argument that the realisation of international society is "second best" to a potential world government of some kind. Arguably, Kant was a major proponent of this idea of "second best", although proffering an international-society-type thesis he remarked in his 'Definitive Articles of Perpetual Peace' that due to the structure of the states system 'the positive idea of a world republic cannot be realised'. For those pluralists to whom international society is ultimately desirable, the belief is that 'only those who do not want to live in peace-with-justice could rationally reject the terms of practical association... [and] that the institutions of international society, properly understood, can have an appeal divorced from their political and geographical point of origin... divorced from considerations of power, culture or history'. This idea has some affinity with John Rawls' 'formula' championing "justice, political not metaphysical".
However, there is the idea that consensus must develop from this practical association of states so that a lasting, orderly and just society of states can emerge de facto rather than simply de jure. Bull himself was constantly torn between the pluralist perspective and the more solidarist one, his theory thus became an effective amalgamation of the two that seeks to investigate the paradoxes of international politics and provide insight into the factors that motivate inevitable historical change. In his Hagey Lectures, Bull made it explicit what he had only hinted at in The Anarchical Society, that 'justice was the precondition for a lasting order'. Nevertheless, countless examples prevail that demonstrate a 'lack of solidarity' in human affairs. Inconsistent and unreliable public pressure to 'alleviate chronic human suffering' for example reveals sentiments of "us" and "them" which failed to stimulate sufficient desire to intervene in Rwanda in 1994, for example, a stark reminder of 'the paucity of cosmopolitan moral awareness'. Such cases 'bear witness to the continuing relevance of Bull's judgement that the society of states is not solidarist enough to legitimise collective humanitarian intervention'. Bull was anxious to remain cautious over the implications which demands for justice - 'in a world where there was no shared understanding of what justice entails' - might have on international order. This concern rang true in his Hagey Lectures as it did in The Anarchical Society. The 'order/justice conundrum' as conceptualised by Bull led him to 'continuously search for a reconciliation of the two goals'.
Too often, Bull couched his appeals for justice in the language of preserving order - possibly an attempt to make his demands more tasteful to the great powers, certainly a result of his latent pluralism. For some, the argument that 'virtually no one actually believes in toleration at the level that would be required for a world-wide scheme of coexistence to be ethically grounded' is all too convincing. For example, 'nothing in the recent history of human rights protection gives reason for believing that a meaningful consensus...actually exists'. It seems that the Kantian idea of an international society of republics, or in a similarly limited sense, the Wightian idea of international society of "European" states is the only viable alternative. In this sense, 'the pluralism required for an international society to work is bounded'. Today, 'the "Europe" of the mind stretches from Vladivostok to Vancouver', and provides for the peace and international co-operation that pervades this era of globalisation'.
Within the international system approach to International Relations theory, in structural realism for example, order (manifest particularly as the balance of power) is 'systemic in origin', therefore not 'the product of the intention and wishes of diplomats'. However, this conception of order excludes 'any kind of normative component'. Antithetical to this is the world community approach, 'normatively grounded, based on relationships which constitute a network of mutual claims, rights, duties, and obligations...qualitatively different from the impersonal forces which create a system... [and] implies a cosmopolitan belief in the oneness of humanity'. Bull's approach 'emerges in contrast to both community and system'. This does not mean that international society represents a 'halfway house' as some suggest, mediating between the system and community approaches. Rather, theorists of international society are attempting to account for considerations of human justice within the states system that is inhospitable to notions of global community. For them, due to the machinations of the system, a global community is untenable and that this is a 'matter of regret', Bull included.
However, he later became fascinated by the status of 'Third World' powers within the states system and often broke out of the pluralist-international-society mould to suggest that the rights of individuals were prior to the rights of states. In order to protect this fact the system of states would require a measure of consensus. He inevitably retreated back to his original position, though somewhat richer with the consideration of certain universalist principles. It was always order that prescribed the conditions necessary to secure the basic justice required by human beings in Bull's mind, but his Kantian inclinations were consistently reinforced by a vision of international order as the ultimate condition for securing individual justice in an anarchical world divided among states.
The clash of order and justice in Bull's work is crucial to understanding how he prescribed for the possibility of change in international politics. Maintaining order via the society of states was viewed as the ultimate provision of basic justice for individuals. However, he did entertain the possibility of 'a more integrated world society' which could better provide for human justice because it would be a system constituted of individuals 'and not largely of the states into which they were now organised'. If states did not protect the basic rights of individuals - the three basic goals of society in particular - then their rights as states would be bankrupt. In a similar sense, if the system of states as international society did not protect these values it too would be bankrupt. Bull 'introduced a more cosmopolitan angle' to the international society because of his concern for justice that was not simply subjugated as it might be in a more ardently pluralist or realist assessment. As a consequence of his scepticism, Bull 'stopped short of a revolutionist position'. Despite such oscillating tendencies, it is clear that a consistent theme ran throughout Bull's contribution to the study of international politics: his concept of an international society in which an 'awareness of common interests and recognition of shared values, rules and institutions' was pivotal, crucial to the maintenance of order. In this sense, while the states system prevailed in a condition of anarchy, this was the ultimate mechanism for providing both order and justice.
This also led Bull to reject universalism as utopian because of the expediency required by states and statesmen to maintain order and the foundations of minimal coexistence, which meant that 'justice and order cannot always be reconciled'. While it is correct that Bull was sceptical about consensus and solidarity he was consistently hopeful that it could emerge via the minimal principles of coexistence that prevailed. What Bull emphasised was 'cultural change which produces a different perception of common interests in a context of coexistence and co-operation'. He asserted that 'anarchy is compatible with society, because the state is not the only reason for obeying rules'. Although he did, as a result of his scepticism, ensure that he re-emphasised the fact that international society can exist without the development of a common culture or moral consensus because the nature of the system demanded co-existence. Within Bull's theoretical approach it is possible to detect an awareness 'of the need for change beyond the status quo'. Although subtly implicit, the idea of solidarity and consensus can be seen as fundamental in Bull's conception of a thriving international society. "The rights and benefits to which justice has to be done in the international community are not simply those of states and nations, but those of individual people throughout the world as a whole". Human justice helped maintain order just as order helped in the pursuit of justice. Bull believed that the states system, as international society, was not inherently averse to such principles. If it became so, the implication is that it would have to be reformed.
This tension in his work 'gave it its density' and made it particularly 'instructive and thought provoking'. Bull's methodology was in stark contrast to the scientific approach, the exponents of which he regarded as 'obsessed by the quest for a far greater degree of precision than the field of international relations allows'. According to him, "a scientifically imperfect procedure of perception and intuition" were necessary. The starting point of his work was with the essence of the inquiry. The major issues of international political life could only be understood in the context in which humanity has come to interpret them. 'By reference to the works of political philosophers who have discussed and sharpened them'; in spatial and chronological context; and, in the context of the rules and laws that shape social existence. This can be seen as 'a blend of intelligent social science and humanism' that emphasises the role of meaning. For Bull, the linchpin of orderly international society was morality rather than a more simplistic respect for the rule of law. States were not egoistic actors seeking to maximise interest gains but political entities that reflected the beliefs of a society seeking consensus and coexistence. The state, therefore, could only be a concept that reflected this subjectivity of human existence, not an objectively value-free abstraction.
Bull rejected realism for it was, as he saw it, ignorant of normative principles and principles of justice, and he rejected the world community approach on the grounds that it unrealistically subordinated goals of order to goals of justice. 'The society of states is more than a convenient fiction to mask power politics... Bull suggested that a society of states emerges out of a consciousness among states of both enlightened self-interest and moral obligation'. Although this served as an effective rebuttal of the realist approach, Bull was also inclined to employ Hobbesian critique to deconstruct the world community approach by suggesting that 'there was not sufficient solidarity among humankind to make agreement possible on global principles of justice and human rights'. It was from this that Bull developed his pluralist conception of international society, whereby consensus, common values and goals, are established 'only for certain minimum purposes... [for example] reciprocal recognition of sovereignty, and its logical corollary, the norm of non-intervention'.
Therefore, international order was maintained by respect for these rules of coexistence. In Bull's own words, "the pluralist doctrine that so far from constructing a disguised form of Realpolitik... presents a set of prescriptions more conducive to the workings of international order than those of Grotius... It is a conception of international society founded on the observation of the actual area of agreement between states and informed by a sense of the limitations within which in this situation rules may usefully be made rules of law". Moreover, 'Bull's espousal of a pluralist approach was a moral position since he saw the provision of international order as the ultimate foundation for the protection of human values'. That said, he did not remain entirely convinced of 'the full implications of the pluralist view' which could lead to a position of moral relativism and preclude the possibility for consensus and solidarity to develop out of practical association. Bull, therefore, avoided asserting 'a general priority of order over justice'.
This classic tension begs the question that constantly plagued Bull: 'What value has international order if states do not provide for plural conceptions of the good life?" The answer lay in an intuitive judgement in which 'it is necessary to take into account the degree of injustice embodied in the existing order'. It is such caveats with which Bull emphasises the historically contingent and changeable nature of political organisation. 'International order had to be evaluated in terms of the goal of world order, and the protection of the core goal of social life - individual security from violence - it afforded'. As such, 'Bull was attracted by the liberal belief that order might best be preserved by strengthening justice', a notion that saw his work take on more of a solidarist flavour in his later life. International society was as much contingent on its potential to provide justice as it was on order. 'Bull suggested that the moral value of the society of states has to be judged in terms of what it contributes to individual justice; the implication being that if the society of states fails to protect individual justice, this would place in jeopardy its normative value'. However, such notions in Bull's theory were consistently limited by concerns for expediency, and 'he expressed considerable scepticism that it was possible to talk about universal human rights: different cultures had very different conceptions of what constitute human rights'. Consequently, Bull the pluralist always maintained that 'world order is...better served by accepting the compact of coexistence than in seeking to overthrow it in the name of some higher morality'. Thus, of revolution, he wrote that:
In one of Bull's 'rare' flashes of moral assertiveness he emphasised that individual justice was 'more fundamental' than international order or international justice. It was 'because its units are ultimately individuals and not any artificial construction...the purposes of...which should inform the activities of states and the theoreticians and practitioners of order among them'. Bar this exception, Bull's seemingly nihilistic "political quietism" was in fact a remarkably effective 'scholarly instrument'. 'Subverting all doctrine except the doctrine of scepticism itself' left Bull's theory open to a wide range of interpretations from positive to critical, painting a picture of the states system that was at the same time a defence of its structural possibilities as well as a critique of its limitations. Hence, 'his style of argument with regard to the balance of power was more to render it as the best arrangement that states had been able to make in the circumstances then to celebrate it as a high achievement of Western civilisation'.
In The Anarchical Society Bull examined 'arrangements that would mean change within the states system' as alternative routes to international order but concluded that none was superior to that of international society. Moreover, he saw no possible alternative form of states system that would remedy the 'substantial difficulties' of 'peace and justice' because there was no reason to suggest they were the consequence of the states system itself. In fact, Bull asserted that 'there were good reasons to think that the states played some role in ameliorating them'. Therefore, Bull was compelled to concluded that, as things stand, the system of states organised as international society was the best means by which to achieve order in an anarchical world. Although he argued that international society and prescriptions of order were often contradictory to 'notions of justice', including even the limited concept of international justice, it was not inherently 'inhospitable'. Considerations of justice could be made within the context of international society and, essentially, within the context of order provided certain levels of consensus developed.
These were not beyond the realm of possibility within the concept of international society. Bull never explicitly ascribed to a particular opinion on how to relieve the burden of conflict between order and justice and was limited to insincere conclusions. It is possible that Bull weighted his analysis in favour of order because he believed that justice could not be realised without an order that protects the minimum normative standards of human existence. In his concluding remarks to The Anarchical Society, Bull says that 'it has been contended that order in world politics conflicts with goals of justice - international, human and cosmopolitan - and that while there is a sense in which order is prior to justice, it does not follow from this that goals of order are to be given priority over goals of justice in any particular case'. Accordingly, he chose neither the extremes of realism nor revolutionism that subordinated justice for order or vice versa and employed the criticisms of each tradition to deconstruct the excesses of the other. The Anarchical Society is a paragon of state centric analysis of international relations that is not bound by rigid positivism. 'On every page...it is possible to find a foundation on which further work could build'. Bull held the door open to historically aware and reflective assessments of international politics in this way. He sought to 'ask the big questions and get the big picture; be sceptical about every generalisation including this one; [and] hold every fashion up to the mirror of history'.
Bull's work in particular reflects such elements. The tensions in his work, between pluralism and solidarism, between realism and revolutionism and between order and justice are ultimately caused by a profound, historical and philosophical conception of international politics that comprehends the necessity to explain the present in order to conceive of change. The society of states is not taken to be the ultimate form of political organisation for humankind; it is regarded as the ultimate form of political organisation in a world divided among states and governed by anarchy. Accordingly, the order-justice paradox, which exists in international politics, is integral to Bull's theory and it provides the intuitive basis for further investigation and deliberation. This dichotomy in Bull's work, along with an acute historical awareness, offers much in the way of critical theory and, therefore, much in the way of a blueprint for change. It is in this way, by presenting order and justice in tension - a result of the pluralist and solidarist elements of his theory - that Bull opens the door for critical theory. As such, every eventuality must be explored against the challenge of uncompromising, ahistorical positivism, for 'it is better to recognise that we are in darkness than to pretend that we can see the light'.