It appears that we can all succumb to a blurred and particular view of the past. Modern day prejudices can effect even the simplest discussion of history. There will be a conscious attempt here to provide an ultimately objective critique of the above statement made by Eamon de Valera in 1966. A reading of recent historical work concerning these two powerful characters provides a variety of opinions. Clearly, de Valera believed that Michael Collins' life and premature death secured him quasi martyrdom and a sympathetic remembrance. He may have felt that the fighter was more likely to be idolised than the politician. However, a theme central to this essay will be the discussion of whether the portrayal of Collins as simply a revolutionary soldier and freedom fighter is especially accurate. In any such investigation, it is important to outline the social, political and economic climate of the time and also to dissect the lives of the two men in order to understand the way they have been depicted in history. This essay will juxtapose historical commentaries of the lives of de Valera and Collins, while providing the political context within which both men worked. It will then be possible to remark upon the extent to which de Valera's comments made almost four decades ago have been corroborated by historiography.
In this assessment, and combined with an analysis of recent historiography, it is necessary to weigh up the political ambition, the political achievement and the mystique of both de Valera and Collins in order to comprehend their role in Irish history. It is quite possible that they realised a greatness and heroism that surpassed their concrete, quantifiable success, and it is the aim of this paper to discover how historians have recognised them and if this is congruent with de Valera's 1966 statement. Alvin Jackson believes that de Valera had all the qualities of a great man. He had the intellect, posture and charisma of an outstanding politician, and was 'the senior surviving officer of the Easter Rising', yet he is not renowned for his revolutionary tendencies. We can further add tribute to de Valera - the fact that he guided Ireland almost to complete independence from Westminster, a feat which had been the chief aim of nationalists and republicans for close to one hundred years. But, on a reading of recent historical work de Valera has failed to be remembered in a very positive light. It becomes imperative to pose the question, why? Jackson reminds us that 'it is easy to highlight the technical skills both of de Valera and his party: and it is dangerously easy to highlight their constitutional agenda to the detriment of other issues'. However, Pauric Travers believes that 'de Valera ranks among the major figures of the twentieth century. Few other international politicians of comparable standing spent as long in the political limelight, even Winston Churchill, with whom he crossed swords on more than one occasion, appears something of a pygmy'. Praise indeed, but it is apparent that not all historians feel the same way. Has de Valera therefore suffered as a result of political or social issues? Did his agenda not suit majority Irish opinion? Had Michael Collins achieved something that overshadowed what on paper appears to be nothing short of a magnificent political triumph? Or, in fact, is it unfair to suggest that de Valera has received an ill reputation amongst the majority of historians?
In the political context, de Valera has been criticised for failing to provide much social reform and for lacking any real economic policy. It is possible to dismiss this criticism if it becomes apparent that he had absolutely no intent concerning social or economic reform. Considering what de Valera was trying to achieve it is impossible to amount this to his being politically inept. Jackson believes, and it is true, that de Valera's party, Fianna Fil, provided a relatively unsubstantial social policy and that 1930s Ireland was still rife with economic turbulence. The apparent protectionist zeal of Ireland at the time was born out of pragmatism, rather than the consequence of any higher ideology. Although, it could be said that the leaders of other nations, when faced with the great economic depression of the era, felt hard pressed to break free from the shackles of their laissez-faire shibboleths, de Valera was a shrewd enough politician to recognise its benefits. That said, the Irish economy under de Valera made little progress and was still highly reliant upon British imports and the British market. Perhaps it is too easy with hindsight to deconstruct the economic strategy of a politician and party which was concerned with more pressing issues. In fact, 'the main focus of the attempted disengagement form Britain was not economic', since freedom form Britain was the primary aim of de Valera and Fianna Fil, surely it would be inappropriate to over criticise their lack of economic policy.
De Valera's number one political aspiration was the resolution of Irish independence, working within the framework of the 1922 Anglo-Irish Treaty, and in his 'first fifteen year administration, he had 'placed an indelible stamp on the self-image of twentieth century Ireland'. We can therefore begin to concentrate on this element of his life in the public sphere, disregarding any more specific critique of his policy. It is to his credit that he pursued a new constitutional road to Irish self-determination; in any case the political climate of the 1930s would have proved to be a turbulent nemesis for radicalism in Ireland. Clearly, the domestic problems which occupied the attention of Westminster politicians at the time - most saliently, the Abdication Crisis and the increasing threat from Nazi Germany - were influential in terms of the ease in which concessions were made to Ireland, but the political manoeuvrings of de Valera made sure that 'it was also the case that they had little choice but to acquiesce'. In the same way, it is true that British politicians had 'turned form mollifying the Taoiseach to the more intricate task of appeasing the Fhrer. Again, we can attribute triumph to de Valera and his Fianna Fil compatriots; it was they who had rejected militancy, preferring amicable negotiations which proved to be much more positive in their outcome. De Valera himself regarded the conciliation made by the British in 1938 as his most resounding political victory. It was this Machiavellian intrigue within the boundaries of the Treaty which allowed it to be dismantled. Surely, such a profoundly successful strategy means that Eamon de Valera deserves a much more empathetic writing in history.
Another accolade de Valera deserves is that he not achieved amicable concessions and diminished the threat of violence form Ireland, but he had elevated, in Neville Chamberlain's opinion, the Irish situation to the level of international diplomacy. As Jackson put it, de Valera had placed Ireland 'very firmly within the international context and as a series of interlocking diplomatic settlements forged between Britain and Italy and Germany'. This was a u-turn of previous policy that had somewhat sidelined the Irish situation. British politicians had become fearful of the threat of an Irish-German rapprochement. Britain's 'relatively weak bargaining position', was thoroughly, and rightly so, exploited by de Valera to its maximum. On the other hand, Neville Chamberlain had quite admirably revealed 'that there [was] no time for keeping open old sores'. De Valera had galvanised a cordial relationship with British politicians on an unprecedented scale. Against any argument made concerning the flaws in the economic and social policy of Fianna Fil, one can point out that de Valera was ultimately prepared to 'sacrifice economic well-being in what he saw as the wider national interest'. However, as Travers points out there were critics 'who challenged the hegemony of de Valera...and [also] radicals who rejected the narrowness of de Valera's vision and deplored the backwardness of the country he ruled'. For the most part though, he had taken a completely acceptable and justifiable attitude at a time which was perfect to settle arguably the greatest problem Ireland had ever encountered, with the exception of the Great Famine. Economic, social, cultural and religious problems within Ireland could not be mended until Ireland had a government in place that represented the will of the majority. It is, therefore, futile to argue that de Valera had listed his priorities incorrectly.
One of the trickiest periods Fianna Fil had to encounter was the Second World War. For many the securing of neutrality for Ireland ranked as one of de Valera's greatest achievements. Irish historians have tended to create an 'intricate and defensive' historiography of wartime Ireland. This is understandable; it was a complex fusion of political stratagems, with the main purpose being the maintenance of unity and symbolic rejection of British rule - it was also pretty widely accepted amongst Ireland's diverse population. It was at a time when de Valera had boosted his credentials. He was attacked for playing host to ministers from the Axis of Evil, yet managed to manoeuvre so that his reputation remained unscathed and that the cause of Irish nationalists emerged undamaged. Post-bellum Ireland was cast in a similar mould to that of Britain. Fianna Fil embarked upon a relatively large scale social and economic welfare programme following the precedent of Beveridge and Keynes. However, throughout the 1940s the economic climate was never really bettered and de Valera's eventual downfall can be attributed to the realisation that the Irish economy was slipping even further behind the standard of other European nations. Fianna Fil was defeated in 1948, yet that defeat was 'long in coming and...narrow when it came'. It is not surprising if we recognise Fianna Fil as being synonymous with 'a romance, spiced with republican chiliasm, cultural ideas, social reformation and personal loyalties forged through war or...through patronage'. De Valera had managed to strike a successful equilibrium between the quest for independence and eclectic political appeal. What is more was that at the time he was the embodiment and epitome of one hundred years of Irish sentiment, for many de Valera still remains the personification of Irish independence. In February 1948, forty-two per cent of voters were still 'prepared to judge Fianna Fil on the basis of its creed rather than its record. This is the true measure of the party's success and of its leader's stature'. It still remains to be seen then, why de Valera has been subjected in some intellectual circles to a critical historiography?
Travers still believes that de Valera has a healthy reputation amongst most historians, however he does point out that for some he remained a 'divisive figure', and that there was a substantial number of Irish men and women who did not ally with his policy. Also, even the staunchest of republicans lost faith in de Valera as his expedience and pragmatism became superimposed over the nationalist principle. Perhaps, when he made that statement in 1966, suggesting that his critics would prevail in his writing into history, he was overtly conscious of the fact that expediency could not ensure him a legendary celebration. However, those more sympathetic historians must agree that the last thing the Irish independence cause needed was another martyr, another uprising or another civil war. Ireland really needed a man like de Valera to take on Britain politically and constitutionally to snatch the nation back form the grip of Westminster. A narrow vision may be, but a vision that placed Irish independence above all else. Ronan Fanning has said that 'de Valera's ultimate achievements were political sovereignty and psychological independence'. He elaborates, making us aware that Ireland under de Valera had experienced the 'entrenching of stable democratic politics'. In contrast, John Regan has said that in terms of recent historical work there has been a trend towards the 'demonisation of de Valera and the deification of Collins'.
It appears that the complexities of modern Irish politics have been bundled together as 'polar opposites', Treatyite vs. Anti-Treatyite in any discussion of de Valera and Michael Collins. We can point to Durkheimian theory, as Jeffrey Prager does to explain why this might be the case, as a symptom of the nuances of Irish culture. Prager believes that the 'modern state has to reflect the collective consensus of its constituency'. He says the split between Treatyite and Anti-Treatyite groups has deep cultural roots and is the manifestation of division between "Irish enlightenment values and norms", based on principles of the individual, democracy, consensus and parliamentary tradition, amongst others, as opposed to the culture of Gaelic romanticism which harbours Anti-Treatyite sentiment. The latter is fuelled by tradition, Anglophobia, republicanism and militarism to mention but a few. This goes a long way to explaining why some historians prefer to idealise the character traits of Collins which pertain to this model, ignoring the fact that he was also a moderate politician towards the end of his life, having realised the need to follow the route that de Valera eventually became allied with. The dominance of Fianna Fil in the early twentieth century was a consequence of being able, for the most part, to appeal to both these two strands of Irish political culture. It was they who 'were better able to integrate the Irish public into the new state'. Tom Garvin, who has attempted to ameliorate Prager's model has accepted that de Valera spoke 'the language of both pragmatic nationalism and romantic moralism', but he feels that he abandoned romantic Gaelic principles, preferring to guarantee his own status as a political heavyweight. There appears to be a tendency amongst such historians to champion Irish traditionalism, and thus to demean de Valera's expediency and constitutionalism. Regan himself and much recent historiography appears to be guilty of what he has called 'nostalgic rhetoric about a pastoral Ireland'. The pursuit and eventual accomplishment of self-determination has left a cultural vacuum in Ireland, and the writing of Irish history has provided an outlet for attempts to define a specific Irish culture to follow political autonomy. Michael Collins may well be better suited to Irishness than de Valera, and has received a more favourable treatment.
Regan highlights the 'ascendancy of militarists within the (republican) movement after 1919', which he believes 'ensured an escalation of radical rhetoric and the primacy of republican over more moderate views'. It is this method of gaining independence which has been championed recently, and Michael Collins' approach to "rid the country of the enemy" has been widely saluted. Collins had also said, of the Treaty and dominion status within the British Commonwealth, that it provided "freedom, not the ultimate freedom that all nations desire but the freedom to achieve it", the more moderate Collins is often overlooked. It is the fact that Collins seemingly 'remained true to the revolutionary republic', that has seen him idolised. The idea of a glorious revolution and the seizure of power from Britain, as in all Imperial contexts, had always maintained a romantic stigma - modern day nostalgia is the major pre-condition to this current wave of historiography I feel. It has been to the detriment of de Valera's adherence to realpolitik; his skill and his political acumen have, to some extent, been swept aside. Some recent historians have preferred to see de Valera as a political vulture, who managed to achieve Irish independence off the back of the groundwork done by Collins. In particular, this is how he is poignantly portrayed by Alan Rickman in the film Michael Collins, directed by Neil Jordan.
Regan points out that it was Collins who first attempted to argue that 'the treaty had to be accepted not for what it was but for what it would become through a process of undefined evolution'. He believes that this was the true essence and brilliance of the approach. J. Bowyer Bell also voices the conviction that it had been Collins who first suggested that the Irish Free State should be seen as the stepping stone towards realising Irish hopes. However, surely this was no different to the approach taken by de Valera, but attributing much more success to Collins rather than de Valera is symptomatic of this current swathe of historiography. Regan does allow an insight as to why those who reject the moderate stance do so. He says that Collins 'also served to challenge...parliamentary democracy, majority rule and legitimacy', grievances that 'had existed within the revolutionary movement'. It was he who appeared to be the rebellious fighter. De Valera, on the other hand, had 'prepared for a compromise built on the acceptance of parliamentary democracy and majoritarianism'. Unfortunately, many overlook the fact that Collins had come to the conclusion that this was the only viable option, having exhausted the militant road to independence with the cessation of civil war hostilities. It would appear that while both had a revolutionary background, and de Valera achieved a great deal for Irish independence later through constitutional methods, a notion also backed by Collins, it is the latter that takes the accolades because of his apparent adherence to Anglophobic traditionalism. Irish historians have elevated Collins so highly because of his old fashioned, Irish, masculine character traits. Richard Mulcahy revered his "tireless, vigorous, almost turbulent hard work", as well as his "daring" and "enormous momentum". This conforms to the romantic, idealistic vision of Ireland. It is possible, that for all his Machiavellian political nous, de Valera had failed to develop any lasting enigma of Irishness.
Michael Collins has become an icon; he is represented and portrayed as a freedom fighter and a revolutionary. He initiated an unprecedented underground war in Ireland, and he pertained to the 'revolutionary ide fixe (which was) at work in Irish revolutionary thought'. Contrary to popular historical opinion, there is an element amongst some historians that believes it was he who brought the 'struggle for Irish independence on to the international scene', not de Valera. He did so uncompromisingly, until compromise became the only road to victory, which is a fact that many tend to gloss over. What prevailed as the image Collins has become synonymous with is 'militant nationalism combined with the willingness to sacrifice oneself for the cause'. De Valera had also once adhered to the very same principle, but what was it that led many to forget his role in the Easter Rising and portray him solely as an opportunist politician? Bowden believes that Collins fitted the role much better, a rural Irishmen who slotted perfectly into the niche of a 'deep and pervasive cultural regeneration in Ireland, fostered by organisations such as the Gaelic Athletic Association'. Recent historiography has been massively influenced by the 'revival of Irishness and the assertion of a distinct national identity'. Collins was, 'in terms of the Irish underground, a far more significant man than the often absent de Valera'. It was this 'underground democracy' that has great integrity amongst some recent scholars.
The search for a distinct Irish culture, and the reasons why Irishmen had become irritated with British rule provides an explanation as to why the characteristics Michael Collins expounded, or at least appeared to have expounded, were much more aligned with Irish sentiment and the sentiment that has now been absorbed by some historians. Allowing us to understand why de Valera has suffered in some historiographies. Richard English believes that the 'perceived marginality of Catholic Ireland within the United Kingdom provided the soil from which the nationalism could grow'. Also, a 'religiously coloured sense of history, identity and allegiance', is why the north-east section, today's Northern Ireland, 'failed to succumb to Irish nationalism'. Religious and economic explanations were the immediate causes of the southern Irish feeling of detachment form the rest of Britain, as well as the 'inborn hate of things English', which he believes 'all Irishmen inherit'. Opposition to English rule had been present in Ireland since the very first Elizabethan conquest, and it 'took the form of a Catholic Jacobite reaction. Inevitably Irish nationalism as it emerged in the nineteenth century was to bear the marks of this long gestation'. Newsinger also emphasises the actuality that 'Catholicism and nationalism were inseparably linked in the consciousness of the people'. To be Irish was, according to this school of thought, to be Catholic, agrarian, nationalist and anti-English. Apparently, Anglophobia is inherent in Irish culture then, and if not, then simply a huge desire for Irish national self-determination is one of the key criterions of Irishness. Nationalism also seems to be a great characteristic of being Irish, which helps to explain why those historians attempting to write Irish history disregard the wordy, scholarly politician de Valera, preferring to bestow the accolade of securing independence firmly upon Michael Collins. In the article by English, it is possible to draw great comparisons with Ernest O'Malley and Michael Collins. Collins was born into the romanticized peasantry which O'Malley venerated; in fact he had once advised a couple considering adoption to choose from "peasant stock from Ireland as it has more good blood in it than either middle or upper class". This is the exact sentiment that has penetrated deep into the Irish sub-conscious for so many years and has a great deal of influence in Irish historical writing.
There may be a component of the Irish intelligentsia which still adheres to these beliefs, which has affected the way Irish history has been written. The alignment with the ideal of 'an insurrection as a means of redeeming the Irish nation from its apostasy' may well be seen as the best way to reach independence according to some. The revolutionary modus operandi endeared men such as Collins into the hearts of the Irish majority - 'the posthumous rallying of the people behind the rebel cause was to...elevate Sinn Fein to a position of electoral dominance and provide the background of sympathy and support necessary for the conduct of a guerrilla war against the British'. The reversion to this attitude amongst historians, in what may be seen as a continuation of the attempt to rediscover Irishness, can explain why it is Collins who has been written into Irish history in a more compassionate light. 'Necromancy or Magic of the Dead', was then, and always has been, of great authority in such situations. Newsinger believes that 'it played a vital part in maintaining the Irish people's determination to continue this struggle'. De Valera was one of the original Easter rebels who has been forgotten as a result of his political pragmatism, he had been one of the leaders of the 'rank and file republicans...fighting for both Faith and Fatherland', but he has been eclipsed in Irish historiography by Collins.
Charles Townshend reiterates the need to remember that Collins, and Mulcahy, were ready to accept a compromise political solution to the constitutional problem upon the realisation that militancy had become obsolete. De Valera reached the same conclusion, only earlier and has suffered from appearing to be unwilling to fight to the end. 'The arguments later propounded by Collins and Mulcahy in favour of the Treaty were based on the belief that the IRA had reached its limit', according to Townshend. In that sense Collins was prepared to fight for 'extravagant hopes', whereas de Valera became criticised for being too ready to accept 'modest reality'. Somewhat overly optimistically, Townshend believes that even Collins and Mulcahy were too ready to accept defeat, however prolonging the violence would surely only prolong the inevitable defeat - and, perhaps, damaged the political headway that was becoming increasingly successful. In the end the failure of the IRA was rooted in its lack of military organisation, not through any lack of dedication or initiative, but through the simple lack of resources. Townshend uses Vo Nguyen Giap's comment made in 1971 - "he who speaks of the army, speaks of discipline" - to cement his opinion that the IRA suffered defeat because of the 'failure to subordinate the army to any single legitimate authority'. There is a micro-scale debate between Bowden and Townshend concerning the issue of IRA organisation, and the reasons why it failed to secure independence through military means, however it becomes insignificant since the same goal was achieved through the more admirable route of moderate constitutionalism. The problem for de Valera is that this is not as glamorous as a bloody revolution in the popular realm. The public idolises fighters not politicians.
Regan has produced an excellent essay concerning the need to apply caution to the portrayal of Michael Collins in history. Regan clearly has a fondness for Collins, which is understandable - he had an 'undeniable romantic quality'. However, it is important to be aware that images of Collins are intended to show him in a particular light; namely, in full military dress to emphasise the fighter and soldier which has found an 'apparently ambivalent market place'. Despite this, Collins had little in the way of a 'readily identifiable or accessible ideology', and there has been little in depth analysis of his life and work as yet. He has said that, 'historians...with one or two brave exceptions, have preferred not to roll up their sleeves and delve into the barrel of eels which is Collins' secret and above all contradictory revolutionary career'. Regan thinks this is the main reason why the Collins mystique has become so popular, as an ambiguous figure he represents a plethora of identities. The fact that Collins' ideology is so vague is a major reason why there can be little criticism or rejection of his life and work. De Valera, on the other hand as the 'apotheosis of the pragmatic politician', was in the public limelight for decades, has had numerous biographies written and has been rejected by many Irish historians.
De Valera has been eclipsed by the well captured and photogenic Collins. His 'visual presentation' and 'visual appeal', have aided his elevation to iconic status. Regan reckons that 'elements of fantasy and denial in the militarist projection of Collins which are mirrored in biographical treatments' have the same effect. Collins is often ignored as an 'administrator, politician and ultimately state-builder', admirable characteristics, which were also part of de Valera's make up. So why then has Collins survived unscathed? The 'populist, almost pulp fiction, biographical genre which has grown around Collins', can be added to the fact that he fits the Irish mould; he was rural, masculine, militant, Catholic, nationalist and republican. Imagery of Collins is often misleading, or at least unnatural and controlled. He is usually depicted in motion to give the impression of dynamism and constant movement. Regan is critical of this blurred view of Collins, yet maintains a sympathetic tone throughout. Many have been 'too easily seduced by the romantic, militarist image of Collins'. However, one can regard this as a breath of fresh air in a world which is overly keen to deconstruct heroic historical figures - but clearly unwelcome in an objective analysis. It is necessary to also consider the 'less glamorous but perhaps far more important and in the long term influential Michael Collins: the administrator and the state-builder'. Surely, this would consign the popularity of Collins to the same fate that de Valera has suffered, 'would posters of Collins behind his ministerial desk sell on Westmorland Street?' Perhaps, perhaps not.
In Irish history the greatness of Michael Collins has for the most part been recorded at the expense of Eamon de Valera, and in that respect his statement made in 1966 has proved to be correct. Irish historians pertaining to a model of Irishness, republicanism and nostalgia have preferred to oust de Valera and deify Collins. However, objective historical accounts do not deny that de Valera was a great politician and worthy of immense tribute. For those who have attempted to write Irish history under the aegis of nationalism, de Valera is not considered a heroic figure. The complexities of Irish political culture may have coloured their view and it is important to be aware of such nuances when entering any discussion of Irish historiography.