In the quest to discover the essential nature of the nexus between Lenin's political rule and theory it will be necessary to consult a variety of his writings to gain an insight into the development of his thought. What may become clear with a close reading is that there are some core principles that remained unchanged throughout his life in contrast to other immediate and improvised policies that he latched onto or jettisoned at will, according to circumstance. Furthermore, the sophisticated interpretations of some influential historians will add weight to the analysis and in an attempt to show the correlation between Leninism and Bolshevism Nikolai Bukharin and Evgenii Preobrazhensky's ABC of Communism will offer a wealth of information.
Despite the limited chronological framework it will be of seminal importance to assess prominent works from the formative period prior to the February Revolution in order to witness how his thinking deviated from or remained true to his early beliefs. Wartime thoughts on The War and Russian Social Democracy and his speech in January 1917 on the twelfth anniversary of "Bloody Sunday" will provide an insight into Lenin's revolutionary physiognomy and his socialist outlook in the immediate run up to revolution. Reaching further back will help to create a more complete picture of Leninism. Perhaps the earlier texts portray his political philosophy in its purest form before it became compromised by the expediencies of governance. The Tasks of the Proletariat in the Present Revolution, or the April Theses as they have became known, The State and Revolution and Lenin's resolutions at the 1921 Party Congress stand out from his work published after the revolution. In addition, his Letters From Afar, The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government, Economics and Politics in the Era of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat and his writing On Proletarian Culture are of significant merit.
Lenin has undoubtedly been both 'praised beyond hyperbolae and damned with savage invective'. In fact, 'acerbic clashes in interpretation were inevitable' in historiography concerning Lenin. The present writer has found very little evidence that points toward a possible obloquy; however, the motivation here is not to produce a hagiography on an all ready well published theme. Neither will any attempt be made to speculate on the personal or psychological state of the man. This has already been achieved to some extent in three superb volumes by Robert Service and particularly in his Lenin: A Biography in which the author intended to give a 'sense of personality' to an immense politician. That said it will be necessary to reflect on Lenin's early years in order to provide a well-rounded examination of his political development.
Neil Harding's opinion is that some commentators have been ignorant of 'the theoretical underpinning of Lenin's thought'. The idea here is to assess the political leader, to show coherently, consistently and convincingly that Lenin had a distinct Marxian strategy for the development of socialism in Russia. The problems Lenin encountered in transposing his thought into reality will be mentioned but that does not detract from the deep sense of intellectual conviction involved in his work. A dissection of The State and Revolution, one of the most critically important and thorough of Lenin's works, will serve as the perfect point of departure for a comparison of theory and policy during these decisive years. It will be used to set out a broad framework of Lenin's thought and as a reference point to which both early and late discourses can be related to show the consistency of his ideology. It would need an immense literary undertaking to analyse every element of continuation and every element of digression in Lenin's writings. Therefore, this paper will take a sizeable chunk of work compiled between 1914 and 1921, and before, in order to highlight the major theoretical dogma that exists throughout and will consider the following fundamentals: organisation, production and the role of the party and society. Also, it will endeavour to explain the gradual move of the Bolshevik party from the conjectural opponent of the autocracy and bourgeoisie to the party as sponsor of the realistic functions of government.
Richard Pipes has detailed the 'origins and Bolshevism' and 'the intellectual formation of young Lenin' expertly. His construction of 'four phases' which influenced Lenin show how he picked up various elements that he combined to produce Bolshevism. From 1887-1892 he was a sympathiser with the populist movement and 'the Jacobin wing of the People's Will'. At this time he believed that techniques of conspiracy combined with the restlessness of the narod would ignite revolution and culminate in a violent coup d'tat. In the next epoch, 1892-93, Lenin was disillusioned by the potential of the peasantry and heralded the more Marxist emphasis on the urban workers as the driving force behind unrest. Yet, he 'continued to cling to the techniques of terror and power seizure'. By mid-1905 Lenin became a Russian bedfellow of the Social Democrat movement 'of the Western type'. He championed the ideal of progress, that all classes would revolt against the tyranny of tsarism and the bourgeois liberals would provide the stepping stone to social revolution. In the last year of the century he 'lost faith' in both the frail proletariat and the fickle bourgeoisie. The 'undemocratic philosophy of socialism' that he found solace in resulted in a 'peculiar amalgam' of Jacobinism and orthodox Marxism.
Pipes' use of the idea of democracy here falls foul of the Leninist paradox. Initially he states that Lenin thought that 'socialism presupposed democracy' then says that the shift to Bolshevism was undemocratic. A quick clarification may be in order. Indeed, Lenin was adamant that socialism was the only way to rid the world of the evils of exploitation. Furthermore, he did believe that one party as the representative of the oppressed masses could carry the weight of revolution on its shoulders and should explicitly, and violently if necessary, guard itself against opposition in order to do so. The fact that 'socialism presupposed democracy' meant that a redefinition of the term was needed and it should be kept in mind. It was not the Western liberal democracy, or contemporary notion, of political choice. He believed that social revolution was the way to realise mass participation in the governing of the socialist state, economic rather than political freedom and therefore ultimate egalitarianism. Hence, Bolshevism in Lenin's mind, and in this sense, was a form of total democracy. When used negatively by Lenin it meant the former, when used in a positive sense it comes to mean the latter. The dual usage of the word is quite unavoidable without an effective replacement.
At the turn of the century Lenin began to consolidate his political thought more coherently and in 1902 he compiled What is to be Done? as the urban proletariat rocketed out of the control of the nascent political organisations that wished to direct it towards revolution. Partially this work was stimulated by Lenin's dismay at the Bernsteinian infection that had spread into Russia with the phenomenon of urban boom. The so-called 'economists' wished to assist the proletariat in their immediate financial aims. The danger was the de-railing of historical progress. The socialists were compelled to drive the working class to fulfil their role in history, a role that they were for the most part unaware of. They had to be politicised and revolutionised. Convincing them to settle for economic rewards in an unfavourable political climate was heresy and it would see them blinded by bourgeois smokescreens. The 'limited Bernsteinian vision of a struggle for a fuller pay envelope and some token representation in sham bourgeois parliaments' was anathema to Lenin. He began to 'stress the need for political action'.
The Bolshevik period was one in which Lenin adapted Marxism to a new age. This was an age where social values were not subordinate to market forces but where economic and political planning was essential in overcoming social ills and exploitation. Some have accused Lenin of distorting Marxism to suit his own ends. Leon Trotsky believed that substitutionism had crept into Bolshevism, whereby the party replaced the proletariat as the vanguard of the revolution. While Trotsky's assumption was quite correct it becomes problematic, especially given the merit of E.H. Carr's idea of the necessity of having to adapt Marx's theory to suit a new age. It was not done to suit individual political aspirations. The problem arises in the fact that Marx and Lenin were working in different eras. Great caution must be exercised in this respect. In 'concurring with the opinion expressed by...[E.P] Thompson... Carr said that down to the moment of his death Lenin was still puzzling over the question of how socialism could be introduced in Russian conditions'. Clearly there is some accord regarding the notion that 'Marx was essentially a nineteenth century thinker whose theories could not be adopted tout court in the twentieth'. To add emphasis, Lenin was forced into 'reinventing the revolutionary project in the conditions of imperialism and colonialism - more precisely: after the politico-ideological collapse of the long era of progressivism'. In light of this, the interpretations of Service and Louis Fischer that Lenin was a hard and fast Marxist, despite seeming 'obvious', appear to stand strong against the more shaky claims of those who have denounced Lenin as 'a Russian nationalist, above all, or a megalomaniac...or simply a pragmatic politician without a consistent theoretical system of ideas'. In his early works of the 1900s, Two Tactics of Social Democracy and  What is to be Done? Lenin provided Russian 'socialists... [with] a rationale for direct revolutionary activity. They had to involve themselves directly in the bourgeois revolution lest that the revolution fail [stunted by the grip of autocracy] and thereby delay the more important socialist revolution'.
In November 1914, Lenin composed what turned out to be a very acute analysis and an imaginative Marxist account of the First World War at a time when Europe was swamped with jingoism. The War and Russian Social Democracy concerned itself with class conflict and the bourgeois nature of the impending war. Principally Lenin asserted that the proletariat had no interest in fighting and consequently he attacked those members of the Second Socialist International that broke the institutions unity by supporting their national governments. More specifically Lenin saw the war as a move to destroy socialism, a 'nationalist stultification of the workers, and the extermination of their vanguard so as to weaken the revolutionary movement'. He thought that the people had allowed themselves to be 'hoodwinked' by the capitalist military machine and that Russia had been drawn into playing a puppet role in alliance with Britain and France. Russian military resources were being sapped in order to assist them in liquidating Germany as an imperialist competitor in order to bolster monopoly capitalism in those nations - the imperialist aspiration of Germany was no different one must add. The Russian autocracy also had considerable gains to make, particularly in increasing it's strangle hold on the satellite nations of the Ukraine and Poland and crushing the tide of revolution. But, socialism had suffered a schismatic blow. In this study Lenin presented his feelings on the revolutionary status of Russian socialism. He reiterated the idea that the nation was 'most backward and has not yet completed its bourgeois revolution'. This document provides an extra vista on Lenin's transition from populist ideology through utopianism, in The State and Revolution, to guarantor of state capitalism and popular reform with the new economic policies (NEP). As in every realm of world history 1914 marked a watershed where Lenin developed a malleable political machine around certain inner principles, rejecting the western model. He hoped could propel the shift to communism in Russia.
The State and Revolution is unrivalled in importance as the most coherent of Lenin's theoretical works. It differs somewhat from the realpolitik hypotheses that are seen as synonymous with Leninism. Rodney Barfield has pointed out that in this sense State and Revolution can at a glance appear to be anomalous. A direct comparison can usefully be made between this piece, compiled in exile in 1917, and What is to be Done? The former was not designed to be a didactic treatise aimed at instructing the concrete development of revolution. The State and Revolution has been criticised for being utopian, a label of derision that Lenin himself levelled at his opponents regularly. However, he castigated such attacks by referring to the sections in his book concerning the era of socialist transition and the need for a semi-state which would be an 'apparatus that would gradually "wither away" as its functions were...replaced by the "natural" cooperation of all members of society'. This was realistic and strict adherence to Marxist theory of historical progress. Moreover, Lenin's strategy for 'universal bureaucracy' was criticised as anarchist and yet again defended. Since the capitalist system had reduced the nature of administration to very simplistic modes of "filing and checking" it was explicitly realistic that everyone and anyone could perform official duties and for "workingmen's wages". This would 'prevent the development of a professional, elitist bureaucratic system...and would be under the control and direction of the "armed proletariat". Barfield describes it as 'simplistic and utopian', or perhaps more accurately, 'nave'. For instance, in relation to the citizen militia just mentioned, Lenin presumed that law and order would be self-perpetuating under socialist conditions: 'the armed people' would naturally impose themselves 'with the ease and simplicity shown by any crowd of civilised people, even in modern society, stepping in to put a stop to a brawl or to prevent a woman from being assaulted'. How sad that realism determines this to be a somewhat farfetched postulation.
Nevertheless, Barfield announces that it 'is quite amiss to neglect the work'. It cannot be ignored because by definition it ought to be simplistic, and perhaps idealistic if not utopian, as a blueprint theoretical guide for the future of communism. The book was completed, as it was published, before the February revolution. Those who place it in the period between February and October 1917 and consequently describe it as a reaction to the ambiance of radicalism that was fervent at this time are mistaken. This becomes increasingly clear given the fact that the book was 'compiled in the sober confines of the Zurich library'. Added to which, 'few Russian revolutionaries anticipated revolution in 1917, and Lenin was no exception. It is against this pessimistic background that the ideas expressed in The State and Revolution must be viewed'. 
The State and Revolution was Lenin's most forceful and lucid hypothetical undertaking. It is true to his interpretation of Marxism and predominantly void of the concrete political practicalities that were to fill his other works.
As Pipes asserted, Lenin was preoccupied with specific social relationships and The State and Revolution was no exception - but the major focus was on the 'relationship between the state and society' in general. Lenin entered a discussion of the Marxist development of the state under the rule of the proletariat. The objective of the worker state 'would be the eradication of all class-based discrimination...classes themselves would disappear...class struggle would cease... [and] the state would consequently "wither away". During this process, there would inevitably be an 'intermediate epoch' where a "dictatorship of the proletariat" would continue the struggle to dissolve the old apparatus of capitalism and prepare the ground for 'the inception of a fully classless and communist society'. The "proletariat organised as the ruling class" was the only way to effect social revolution and The State and Revolution presumed that the 'presentation of the revolutions of 1905 and 1917... [would] confirm the genius of Marx'. Immediately a trestle framework, not without its gaps, was visible within which Lenin was to set about the task of landscaping Russian society in preparation for the switch to communism. Lenin was expounding grandiose conviction rather than calling out for urgent and particular action.
The transitory epoch Lenin identified, from his studying of Friedrich Engels, was to be pockmarked with a plethora of characteristics that were unavoidable. In particular the proletariat was going to have to wield the sabre of bourgeois bureaucracy in order to nationalise and popularise state offices. This was supposedly easy since the bourgeoisie had perfected and simplified such processes. Until a time when the 'whole of society... [operated as] a single office and a single factory with equality of labour and equality of pay' a massive expansion of the bureaucracy was inevitable. By creating mass participation in state affairs both the bureaucracy and the state would begin their demise. The 'complete eradication of bureaucratism' would ensue and 'the introduction of complete democracy for the people' would become possible. Marx himself proclaimed that the embryonic socialist state in such circumstances "was only just emerging from capitalist society and which thus in all relations - economic, moral and intellectual - bears the imprint of the old society from whose womb it emerged". Until the eventual realisation of communism freedom was still compromised. Engels helped Lenin crystallise his belief that 'every state' is repressive by nature hence 'every state is un-free and non-popular'. To safeguard their own interests 'the labouring people need a state to suppress the resistance of the exploiters'. In fact, Lenin adhered to Marx's belief that the aim of socialism was the "conquest of democracy", at least democracy in the bourgeois sense. Suppression and the removal of so-called democracy were essential 'in order to free humanity from wage slavery'. Lenin enthused over Engels' assertion that "the proletariat has the need of the state not in the interest of freedom but in the interests of suppressing its adversaries, and as soon as it becomes possible to speak of freedom the state will cease to exist".
Above all else coercion was essential to ensure there was no opposition to disrupt the revolutionary agenda. This was to be directed at the 'minority...the former ruling class' and hence, 'according to Lenin', it would be a temporary measure and 'low in scale'. The period which was to be governed by the "dictatorship of the proletariat" was geared toward developing the economic, productive and organisational prerequisites for communist society. Economic equality was impossible at this stage as economic incentives would have to be dished out to the former experts of capitalism in order to achieve the necessary levels of modernisation and production. Lenin declared that needs must and that Russia was in dire need of 'the latest technology...to be ubiquitously diffused'. Once the necessary levels of production and economic know-how had been reached it was possible to embrace socialist ideals. A huge monolithic national industry was envisioned by Lenin where all those capable would become "employees and workers of a single national state 'syndicate' [and do] their proper share of the work". Lenin emphasised that he believed he was not professing something new but that the true essence of Marxism had to be 'recapitulated if ever... [its] true intentions were to be restored to the light of day'. In this sense he continued to attack those who sought a revision or mediation of Marx's work. In State and Revolution he mimicked Anton Pannekoek's repudiation of Karl Kautsky and agreed that the latter was 'failing to recognise' the central themes of Marxism.
In support of Kautsky and Yuli Martov's criticism of Lenin's supposed deviation or misinterpretation of Marx it is possible to argue that 'to abrogate formal electoral procedures' and advocate violent dictatorship was not Marxist. What is more, since the urban workers were a minority group across Western Europe never mind in agrarian Russia 'any conceivable dictatorship of the proletariat would be...minoritarian...and would likely resort to mass terror'. This is difficult to refute, but it is merely the exemplification of an interpretative schism that was not uncommon amongst those who attempted to diffuse Marxism to the general populace. It becomes futile to engage in the 'libertarian' versus 'authoritarian' scrap since Lenin quite clearly demonstrated a penchant for both. The dichotomy often sits uneasily but that does not make the book obsolete. Quite the opposite - it becomes a useful guide to the Leninist political economy - 'below the surface...lies a stratum of assertions and assumptions which tell us a great deal about the kind of future political life regarded by the author as being desirable'.
However, the optimism that leaps from the pages is not completely unbridled. An undertone of realistic caution is also present - 'the first phase of communism cannot...produce justice and equality: differences in wealth, and unjust differences at that, will still exist, but the exploitation of man by man will have become impossible because it will be impossible to seize the means of production, the factories, the machines, land and so on as private property' - an intoxicating blend of idealism and reality that appears wildly incomprehensible to a closed mind given the experience of the twentieth century. It becomes clear that Lenin hoped that 'his chapters would have global applicability' given his belief in the supra-national homogeneity of the working-class but at the same time he exhibited an 'awareness that each country would need a set of policies appropriate to its social and economic characteristics; he was very far from the belief that a uniform programme was sensible...thus Lenin adjusted the grand designs of The State and Revolution to his perception of Russia's peculiarities'. Additionally, Lenin asserted that 'by virtue of its economic role in large scale production' the proletariat was the natural leader of the exploited people - it was not ruling in its own specific interest but in the interest of the poorest sectors of society, the majority - by definition it was representative of the most significant portion of the populace and therefore not minoritarian. It was carrying out the revolution for those agrarian labourers 'who... [were] incapable of waging an independent struggle for their own liberation'.
Lenin the pragmatic and realistic politician was still Lenin the idealist and perhaps utopian dreamer of the days before 1917. There was a great deal that re-occurred in his writing. He consistently referred to themes of efficient, central organisation, bureaucratism, productionism and the role of the party and society. Equally, the peasantry remained relatively conspicuous because of the lack of significance that Lenin attached to it in its own right. In The ABC of Communism, as in The State and Revolution, the principle of extensive bureaucratisation was met with an air of inevitability. A surge in the number of political offices was to be expected to ensure 'the more extensive...participation of the masses'. Lenin did have an immediate solution as always. Bureaucrats were to 'become elected officials...subject to recall at the people's first demand; they are reduced to the position of simple agents; from a privileged group holding "jobs" remunerated on a high, bourgeois scale, they become workers of a special "arm of the service", whose remuneration does not exceed the pay of a competent worker'. Not surprisingly given the political climate, the 'practical problem of equality in relation to remuneration of labour', for bureaucrats, experts and officers as opposed to unskilled workers and inexperienced soldiers prompted the party to announce in March 1919 that "the Soviet power cannot endeavour to affect the full realisation of...equality at the present moment". Socialist intellectuals remained hopeful but reality doomed their aspirations since 'the demand for more and more experts as industrial processes became more complex, and the need for incentives to stimulate the workers' productivity, defeated any widespread move towards equalisation'. Not incorrectly Carr decided that 'the introduction of NEP in 1921 may, therefore, be said to have marked, among other things, the end of the utopian period in Soviet history'.
Bukharin and Preobrazhensky outlined highly practical solutions to the problems of production and organisation. To modernise and engender the conditions to allow the greatest possible levels of production was crucial. The Bolshevik intellectuals were well aware of their goals and in the Russian Party Programme of 1919 they expressed that it was "essential...to secure a universal increase in the productive forces of the country...all other considerations must be subordinated to one practical aim - a rapid increase, by all available means, in the quantity of goods urgently needed by the population". There were no new ideas thrown up two years after the seizure of power: 'in the well known article Will the Bolsheviks Retain State Power? written by Lenin' shortly after October, he argued that the means of production "should be wrested from the control of the capitalists" and "subordinated to proletarian soviets". Idealistic theorising was clearly marginalised to a somewhat greater extent over the years but it remained the omnipresent undertone of Bolshevism. Likewise, practical assertions had by no means been avoided previously.
It was in these years that Leninist socialism crept toward NEP. The Bolsheviks delved into concrete policy more noticeably than ever. In terms of productionism 'the communist method...must present the following characteristics: in the first place it must be an organised society; it must be free from anarchy of production, from competition between individual entrepreneurs, from wars and crises...communist society is organised throughout'. Equally, 'the foundation of our whole policy must be the development of productivity...we must stick to one point of view, [we] must drive the nail home'. Hence, production for the good of humanity rested on disciplined and altruistic organisation. It was not expected to result in a rapid resolution of contemporary hardship therefore the latter quality was crucial in order to achieve the necessary 'organisation for the administration of economic life'. The communist utopia was never reached, but the practical theories that Bolshevism pursued were politically and economically shrewd in their conception and application. A brilliantly brief and concise appraisal of a half century of Soviet history is worth quoting almost in its entirety: 'in the first fifty years after the revolution, the population of the USSR, in spite of the ravages of two world wars...[almost doubled] from 120 million to over 200 million'. This was mirrored by 'enormous urbanisation and a shift from 'a high proportion of illiteracy or semi literacy to total literacy and a widely diffused standard of secondary and higher education...the USSR had become the second industrial nation in the world'. This was the great success of Lenin's socialism. Unfortunately the strategy he laid out did not achieve the abstract revolution of social values and the readjustment of mankind to true natural cooperation and humane interaction but it did affect the short term preconditions that he hoped would propel Russia towards the upheaval of capitalism. He assured the industrial revolution of his peripheral nation.
With the realisation of the 'first stage' of the revolution in February 1917 Lenin again attached hopes for the future on the successful seizure of power by the workers. This period of revolution saw the crystallisation of 'three fundamental political forces'. Namely, 'the tsarist monarchy...bourgeois and landlord-Octobrist-Cadet Russia... (of which Kerensky and Chkheidze are the principle representatives)...[and] the Soviet of Workers' Deputies, which is seeking to make the entire proletariat and the entire mass of the poorest part of the population its allies'. The First World War had exacerbated the impact of February and saw an extremely rapid reversal of fortunes in favour of the socialist movement. Economic collapse was pending and the autocracy appeared bankrupt, the people and the soldiers joined together in a harmony of discontent, tsarist officers failed to support Nicholas II because he appeared increasingly inept. Circumstances prevailed against the monarchy and the liberals flooded into fill the power vacuum bringing a socialist contingent with them. This was the conception of Soviet Russia, it was born in October. Lenin had commented that 'side-by-side with this [bourgeois] government...there has arisen the chief, unofficial, as yet undeveloped and comparatively weak workers' government...the Soviet of Workers' Deputies in Petrograd'. Increasingly it became apparent that the promises of the liberal rgime were empty and it became the role of the proletariat to 'open the eyes of the people to the deception practised by the bourgeois politicians, teach them to have no faith in words, to depend entirely on their own strength, their own organisation and their own weapons'. Yet again, the insistence was on 'transition' and politicisation. The vanguard of the people had to nurture the shift from 'the first stage [achieved in February] to the second...to enlighten and organise this mass'.
Lenin's much coveted "April Theses", written under the heading The Tasks of the Proletariat in the Present Revolution in 1917, provide a gold mine of literary sub texts and orthodox Marxist theory. The traditional viewpoint suggests that this work was an attempt to launch the October revolution and propel the Bolsheviks into power - an opportunistic tract. Lenin appeared to have wavered on his belief that the implementation of a democratic, liberal rgime was a necessary prerequisite for the development of socialism. At the time when this was written he championed the overthrow of the Provisional Government as the time was ripe for the completion of the socialist revolution because the current political order was detrimental to the movement. The reason for this volte-face has been challenged by Jonathon Frankel in his article called 'Lenin's Doctrinal Revolution of April 1917'. Frankel referred to the Marxist assumption that 'to attempt to stage a socialist revolution before the bourgeois order had established itself would be an act of irresponsible utopianism, was bound to fail, and would thus delay the ultimate victory'. The initial stance of scepticism taken here mimicked the traditional viewpoint before entering into a more nuanced analysis in which the true essence of the "April Theses" is effectively unearthed. Frankel states that 'he did not claim that Russia was ripe for socialism. For the time being, only the transitory and preparatory steps...could be taken'. To be sure, Lenin encouraged 'a patient, systematic, and persistent explanation of the errors of... [Soviet] tactics, an explanation especially adapted to the practical needs of the masses'. It was an erudite appraisal of the contemporary situation but it remained true to his Marxian ideal of progress - what had changed is that the Bolsheviks had to be aware of the rapid pace of change that was occurring grce 
 the imperialist skirmish that had enveloped Russia. The Bolshevik politically conscious revolutionaries had to make the people aware of 'the chief sin of the petty-bourgeois bloc...it resorts to empty phrases to conceal from the people the truth about the governments class character'. In an attack on the opposition of Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries Lenin wrote in the summer of 1917 that they had reduced the revolution 'to a state of subjection to the imperialists'. Lenin believed that if the Bolsheviks maintained their policy of opposition to the Provisional Government then time would 'show the masses their true leader - the organised urban proletariat'. In that respect, 'the imperialist war has hastened developments fantastically'.
Lenin's cognition of the importance of the proletariat in the Russian situation slightly altered how he conceived the revolution to unfold. At the turn of the century he had readily advocated the notion of uninhibited revolution developing of its own accord. The nature of Russian society, and perhaps the precedent of 1905, had taught him that this was possible in the towns but that 'in the villages the social revolution...would have to be inspired and led'. The 'revolutionary force' par excellence that was the peasantry would provide the key to the success of the revolution but not independent of the proletariat. After 1905 Lenin realised that it was necessary to abandon western brands of socialism and advance a peculiarly Russian version which came to be known as Bolshevism. By 1909, Frankel has argued, 'Lenin had thus developed a fully fledged strategy for revolution which envisaged a Marxist dominated dictatorship, rooted in the soviets, committed to open-ended violent change (including full-scale land distribution) and pledged to extend the revolution to Europe'. Lenin had always been sure to reject 'half-baked, semi-anarchist ideas which envisaged the speedy implementation of the maximal programme and the seizure of power in order to carry through the socialist revolution'. He was certain that to win over the peasants the bourgeois revolution would have to affect the minimalist programme of land redistribution and basic social reform, some representation in the Soviets and so on. Once this had been assured the masses would be convinced of the benefit of revolution and the tsarist monarchy would have been decisively defeated. Why then in less than three months did Lenin come to believe that Russia was ready to experience the proper socialist revolution? The "April Theses" hit a 'new note of urgency...but the Bolshevik strategic doctrine remained in all essentials unaltered'. Without doubt the key to the extreme catalysis of the Marxist process was the First World War. The effectiveness of the Soviet as a body for socialist representation had materialised and was showing signs of compromise under the Provisional Government of Menshevik and Socialist Revolutionary turn-coats. Hence, 'the revolution had gone much further than anticipated and control of the state had already passed from the feudal to the bourgeois class...at the same time the power of the Soviets was so immense that they in fact constituted (albeit in passive form) the long-awaited dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry. By handing over government to the bourgeoisie, this dictatorship had betrayed its historical mission'.
Lenin 'concluded dramatically' that "to this extent the bourgeois or bourgeois revolution in Russia is completed". Indeed, 'this analysis of the political situation revealed his usual mastery'. It was a call for socialist revolution, it was a denunciation of the bourgeoisie but it fitted perfectly with Lenin's Marxist doctrine. It was not until the summer of 1917 that Lenin began to encourage that the socialist revolution must arm itself immediately to avoid subjection to the military rule of the counter-revolutionary right. He believed that 'military leaders, with the deliberate or semi-deliberate assistance of Kerensky...have seized actual state power and have proceeded to shoot down revolutionary units at the front'. This left an ultimatum; 'either complete victory for the military dictatorship, or victory for the workers' armed uprising'. Having mauled the Provisional Government Lenin felt that the Soviets too had become corrupted by liberalism and had become obsolete, the slogan "All power to the Soviets" was to be resigned to a period that had 'passed irrevocably'. This was a temporary sentiment. A characteristic reversal of policy rested on the condition that 'new elections must be held immediately' in the Soviets. They symbolized the perfect body for proletarian representation but had been spoiled by being assimilated into the Menshevik and Socialist Revolutionary debacle. Lenin also abandoned the idea of caution. The situation had 'matured' and the revolution had to steamroller the forces of reaction. It was now or never. He recognised that the Bolsheviks had to cope with a minority status and thus he called for newly elected Soviets to become the basis of the socialist government because his party was beginning to win over the workers' in the Russia's two key urban centres - Petrograd and Moscow.
In opposition the Bolsheviks were political masters. Under Lenin's direction they steered a steady course constantly adjusting to circumstance yet adhering unerringly to their Marxian ideals. It was much easier to offer opposition in the atmosphere of disaster that haunted war torn Russia. The Bolsheviks got a rude awakening when it was their turn to entertain the want of the masses that they had stirred up. Unpopular decisions had to be made in order to ensure 'economic revival', to heal 'the very severe wounds inflicted by the war upon the entire social organism of Russia'. The tasks of the revolution were to secure a decisive majority, crush the opposition including the remnants of the bourgeoisie and to bring about complete, disciplined organisation. For the latter to succeed it was ignorant of necessity to deny that 'without the guidance of experts in the various fields of knowledge, technology and experience, the transition to socialism will be impossible, because socialism calls for a conscious mass advance to greater productivity of labour'. Predictably this would mean the use of bourgeois officials, managers and technocrats but 'every thinking and honest worker and poor peasant will admit, that we cannot, immediately rid ourselves of the evil legacy of capitalism'. The positive facets of this legacy had to be harnessed for the good of the revolution and the negative un-socialist principles ignored in the meantime.
Lenin's belief in productionism originated in the development of twentieth century industry and production line methods. Taylorism and the ideal of ergonomics seemed to provide the perfect basis for extending productivity in Lenin's eyes and when coupled with the 'introduction of the best system of accounting and control' the socialist tide would be unstoppable. He thus scribbled a 'Draft Plan of Scientific and Technical Work'. Its tone was antithetical to capitalism but was swamped in visionary hopefulness - it planned the ideal future of the modernising process but it seems somewhat utopian. The rejection of society's subjugation to market forces was very Leninist and it reaffirmed the need to plan and control the economy in order to benefit the whole of society. Concretely speaking it was not a complete washout. Its conception saw the convening of the Supreme Economic Council 'to set up a number of expert commissions for the speediest possible compilations of a plan for the reorganisation of industry and the economic progress of Russia'. Lenin denounced the procrastination of 'economists' and 'literati' on this issue and announced that they must 'stop...twaddle about the plan in general, and get on with a detailed study of the implementation of our plans, our mistakes in this practical business, and ways of correcting them... The whole point is that we have yet to learn the art of the approach, and stop substituting intellectualist and bureaucratic projecteering for vibrant effort'.
The publishing of The ABC of Communism in 1918 was an attempt by the Bolshevik party to harness the powerful theory of Lenin with the expedient requirements needed to modernise Russia and drive it towards communism. It was not, however, given the complex political language going to be, as intended, "an elementary textbook of communist knowledge". It does exude imperative significance though as a treatise designed to echo central party sentiments, the sentiments of Lenin, and it proposed an analysis of the political situation which was very much in accordance with Leninist principles. In the few years prior to the publishing of the book, Lenin had clashed with Bukharin over the issue of economic policy. However, the matter-of-fact pursuit of socialism in the wake of civil war drew the two closer and Preobrazhensky too 'welcomed the emergency measures of War Communism as a fore taste of the future socialist order'. This period exemplified the attempt to marry the ideological shibboleths of 1917, and of The State and Revolution, with practical contingencies, the preservation of the revolution and party hegemony. The decision to alter policy stimulated internal dissent, particularly from the self-proclaimed Left Communists. They denounced Lenin's 'espousal of the forms of capitalist industry'. The Bolshevik leader retorted unremittingly, slamming their opposition as 'childish exuberance' and that if relaxed economic policies, 'state capitalism', took root then that 'would be a great success and a sure guarantee that within a year socialism will have gained a permanently firm hold and will have become invincible in our country'. Once in power, it was the prerogative of the government to establish the correct economic conditions conducive to socialism. Marx had theorised about a transitory epoch, as had Engels, and Lenin decided that it had to be prolonged to ensure the survival of the revolution. After all, according to theory 'it is one and the same road that leads from...large-scale state capitalism...to socialism'.
Realising the growing discontent Lenin began to purge Russia of political opposition during the civil war. Victor Chernov said that the Bolshevik decision to dissolve the Constituent Assembly meant the extermination of 'Russia's first and last democratic parliament'. The measure was taken to avoid the betrayal of the socialist revolution because parliamentary political organisation was regarded by Lenin as the 'expression of the old relation of political forces which existed when power was held by the compromisers'. To allow it to convene was an 'obstacle in the path of the October revolution and the Soviet power', therefore the opponents of Bolshevik economic policy duly failed to understand 'the concrete forms and stages of the transition'. 
The Declaration of Rights of the Working and Exploited People was tendered as an alternative democratic safeguard. It was vaguely based on the French revolutionary model as a manifesto of the revolution in Russia and its Marxist influence was explicit in the title. It was passed on 12 January 1918 proclaiming Russia 'as a federation of Soviet national republics'. The inclusion of a clause concerning the creative freedom of the people was mere phraseology designed to disguise the Bolshevik penchant for tight centralisation and rigid discipline. The ability 'to decide independently at their own representative congresses of Soviets whether they wish to participate in the federal government and in other federal Soviet institutions, and on what terms' was never recognised. The implementation of the constitution was controlled form the outset by the party, a classic example of the substitutionism that they were not afraid to exert. The public manifesto was closely guarded, monitored and opposition or external institutions infiltrated and repressed if necessary.
The Eighth Party Congress of March 1919 encapsulated the more pragmatic balance of party policy that was to follow. It was conducted in a dismissive and apologetic manner, albeit with the usual imaginative, idealist attitude towards the future. It also warned against the dangers of bureaucratisation in the bourgeois style that would lead to an irrevocable schism between the party and the narod. The Congress set forth guidelines on party size and membership to ensure "the qualitative composition" of the proletarian component. To protect against the party becoming "infected with bureaucratism" the Bolsheviks resolved to enforce 'closer links with the membership of local soviets and trade unions' and 'written reports' had to be frequently submitted regarding regional initiatives. Equally, party workers were to be constantly reassigned. To tie the periphery inextricably to the centre the party wished to 'win "decisive influence" and "complete control" in all organisations of working people such as unions, cooperatives and rural communes'. This move spelled the effective marginalisation of the soviet as an institution and enabled the party to increasingly assert its total domination. Other institutions became mere 'transition belts between the party and society as a whole'.
The Bolsheviks began to cement the dictatorship and determined that the 'deprivation of political rights and any kind of freedom are necessary as temporary measures in order to defeat the attempts of the exploiters to retain or re-establish their privileges'. It became clear at this point that Lenin and his party, although maintaining the ideals of crushing the bourgeoisie and smashing the state machine - ideals taken directly from Marx and Engels and given primacy in The State and Revolution - were not concerned with the vehicle of progress so long as the end goal was to be achieved. That, issues of nationality, education, economics, distribution, housing, labour protection and social security as well as public health were included in resolutions designed to benefit the welfare of the populace and to ensure that ultimate freedom and equality would be achieved. Religion was to be detached from the state and resigned to the wilderness but open oppression here was to be avoided at all costs because it would no doubt provoke a knee-jerk backlash and 'religious fanaticism'. In terms of 'money and banking' the state must control and nationalise all financial resources in order to provide impetus for the foundation of a single national bank of the Soviet republic'. The resemblance to Lenin's book written more than two years earlier and prior to the Bolshevik seizure of power is remarkable here and despite the tightening of party control the ultimately free communist paradise was not forgotten.
At the next Bolshevik assembly Lenin had to yet again go on the defensive, countering attacks on 'the character of party leadership and on economic policy, especially questions concerning industry and labour'. Two factions emerged as dissident, the so-called 'Democratic Centralists' and the 'Workers' Opposition'. The former were against the style of leadership which they dubbed 'vertical centralism' which involved the rule of a minority clique or increasingly a single personality. 'The question of trade union organisation, on which Bukharin reported...evoked debate from several sides' and the Workers' Opposition were prominent here. However, yet again the maestro was able to flatter the quarrelling groups and his apparent compromise 'was accepted by a majority' although no formal record of 'the actual count' was ever recorded. Robert McNeal accurately concluded that 'the lesson of [this]... Congress seems to be not that Lenin's leadership was in danger but that the party would produce divergent factions if something was not done to curtail them'. The growing authoritarian nature of Bolshevism was eventually to be extended into the world of culture. Nothing could be left outside the realm of the proletarian state if complete socialist consciousness was to be nurtured. 'The Marxist world outlook is the only true expression of the interests, the viewpoint, and the culture of the revolutionary proletariat', culture was thus to be strictly defined by the party as the representatives of the people's vanguard.
Lenin finally confirmed his definitive status as sacrosanct party leader at the Tenth Congress in March 1921 and he drove the implementation of his new economic policies home. McNeal affirmed that this congress was focused 'around the question of trade unions, the Kronstadt revolt...and the necessity to change economic policy in order to save the country from total collapse'. It was 'probably the most important post-1917 gathering of Lenin's career'. The real success was stamping out the dissent that had flared up at the previous meeting, Lenin announced that 'our efforts should be more united and harmonious'. That way the Bolsheviks would not concede an inch of ground to their external enemies. Also, the final concession to the peasantry was made with the acceptance that 'the small farmer does not want the same thing as the [urban] worker'. Hence, the party needed to 're-examine our policy in regard to the peasantry. The state of affairs that has prevailed so far cannot be continued any longer'. Lenin hoped to improve the 'mentality' of the petty commodity producers 'through the material basis, technical equipment, the extensive use of tractors and other farm machinery and electrification on a mass scale'. In order to satisfy the peasants, to align them with the party and achieve a rapprochement as well as succeed in realising large-scale production by securing an agricultural revolution. Lenin had to make sure that a 'certain freedom of exchange' did not spiral out of control and render socialist tendencies in the countryside impotent. He assumed that if the state managed distribution then the proletariat would yield political power by dictating how goods were released into circulation thus achieving the synthesis of economic and political power. The peasantry would be at the mercy of the workers, goods would be received by each according to need and the opportunity to secure tools and products to enhance production in the meantime would fuel the transition. The 'surplus grain tax' too was replaced by 'a tax in kind'. An elementary free market economy was to provide 'a certain quantity of goods' in order to keep industrial production ticking over.
In reality 'the programme was economically self-defeating because the peasant had little incentive to produce any surplus' since any profit was siphoned back into the hands of the state. The arrival of the communist party, Bolshevik, single-party hegemony in Russia and the so-called dictatorship of the proletariat was not heralded as a triumph by many outside the government. Alexander Berkman dismally uttered 'my heart is numb with despair; something has died within me. The people on the streets looked bowed with grief, bewildered. No one trusts himself to speak'. Another commentator, Emma Goldman, resolved that 'the libertarian principle... [which] was strong in the initial days of the Revolution... [was] hopelessly bankrupt'. Damningly, she declared that 'never before in all history has authority, the government, the state, proved so static, reactionary and even counter-revolutionary in effect. In short, the very anti-thesis of revolution'. What history has witnessed compared to what Lenin had hoped his Bolshevik party could encourage ended up residing at different ends of the socio-political spectrum. No "triumphal march of soviet power" was achieved, 'it...was halted in its first winter'. Quite simply, 'Bolshevik prognoses were wrong'.
The peasantry represented the difficulty in appeasing the populace that Lenin and his party faced. As the 'most backward strata of the exploited' they had lain dormant up to the revolution of 1905 and had come to show that they had a tremendous energy. That uprising had failed because 'the peasants were too scattered, too isolated from each other in their actions; they were not organised enough, not aggressive enough'. They still symbolized the proletariat's "true comrades", their "most faithful and valued allies" but they were a constant thorn in the side of the Bolshevik party. Lenin came to realise that the peasantry was not a homogenous unit quite early in his career and as a concept it conjured up an abundance of political white water for him to navigate. However, 'it received little attention in The ABC of Communism'. Its authors too were perplexed by the backward nature of Russian agriculture as a hindrance to industrial progress and they eventually postulated the question 'how is this mass of petty producers to be incorporated into the general system of the socialist economy, now in the course of construction?... In the first place, it is clear that forcible expropriation is here quite inadmissible'. Suffice it to say that the socialist ideals that were offered as a means to assimilate the peasantry were ignored. Proposals to provide 'fuel and raw materials...financial aid', the inclusion of 'the home worker in the general scheme of social production' on the precondition that they 'organise themselves into artels or cooperations of production' failed to materialise. The assimilation of the peasantry to the socialist cause was navely regarded as somewhat inevitable given 'the correctness of the proletarian path'. Supposedly, 'their own practical experience of revolution' would show them the light.
Lenin himself had tried to broker a resolution of peasant-proletariat-party divisions by insisting that the 'Bolsheviks should try to establish Soviets for the labourers, the very poor peasants, and the peasant bourgeoisie. The logic of this proposal was transparently clear: the party would seek to turn the lowest tiers into a Bolshevik stronghold powerful enough to intimidate - or "paralyse" - the richer peasantry'. The attempt to divide and conquer peasant enclaves was decidedly unsuccessful. Left unresolved the peasant problem was the tide that NEP rolled in on since it was the essence of 'the problem of capital accumulation [which was] necessary to finance an expanding industry'. In summary, 'as the period of the proletarian dictatorship and the slow transition to socialism prolonged itself indefinitely, the issue of relations between the worker and the rgime became in practice increasingly acute'. The genius of Lenin was shifting immediate policy in reaction to the harsh political climate in order not to chain himself to a sinking ship as the Mensheviks had done in 1917 while maintaining the true nature of his Marxian interpretation. It was apparent that 'Lenin surely sought to match doctrine and policy even though he was not always able to do this clearly and effectively'. Eventually, with the cessation of civil war hostility and the increasing animosity towards war communism 'the Bolsheviks were once again called upon to woo the mass of the peasantry'. Lenin adopted NEP in 1921 with the official consent of the party after the Tenth Congress held in the spring of that year.
The State and Revolution had heralded an exemplary and often admirable transition to communism but features 'which emphasised local initiative, mass participation and popular self-determination' were forgotten. Censorship, the Cheka, the subordination of factory committees to trade unions which in turn were reigned in under state control, the vast power of the Supreme Council of the National Economy to dictate policy, the sheer dominance of the central authorities in general and the violent requisitioning of grain were all unfortunate measures that the Bolsheviks resorted to in order to strive towards maintaining the socialist revolution. They may not have had specific long standing ideological formulations behind them but there was a constant pragmatism to Lenin's writings and one cannot help but feel that they were somewhat inevitable themselves, despite the adherence to a 'visionary faith even when contemporary circumstances appeared grimly disillusioning'. There had been no hesitation in resorting to 'political ruthlessness' in times of crisis but when the civil war ended these policies became popularly questionable.
When the ABC was written, with the civil war in full swing, the 'single overwhelming task that confronted [the rgime]...was to restore order in the countryside and to bring food and fuel to the towns. Utopian visions of the future that now seemed inconceivable remote were irrelevant to the task. Bukharin symbolically abandoned the extreme of revolutionary idealism for the extreme of administrative prudence'. In action, so did Lenin, in word he remained a revolutionary Marxist to the grave. Not surprisingly he enveloped the history of Bolshevism perfectly: 'when a new class comes on to the historical scene as the leader and guide of society, a period of violent "rocking", shocks, struggle and storm, on the one hand, and a period of uncertain steps, experiments, wavering, hesitation in regard to the selection of new methods corresponding to new objective circumstances, on the other, are inevitable'. The adoption of Marxism to provide a strategy for revolution in the backward socio-economic and political state of Russia was masterful. This was no mere revision either, especially since Marx 'had never stated precisely how the proletariat would come to appreciate the revolutionary role that history had thrust upon it'. Moreover, 'Lenin lived and died a Leninist'.