In order to effectively assess the influence and legacy of this immense historian it is essential to deal with the method and philosophy that underpinned his prolific work. Some scholars believe that Ranke has been misunderstood by many and that his impact has been manipulated to serve specific purposes. This essay will attempt to unmask the true essence of Ranke's historical philosophy in order to discover his relationship with scientific history. In light of this it will become possible to conclude whether or not he can be accurately described as 'the father of scientific history'.
Certainly, Ranke's methodology was riddled with scientific precision. He was utterly convinced of the need to consult primary texts as sources; these were the embodiment of historical truth. Having trawled through the archives the historian's next task according to him was to corroborate and compose a critique of the evidence at hand. Above all, given the nature of Ranke's chosen field - the history of the nation state - the most useful data were the official documents of European statesmen. The state according to his historical philosophy was the manifestation of God's providence, a divine tool which affected the workings and progress of history. They were, 'the primary units of his history...the core of knowable human activity in the past'.
Ranke believed that it was impossible to transpose contemporary notions of moral superiority onto the past because the actions of God were impossible to fathom. Hence, he rejected the possibility of reasonably deducing historical progress. He rejected Hegel's idealist philosophy on these grounds, and thus he rejected the rational philosophy of the enlightenment. That is not to say that Ranke rejected philosophy per se. Quite to the contrary, Ranke was deeply aware of the philosophical nature of history. However, the scientific nature of his method did not make him an empiricist or a positivist. In no way did he 'emphasize the importance of methodology over theory'. The 'empirical approach' which originated with Francis Bacon and the idea that all knowledge stemmed from the observation of matter became a shibboleth of enlightenment philosophers. Since the rational idealism of the era was anathema to Ranke the only way he can be legitimately aligned with empiricism or positivism is through his method, which was scientific in its meticulousness. He believed that 'research guarantees the truth'.
His fascination was with "gathering, criticizing and verifying data", in order to discover 'wie es eigentlich gewesen'. According to Richard Evans, this famous proclamation of historical intent by Ranke has been "widely misunderstood". The intention was to understand the inner being of the past". This was his historicist philosophy - his raison d'tre as a historian. It was not simply a call for the production of tepid factual history based on scientific data. History could not be written like natural science. The past should be 'understood on its own terms...not judged by the historians own criteria'. The providence of God was also a crucial aspect of Rankean thought. Iggers has pointed out that "[t]he impartial approach to the past...for Ranke revealed the existing order as God had willed it... One cannot understand the new science of history as it was understood by Ranke without taking into account the political and religious context in which it emerged". This context was the nineteenth-century 'ferment arising from nationalism and the growth of the European states'.
A French historian wrote in 1900 that the presentation of 'facts, facts, facts... The truth, all truth, nothing but the truth' was the primary job of the historian'. Was this the influence of Ranke? How does he relate to 'scientific, empirical history'? Undoubtedly, his methods were empirical and scientific. The need for rigour, impartiality and the 'inductive method of reasoning from the particular to the general' can be seen as empiricist. Of this latter quality Ranke announced that "the particular can never appear in full clarity unless it is grasped in its general relations". However, E.P Thompson alerted us to the mistake of assuming that empirical historical method was synonymous with empiricism as a philosophical trend. In his essay 'The Poverty of Theory or An Orrery of Errors', he attacked Louis Althusser for confusing and conflating 'the empirical mode (or techniques) of investigation with the quite different ideological formation, empiricism'. For Ranke this was a means to an end, the most suitable way to produce accurate history and 'to represent the past objectively'. This search for historical truth was a "noble dream" according to American historiography.
Georg Iggers' well-known critique of such American historians, who heralded Ranke as their empiricist historical figurehead, provides us with an excellent account of the way his work has been misinterpreted. However, generalisations made by Iggers have, to a certain extent, been deconstructed by Dorothy Ross. Although some American historians of the early twentieth-century undoubtedly manipulated Ranke's work to suit their own ends this was not representative of the entire historical profession in the United States. Ross quite rightly has alerted us to the fact that the American historical profession in its formative years was much more 'heterogeneous' than Iggers would like to think. Having said that, Ross admits that where they were not entirely philosophically ignorant they were not 'philosophically sophisticated' either and were keen to rule out the 'kind of philosophy which had religious or metaphysical intentions'. For American historians, if the historical intention of their scholarship was not to achieve the pinnacle of objective and empirical factual history, thereby mistakenly taking Ranke as its epitome, then the development of a political history intended to bolster liberal academic prestige was the priority. Certainly, there did exist a significant portion of American historians that incorrectly believed that their work followed in the footsteps of Ranke.
Hence, according to Iggers, in their historiography Ranke was more important as a symbol rather than as a historian. They consciously interpreted his work as scientific and detached from philosophy. It is their misconceptions that have led some to ascribe the title 'father of scientific history' to him. The role Ranke played in German historiography has been used by Iggers in diametric opposition to that which he was forced to play in America. In Germany Ranke's true philosophical perception was readily accepted and well conceived. In the late twentieth-century there was a reappraisal of Ranke's role in American historiography as the German interpretation crossed the Atlantic. Before this occurred it was de rigueur in the American historical academies for Rankean thought to be regarded as a symbol for history as a natural science. The empirical nature of Ranke's methodology was overly emphasised by this breed of historian to add a greater level of intellectual weight to their theory.
In doing so, American historians bastardised Ranke's historical philosophy, asserting that the clinical and objective search for truth should supersede any deeper meaning. In 1908, George B. Adams proclaimed that "the first duty of the historian" was to discover "wie es eigentlich gewesen", and in this address to the nascent American Historical Association he called Ranke their "leader". The academic history of this school was steeped in a scientific thirst for objectivity and factual sophistication. Undeniably, this was paramount in Rankean historicism but their brief and simplistic reading of his work led them to assume that Ranke believed that the only job of the historian was to establish 'facts for their own sake'. Iggers has shown that it is necessary to revise this view of Ranke, and believes that the process for re-interpreting his work began with Ferdinand Schevill, who pointed out that these American historians had created a "leader" that "bore little resemblance to the real Ranke, who had been led to the study of history by philosophical and religious interests". Schevill continued to remark that "throughout his career Ranke had worked toward a theory of historical forces as ideas which focused moral energies divine in origin. He was much closer to the German tradition of idealism, which had always challenged the dominance and arrogance of the positivistic spirit, than any of his American disciples, who worshipped so uncritically at the shrine of science. They had simply made Ranke over in their own image".
Ranke's misunderstood legacy amongst twentieth-century historians has in some cases given rise to the belief that Ranke wished to indiscriminately sever the relationship between history as an art and as a science. In 1902, J.B. Bury noted that "history is a science, no more, no less", because of the "minute method of analysing...sources and scrupulously exact conformity to facts". However, this is the stripping down of history to its bare bones - removing the literary aspect of narration, which for Ranke would have meant the destruction of history. 'Sixty-five years later', Geoffrey Elton reiterated a similar belief. 'Careful evaluation and authentication of primary source material is one of Ranke's most significant legacies'. True, but it is only one aspect. The dangers of misinterpreting Ranke are numerous - they can lead to boring factual history as championed by Bury and also, perhaps at the extreme, it can lead to moral relativism. The idea that all epochs and attitudes are equal before God and that all morals are of equal value can lead to the formation of dangerous philosophies. Since 'absolute truth is unattainable' then 'all statements about history are connected or relative to the position of those that make them', hence one set of morals becomes just as perfectly justifiable and acceptable as another. However, a closer look at Ranke's philosophy shows us that, true to his belief in an all-pervasive universal element governing history, the particularity of specific individuals and epochs was set "apart from certain unchanging, eternal dominant ideas, such as moral ideas". Morality was not subject to change because it was part of 'the universal human reality transcending each of its individual expressions'.
It is possible to realign Ranke with artistic literary devices and this has been a recent postmodernist trend. The rediscovery of the 'rhetoric and aesthetics of historiography' has become important because its modernity was 'defined by its academic or - in a broader sense of the word - by its scientific character'. The problem inherent in this approach is that it leads to a tendentious interpretation. It is possible to see Ranke as the epitome of mediation between these diverging points of view because he combined a 'new academic standard' with renewed 'literary quality'. In order to "show how it really had been", Ranke elevated empirical qualities above the dated and imprecise rhetoric and dialogue which was preferred by historians of older generations, such as Francesco Guicciardini. He viewed rhetorical dialogues as 'language tricks' which were subordinate to 'convincing argument' based on well corroborated evidence. The process of unmasking historical intention was not abandoned by him, but Ranke, as we have already seen, did not wish to impose the prejudice of contemporary society upon the past. That said it is important not to ignore the artistic style of Ranke's history - 'whereas the principles of research are scientific in their nature and belong to the realm of modern methodological rationality, the principles of writing history are artistic...and belong to the realm of literature'. The art of narrative gave Ranke, and still provides historians today, the 'rhetorical structures' to shape the past into an understandable present-day form. It is possible to produce a critique of those American historians that Iggers had condemned for their misconception of Rankean history based along these lines. The demand for 'research-based historiography' was 'nothing more than rhetoric itself...in order to take part in the cultural prestige of science and to legitimate the professionalism of historians, now cultivating an image of academic seriousness'. Even before Ranke arrived on the scene Wilhelm von Humbolt provided a precedent for the sentiments echoed in his work. Humbolt was convinced that 'historiography is a creative work: imitating the representation of reality'.
There is a great swathe of historical argument that substantiates the belief that Ranke in fact fused the artistic, literary nature of history with empirical, scientific methodology. Rudolf Vierhaus has pointed to Ranke's own belief that "history is at once art and science". Yet again, we see that scientific research was little more than an instrument with which historians could produce a convincing argument. As Vierhaus put it, Ranke believed that 'the historian's greatest task...was the great comprehensive narrative'. In this sense, one might go as far as to say that he produced neither scientific nor non-scientific history, he in fact 'assigned to history a status sui generis'. To emphasise the paramount importance of artistic perspective of history, one must point out that 'historical writing...cannot be evaluated exclusively by its scientific merits but must also be examined according to rhetorical and aesthetic aspects'. These 'literary devices' are used 'to present the results of methodological historical research to contemporary readers', and there would certainly be very little argument if one were to say that Ranke epitomised these qualities. Therefore, on these grounds, it would be unfair and misguided to call Ranke the 'father of scientific history'.
Leonard Krieger offers a more sophisticated development of this idea. He has argued that Ranke did indeed base his history upon the foundations of sound scientific research, but that above and beyond that he adhered to higher philosophical and theological principles. Krieger has pointed out that, '[f]or Ranke, then, what was beyond the fact was more valuable than the fact itself', and he believes that Ranke's affinity with natural science went beyond the basic level of methodological research to the search for a "higher principle" in 'nature and life'. However, one cannot escape the constant recurrence in his work of the 'dramatic invocation of history as the dwelling place and revelation of God'. These ideas reached 'higher than the empirical reality of discrete events'. Surely then his adherence to these abstract notions, ideas that were more important and more profoundly set in his historical philosophy, show us that he was merely concerned with scientific principle as a more precise tool than rhetoric, in particular the rhetoric of invented speech, with which to convince his audience. For Ranke, 'individual reality' and individual historical events were a 'manifestation of a universal principle', a consequence of "laws, more mysterious and greater than one usually thinks".
Krieger brilliantly and accurately surmises 'the unscientific counterpoint' that is implicit in Rankean thought. It is necessary to delve much deeper into the inner meaning of the much maligned maxim 'wie es eigentlich gewesen' and be aware of 'the problematic reinterpretation of his renowned scientific dictum'. Hence, it has become apparent that the aim to discover "what actually happened" is not 'the objective reporting of past facts in the documents; it refers, rather, to the reconstruction of the past life behind the documents'. Therefore, the tools needed to do effectively achieve this higher duty of the historian are artistic not scientific, it requires an elegant literary narrative not an indifferent regurgitation of scientific facts. A competent historian exuded 'historical knowledge, methodological skill, aesthetic sensitivity, and moral responsibility'. It would be greatly unfair and simplistic to simply remember Ranke as 'the father of scientific history'.