Two main areas of project management are given focus in this critical appraisal. The first topic to be discussed is that of risk. The operations director wished particular attention to be paid to risk aversion in such sensitive change.
Within this report, risk has been categorised according to a vague scale of probability that should in no way be relied upon as a factual measure due to the lack of real research. In reality, uncertainty plays a less significant but still as vital role. In Project Management literature, the 'Failure mode and effects approach'. The uncertainty in terms of the scale of changes required to fully implement the proposals is relatively immeasurable, but with further research the level of uncertainty about the level of risk posed can become more accurate.
Uncertainty can be classified by two main measures - the likelihood that a negative change will occur in terms of the risk, and the impact that such a variation would have on the company and project. Within this report, the risk of staff rejecting the proposed increase in workload and learning requirements was posed as medium occurrence and high impact. The Risk Significance matrix states that such a risk could prove fatal to the project and as a result should be avoided. However, in this particular instance avoidance simply is not an option. Instead it has become visible that mitigation of the risk is a necessity for project success. Project Management literature should not be viewed as a static medium. It is a series of concepts that must be adapted to the management strategy present. At CFS, change needs to be embraced by staff, and shying away from this risk would signal the wrong message.
Planning and control of activities was highlighted using a Gantt chart, but after the recommended pilot phase suggested, sufficient projections could perhaps be extrapolated to create a form of network analysis upon the work packages. The scale of resources can be more expressly defined using such analysis and a more overall picture of the resources required for implementation within the company will become apparent.
A Critical Path diagram represents each work package as a British Standard as shown in the image below. By forming links of nodes with this format, calculations can be carried out to: ascertain the quickest route through which to conduct operations whereby the project can be carried out in a shorter time period. Other risks, particularly those of an economic nature depend upon the relative short-termed nature of the project (i.e. fluctuation of interest rates on variable rate loan capital).
Significant research will be required to enhance the accuracy of the analysis provided by a critical path diagram. It is important to define the notion of float, particularly as dispensation for delayed activities was not clearly displayed in the report. By assigning activities a sufficient amount of float that can be used as a benchmark to define the packages urgency then the steering control can exercise far more informed strategic and operational control on the project. It becomes important to appreciate the context of the activities to be undertaken. The balance should be struck between resources and time so as to provide an optimal return to the investor - the project manager.