Cyberspace has become a new realm for the exchange of digital information to conduct commerce, provide entertainment, pursue education, and a wide range of other activities. Simultaneously, the last decade of the twentieth century has seen the rising concern over a new form of conflict, usually referred to as information warfare or cyber terrorism. Its right to say that now since the whole world is heading toward a era where everything will be done by computers, there will be more to fear from computer terrorism than from the bombs. Many aspects of modern society either have a direct or implicit dependence on information technology .So any effect done on or with the help of computers will have its effect everywhere.
Computer terrorism can be defined as the act of destroying or of corrupting computer systems with an aim of destabilizing a country or of applying pressure on a government. Today, it is easier for a terrorist to attack a dam by hacking into its command and control computer network than it would be to obtain and deliver the tons of explosive needed to blow it. Terrorist every time try to leverage limited resources to instil fear and shape public opinion, and dramatic attacks on computer networks could provide a means to do this with only a small group of intelligent people and not much of the funding required. Computers can be attacked anywhere from the world .By knowing how to hack into others computers its not difficult to bring changes in any network where ever you are in the world. Terrorist might also try to use to cyber attacks to amplify the effect of other attacks. Cyberterrorism can involve anything from destroying the networking systems of the company or remotely disrupting the information technology underlying the Internet. They can also take control over the machines of the power plants, electricity in order to wreak havoc.
Cyber terrorism takes many forms. One of the more popular is to threaten a large bank. The terrorists hack into the system and then leave an encrypted message for senior directors, which threaten the bank. In essence, the message says that if they do not pay a set amount of money, then the terrorists will use anything from logic bombs to electromagnetic pulses to destroy the banks files. What adds to the difficulty is to catch the criminal ,it may that the criminal is in another country. Its not easy task to find the criminal as from which part in the world that criminal is doing cyber terrorism. Now days the most commonest form of attack appears to be inserting viruses which corrupt computer systems, sometimes with rather nasty impact on commercial companies. The Internet has presented a huge opportunity to the hackers, particularly but not exclusively targeting the soft option of the Windows operating system as a server. But computer fraud is not new, it has been going on for years. In the following years many miss uses of computer have been seen as many of the hijackers, who crashed four planes into the World Trade Centre, the Pentagon and a Pennsylvania field, were believed to have used the Internet--often in public cafes and electronics stores to communicate without being detected by traditional law enforcement methods such as telephone wiretaps.
Computer-based attack could result in widespread death and destruction as terrorists use laptops, the Internet and other high-tech tools to take down power grids, communications networks and other parts of the so-called critical infrastructure. By using the internet the terrorist can affect much wider damage or change to a country than one could by killing some people. From disabling countries military defences to shutting off the power in a large area, the terrorist can affect more people at less risk to him or herself, than through other means.
As we know the most known terrorist Ramzi Ahmed Yousef and Osama bin Laden. As information given by the Philippine National Police in one of their meetings, Yousef helped himself with computers that caused the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York. He could have done more havoc to civil society. Osama bin Laden's enterprises, on the other hand, are supported by sophisticated satellite uplinks. Encrypted messages have built for groups that have the capacity to direct terroristic operations outside of his home base in Afghanistan .He recently avoided death from assassins. The current news of hacking was that the website of Arab satellite TV network Al-Jazeera was been hit by a number of electronic attacks, Visitors to Al-Jazeera's English website were redirected to a different web page with the message 'God bless our troops. So anywhere in the world anyone can hack any computer .This hacking was done by a US hacker(1).
Attacks launched in cyberspace could involve diverse methods of exploiting vulnerabilities in computer security: computer viruses, stolen passwords, and insider collusion. Attacks could also involve stealing classified files, altering the content of Web pages, disseminating false information, erasing data, or threatening to divulge confidential information.
A senior fellow at the Institute of Security and Intelligence at Stanford University, Califonia, Collin said that every upgrade and expansion in technology brings with it-increased threats from Cyber Terrorism. This new threat is developing as terrorists exploit the latest technology to commit violence acts through computer systems(2). Cyber Terrorists and hackers gain access to otherwise secure systems through carefully gathered intelligence.
The coming of the Rootkit made more easy for the hackers to achieve their goals as it is a collection of tools and utilities that a hacker can use to hide their presence on your system and gather data to help them infiltrate further across the network. After having gained some level of access to a computer, the intruder installs a Rootkit, which can help him maintain his ability to access, the hacked computer, help him attack the hacked computer or use it to remotely attack other computers and help to cover his tracks. So its not always right to say that the person from whose computer other computer is hacked is actually that person as with the help of the root kit it turns not that simple to catch the person who is actually playing the game of hacking with others. Intelligence experts worry that the next terrorist strike on the United States will be what they call a "swarming attack" - a bombing or suicide hijacking combined with a hit on computers - that will make it tougher for law enforcement and emergency teams to respond. (3)
Computing professionals all over the world need to be aware of possible areas of weakness to such terrorism, in order to better protect their computer systems who contains the information which is very important for the country and help to put an end to terrorist activities. It is important for computer professionals to understand cyber - terrorism for the benefit of themselves, their profession, and society. Now all the countries have started thinking toward this issue, as it also has the same importance as the fear from deadly bombs.
A worst case of hacking was found in France when a hacker found the means of remotely reprogramming the rates of exchange of an Automated Teller Machine. By this one can change the rates of any currency rates available in machine. Like rate of exchange of 5 dollars for 1 franc and thus can be changed for 100 francs. But the hacker did the other way round, which was 5 francs for 1 dollar and turned over and changed his dollars and got loads of money.(4) There are many other cases which show the act of cyber terrorism One of the case which drew many people attention was when Robert Morris Jr, graduate of University of Harvard released a worm on ARPANET. The worm was transmitted from machine to machine exploiting bugs in the mail systems. The result of this was slowing down of all network communications, which in emergency times could lead to a very serious problem (5). Most of the hackers like these once explore computer system through simple curiosity and for intellectual challenge. It is not an easy thing to hack a computer Systems if it looks it needs a lot of thinking as how to get try to get connected to a modem on a computer which any one tries to attack .Now to save the data of the military operation all the computer System are kept isolated from being attacked as they contains the information which if changed may take life of many people which is a threat to most of the countries as they think that this might be the place which terrorist group would like to attack in order to bring any country into a big problem. Now new military leaders are being selected based on their experience with information warfare and cyber-terrorism. Gen. Richard Myers was appointed Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in part due to his experience with a task force to prevent hacking attacks (6).
As the threat is becoming more real, corporations and government agencies have hired contingency planners. (Schwartau, 2002) In 2000 President Clinton asked for $100 million to protect from cyber terrorism. (Brand, 1999) The United States is such a large target not only because they are wealthy and control nearly 1/2 of the computing power in the world, but the United States is a superpower and people in other parts of the world feel resentment for that thing.
The government, corporations, and private citizens are all learning to put up defences against the threat of a cyber attack. There is no perfect shield besides removing the target, but we cannot shut systems down permanently as a defence because we already rely on them too much. So every country should try there best in order to save themselves from cyber terrorism which if not taken care can really bring big problems in every part of the world and may be the effects can turn out to be more dangerous then the atom bombs as bombs destructs a part of the country but cyber terrorism carries the power of destroying not just a part of the country but more then that anytime anywhere in the world. As may be tomorrow's terrorist may be able to do more with a keyboard than with a bomb.