In his Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences, Hegel famously said: "To seek to know before we know is as absurd as the wise resolution of Scholasticus, not to venture into the water until he had learned to swim". This statement not only points to a crucial element of Hegelian philosophy, but also captures an attitude to which many critics have set themselves strongly in opposition. Even to generally sympathetic commentators, Hegelian epistemology can be a cause for discomfort. Though the metaphysical grandness of his entire system cannot be denied, it is not generally recognized that Hegel made use of the proper philosophical techniques to ensure the epistemological security of that system. The above quote is often cited to reveal such lack of acknowledgement of the problems posed by epistemology; specifically, the problem of an initial justificatory criterion for adequate cognition. This purported lack of attention, critics claim, is sufficiently problematic to call the worth of his entire system into serious question. On Scruton's reading,
Further, on the issue of beginning a philosophical inquiry without establishing a criterion which justifies it, Baillie writes that "whether thought is able to know, or how far it can know being at all, is a problem which from the start he never seems to have considered, at any rate never discussed at length," and goes so far even to say that "there was therefore no initial problem regarding knowledge, whether philosophical or of any other sort". Because Hegel makes claims about knowledge while failing to offer prior justification for the sort of cognition that can come to know what knowledge is, it is claimed, the metaphysical system which he builds proceeds by means of arbitrary assumption, thereby leaving it defenseless against the attacks of skepticism.
To be sure, the concerns of skepticism are central to epistemological integrity. It is the voice that persistently asks 'how do you know?' in order that the need for justification and necessity is not ignored. For without this level of rigour, the claims made in whatever philosophical system can be tossed indifferently into the realm of arbitrary opinion. What the above commentators see in Hegel is inattention to the standards by which one ought to be guided in any philosophical inquiry concerning the cognition of being. Presumably, then, such claims could be shown to be at best uncharitable, and at worst simply false, if it could be proven that Hegel does in fact take skeptical concerns seriously.
With respect to his Phenomenology of Spirit, I will argue precisely this point. Now, the size and complexity of such an issue as the role of skepticism in Hegel's thought, or a thorough epistemological defense of Hegel's system, is certainly beyond the scope of the present essay. Specifically, I will address what I take to be the gross misconception that Hegel's Phenomenology proceeds in an epistemologically irresponsible manner, by demonstrating the key role that skepticism has in the establishment of the project as a whole, and its central place as the propelling force of necessity in its dialectical progression. What will emerge is a picture of the Phenomenology as deeply attentive to skeptical concerns, one in which the skeptical moment is inextricable from the movement of the dialectic itself, having been critically appropriated by Hegel as determinate negation.
As an entry point into our discussion, and in the interest of charity towards Hegel's critics, we would do well to first note to what extent an acquaintance with the Phenomenology can offer prima facie support for the claim that Hegel does not appropriately value skepticism as such. When introducing the project he will undertake, he questions the value of an attitude that tirelessly doubts the very possibility of a cognition of being and asks: "Should we not be concerned as to whether this fear of error is not just the error itself?" He denounces that "conceit which understands how to belittle every truth, in order to turn back into itself and gloat over its own understanding", claiming this posture to be hiding "behind the pretension that its burning zeal for truth makes it difficult or even impossible to find any other truth but the unique truth of vanity". Making obvious reference to Descartes, he criticizes that skeptical method that employs doubt in order to establish a putatively undogmatic first principle, characterizing it as a mere "shilly-shallying about this or that presumed truth, followed by a return to that truth again, after the doubt has been appropriately dispelled - so that at the end of the process the matter is taken to be what it was in the first place". Beyond the introduction, we see skepticism being taken up explicitly once more in the section on the freedom of self-consciousness. At first glance, it may understandably raise suspicion that Hegel uses a mere four pages to demonstrate the ultimately self-corrupting contradictions of the skeptic's position. It is here that he refers to that position as "a purely casual, confused medley, the dizziness of a perpetually self-engendered disorder" that maintains itself in "restless confusion". The skeptical consciousness is identified as "the unconscious, thoughtless rambling which passes back and forth from the one extreme of self-identical self-consciousness to the other extreme of the contingent consciousness that is both bewildered and bewildering".
What one could gather from passages like these is that Hegel takes skepticism to be ineffectual, even frivolous; moreover, conflicted and misguided in its very conception. However, we must read conscientiously in order to make sense of the context in which such statements are made, and to appreciate a fundamental distinction Hegel uses them to draw. This is the distinction between the skepticism he sees as inadequate and his own conception of what he calls "thoroughgoing skepticism". It is not that he sees no value in skepticism or skeptical arguments as such: what he finds unsatisfactory about skepticism, as it had been understood up until then, is its unwillingness to recognize its self-completion. For Hegel, skepticism as it is normally encountered in philosophy is simply not radical enough. What his thoroughgoing skepticism cannot be is a mere suspension of some kinds of belief while others are held fast to dogmatically (e.g. where a base kind of sense immediacy is considered indubitable). Nor can it be a singularly negative stance where the result produced is no more than an insistence upon the impossibility of knowing. Instead, a Hegelian skepticism will be thorough: it will pursue all existing certainties, being satisfied with nothing less than claims with logical necessity. It will also be productive: skeptical inquiry, though in its outset is undeniably negative, yields a positive result insofar as it determines the content upon which that negativity is exercised. By remaining one-sidedly negative, skepticism typically understood fails to recognize its determining, and thereby affirmative, nature.
We now turn to the first part of the argument: the methodological conception of the Phenomenology. It is my hope that what will be gained is an understanding of how Hegel's method of investigation, set out in his introduction, reveals an earnest respect for the issues presented by skepticism. Rather than seeking to attribute attention to a specific skeptical argument or trope to Hegel's process of thinking, I will highlight his insistence upon a skeptical level of rigour in general. What this translates into is a refusal to make use of unjustified assumptions, dogmatic authority, or the arbitrary positing of standards or criteria of adequacy.
The task Hegel sets out for himself in the Phenomenology is to provide justification for the speculative philosophical standpoint. He effectively takes on the question: how can we be justified in philosophizing at all? The fact of absolute knowing, that knowing where cognizing consciousness and cognized object cease to be conceived separately, must be shown to be necessary, before we can begin to make claims about the nature of being. The target of Hegel's analysis is nave, or natural consciousness. The project is a phenomenology insofar as it looks at the way in which the world appears to consciousness, and can thereby examine what consciousness thinks it knows by looking at what consciousness takes its objects to be. Hegel will not tell us what consciousness is, nor will he advance preliminary criteria for the knowledge that is 'absolute' or 'scientific'. What he will do, is ask that we join him in merely looking on as natural consciousness is forced, through its own internal contradictions, to go beyond itself time and time again, until it need not go any further, and has reached absolute knowing. What the process reveals cannot be known ahead of time, and it can justify itself as necessary and warranted only as it progresses. So, in order to begin an inquiry into "the actual cognition of what truly is", Hegel only asks that we begin at the beginning. Quite appropriately, the task of the introduction is then to elucidate what this beginning does and does not entail, and how, once we understand from where we start, we are able to move forward. Or, to be more Hegelian, to prepare to see how what must move itself forward will do so.
What makes Hegel's introduction so challenging for the reader is that he truly does not go past introducing. Here, what seems immediately to be called for, if we are to begin an investigation into the nature of true cognition, is a preliminary criterion by which we are able to make a comparison between our object and a set standard. If there is to be any method to speak of with regard to this project, it seems fair to demand that we are provided with some way of deciding between what is and what is not to be called knowing. For if we don't know how to recognize the cognition that is true, how are we to proceed?
To be sure, Hegel does provide us with the criterion by which we will be able to distinguish actual from merely apparent cognition, but he resolutely refuses to allow that criterion to be the expression of an antecedent decision about what true cognition is. The method of the inquiry need only employ the criterion of consciousness itself. Although Kant had recently made much philosophical hay of the distinction between being-for-another and being-in-itself, the recognition of that distinction as a central problem in epistemology has persisted since Plato's time. Hegel too is aware of the fundamental nature of this division:
The difficulty, then, is that although knowledge is an object for us, we must identify what it is in itself. However, Hegel points out that, insofar as the project of dissociating the two from each other is a project for consciousness, both being-for-another and being-in-itself are for consciousness: "for the distinction made above falls within it". We need not make the futile attempt to somehow go outside or around the back of consciousness in order to grasp knowledge as it is in itself; we need only make a comparison of what are already for consciousness two different moments. "If the comparison shows that these two moments do not correspond to one another, it would seem that consciousness must alter its knowledge to make it conform to the object". The method of the Phenomenology, then, is to first allow the assumptions of natural consciousness, and to look on carefully as that consciousness encounters the inevitable discrepancy between what it takes its objects to be and what they are in themselves, for consciousness. This conflict, and the subsequent alteration of consciousness and its objects as both move into a new relationship of cognition, is the dialectical movement of experience. Hegel is convinced that if we follow what he presents as the 'science of the experience of consciousness', we will see that the standpoint of speculative philosophy, or absolute knowing, is made necessary by the very assumptions with which natural consciousness begins. As we look on at consciousness comparing itself to its object, the criterion it tests will change with each successive form of consciousness; for "what evolves in the Science of Experience is the standard by which the truth-testing is done". Inasmuch as knowing is simply the being of something for-consciousness, we need only ask whether the object is how consciousness takes it to be. And because this comparison takes place entirely within consciousness, the introduction of external criteria would be superfluous. Indeed, "it is precisely when we leave these aside that we succeed in contemplating the matter in hand as it is in and for itself".
It is the conception of this method that inspires comments very much in the spirit of the opening quotes of this essay. For such critics, the framework of the inquiry laid out in Hegel's introduction is a beginning that is all too bare. It does not claim in what way cognition can actually come to terms with being, if it can at all. About knowing itself, it offers only the most minimal identification: the being of something for consciousness. But most strikingly of all, it does not hold up an accepted standard of the in-itself of knowing and promise to anchor the examination with respect to its agreement or disagreement with that standard. The reader is instead asked to faithfully enter a process that claims to contain no promised or fixed result, and can only demonstrate its necessity through its completion. These critics, and defenders of epistemological rigour, charge that Hegel is asking us to begin by merely assuming, and he is asking us to begin without knowing first what truth will guide us.
These objections, however, are entirely mistaken. To be sure, Hegel could have begun his project in quite a different manner. He could have, like Fichte and Schelling, begun with the assertion of the certainty of the Ego. The epistemological project would then have been one of identifying the consciousness of reality with that indubitable consciousness of self. Or, he could have, like Hume, decided from the start that knowing could only be the grasping of that which is incontrovertibly true, leading to the conclusion that any kind of metaphysics beyond tautological statements is impossible. Or, he could have, like Kant, committed himself to the idea that the subject's very way of making sense of the world necessarily precludes her from reaching a knowledge of the way the world is in itself. The problem with these possibilities, for Hegel, is that a demonstration of the necessity of such assertions is in each case lacking. Why ought we assume what any of these positions assume (i.e. that knowledge of the ego is certain, or that the in itself is necessarily cut off from consciousness)? By what authority ought we take any of these standards as 'accepted'? As long as no justification is offered, there is no reason why we should be convinced of its truth, for "one bare assurance is worth just as much as another". More than that, it should be obvious that if Hegel were to set out the conditions of what knowing is before he began, the project itself, as the process of the 'discovery' of what knowing is, would be transparently unnecessary. As Lauer writes, "the determination of such conditions can be only the result not the beginning of a philosophical inquiry - even though the working out of a total philosophical 'system' cannot begin until the results of this investigation are in". Or, as Hegel himself states: "And, with regard to its beginning and advance, it cannot presuppose the method of cognition as one that is already accepted". The reason Hegel at the start gives us no guarantees that his method will be correct, and is not committed at the outset to a particular conception of the nature of true cognition, is that to do either would be to introduce something that has no warrant. His critics take issue with exactly what should put their minds at ease: Hegel 'enters the waters' of the experience of consciousness precisely in the interest of not making antecedent assumptions, and therefore precisely in the interest of epistemological security. To claim, as Baillie does, that for Hegel there was no problem of knowledge, 'whether philosophical or any sort,' is simply wrong. The seeming elusiveness of Hegel's introduction is a reflection of his interest in the immanence of his project, and his method as he sets it out puts him in firm opposition to "those who begin, like a shot from a pistol, from their inner revelation, from faith, intellectual intuition, etc., and who would be exempt from method and logic".
Skepticism opposes dogmatism: it should now be clear that Hegel does as well. The method of the Phenomenology is thoroughly skeptical insofar as it refuses to acknowledge the legitimacy of arbitrary assumptions. His interest in epistemological rigour is not insufficient, as his critics suggest. Hegel's own words make this abundantly clear: "but when we consider something in thought, we soon become aware that thoughtful consideration implies the requirement that the necessity of its content should be shown, and the very being, as well as the determinations, of its ob-jects should be proved".
However, the degree of skepticism's involvement in the Phenomenology is more complex than what has been discussed thus far. Not only does it play a formative role in the method as set out in the introduction, it is also taken up as an essential moment of the dialectical progression of the entire work. A stance of skeptical negativity persists throughout the entire Phenomenology, in the sense that consciousness remains unsatisfied with anything less than full elaboration of implicit consequences of a particular form of consciousness. The overcoming of erroneous certainties, however, is only the negative side to what is wholly a productive movement. For Hegel, skepticism, recognized in its self-completion, is determinate negation: the negation of something previously held to be certain yields not emptiness, but points beyond to a positive and necessary result. We now turn to the transitions of the opening section, 'Consciousness,' in order to gain an understanding of this concept of determinate negation in the text itself.
The Phenomenology begins with consciousness in its most minimal form of knowing: sense-certainty. This is the knowledge of what immediately is, of what is simply there. Here the object is thought to be grasped most truthfully, as what occurs is merely a registering: the object is not at all changed by consciousness' receiving of it, and so accepts it in all its richness and detail as it is in itself. In other words, no distortion by the subject equals no error in cognition. Once this form of consciousness is scrutinized however, we come to see that its "certainty" is in fact an illusion. The immediacy it claims for itself is corrupted insofar as the necessary structure of the experience is actually one of mediation: there is a sensed content only because there is a sensing self, and there is only a sensing self because there is a sensed content. What each is, is mediated by the existence of the other element in the structure. Further, when we ask which of this relationship is the essential moment, the aspect of which it is actually certain, sense-certainty comes into conflict with itself. For what it wants to express is a particular, a singularity that presents itself in sensuous immediacy, such as this object, or here, or now; however, it can only pick these things out by means of universal expressions like 'now,' 'here,' and 'this' which in fact serve to undermine precisely the particularity that it tries to express. Through the very way sense-certainty attempts to remain intimate with the full reality of its object, by maintaining itself as a thoughtless pointing, it effectively frustrates the possibility of grasping the object at all; for it cannot say what it means.
So, from the assumption that immediacy is the most adequate way for consciousness to grasp its object, what emerged was the realization that this kind of immediacy is entirely indeterminate. The truth of sense-certainty is not the particular, but the universal. Through the negation of the adequacy of sense-certainty, or the negation of the 'This', we are necessarily forced to move on to a more sufficient form of consciousness, one which takes up the truth of the one just negated, i.e. takes up its object as a universal. The dialectical movement is "at once a negating and a preserving," as we are propelled from sense-certainty to perception.
The object of perception is no longer the immediate 'this-here-now' of sense-certainty, presented as unrelated sense-data, but is rather grasped as a 'thing' that is mediated by numerous universal properties, which belong to it. The object is no longer the way it is because of some sort of intending or pointing on behalf of the subject, but is seen as manifesting a certain number of common properties which serve to determine it (e.g. the thing is spherical, white, salty, etc.). The test at this level is the same as at the previous one: we take a long hard look at the form consciousness has taken and wait to see if, through the unfolding of its own position, it can maintain its integrity. The more particular question in front of consciousness is now: can perception individualize its object? First, these determining properties are common insofar as they are not only to be found in this thing, but in other different things as well (a grain of salt is white, but other things are also white without being a grain of salt). Also, it is only the 'thing-ness' of the thing that is responsible for the gathering together of what are in themselves independent and indifferent properties; the thing is 'this' and also 'this' without those properties affecting each other. Perception's way of grasping its object, however, leads it into contradiction. Consciousness perceives an object as a singular thing distinct from other things. However, the properties which make the thing what it is are universal, and so are properties of many things; hence, the thing's supposed singularity comes into conflict with the universality of its constituting properties. Further, although these properties are understood to be determinate, i.e. they in themselves exclude their opposite, there are many properties in that one thing that do not exclude each other. Perception's object is at once exclusive and not-exclusive. What perception lacks is an ability to grasp a thing with universal properties that are nonetheless inextricably related to one another, which only then would serve to determine it as 'this thing and no other.' As long as the properties of a thing are thought of as independent of one another, consciousness will never be able to account for how universal properties can determine a thing in its unique identity.
The dialectic continues: perception's inability to determine its object points us forward. Its object manifests itself to the senses as a group of properties, but perception's status as a mere "spectator consciousness" leaves this object rife with contradictions that cannot be resolved. Only if the interrelationship of these universal properties can be grasped will the object be determined as individual; only if the thing can be understood as an instance of a class of objects. Perception, however, because it is still tied to sensuous presentation, cannot furnish the level of universality needed for the employment of concepts. It is only with concepts that the nature of the thing and all its interrelated properties can be explained; mere percepts will never explain themselves. This further stage of mediation, of "unconditioned universality" is the truth of perception, and can only be taken up by a more adequate form of consciousness: understanding.
We are now in a position to reflect upon what Hegel presents to us. What in each case occurs is that consciousness makes a claim or takes up a stance towards its object and effectively says: 'in this way I know'. Along with Hegel, 'we' grant this presumption without prejudice and simply observe the making explicit of implicit commitments in the position that consciousness has adopted. And yet, in a sense the relationship between 'us' and consciousness is simultaneously observational and critical. It is as if 'we' are witnessing consciousness being subjected to the interrogating skeptic: rather than undermining the other's position by appealing to a dogmatically held principle that is 'more veridical' than one's opponent, consciousness is shown that its undoing comes from within itself - in other words, immanently.
It is this critical or skeptical moment that at each level of consciousness brings forth the contradictions inherent in the claim to knowledge being made, and thus forces consciousness to move on away from that which is unsatisfactory. For Hegel, this is necessarily the "way of despair", for "our phenomenological attention to the dialectic of experience constantly results in the breaking down of our familiar sense of self-identity and the loss of our familiar foundations and guarantees within experience". As we saw from sense-certainty to perception and from perception to understanding, consciousness proceeds by becoming aware of a difference - the difference between knowledge and its object. Neither is adequate to the other, and so consciousness attempts to eliminate that difference through negation. It is that skeptical consciousness, recognizing that "the finite is not restricted merely from the outside; rather it sublates itself by virtue of its own nature, and passes over, of itself, into its opposite," that propels observed consciousness onward through the work, for without it, "the thinker would never allow the dialectical moment to transpire". Again, it must be stressed that the advance of the work does not arise from the defeat of a previous position by a more adequate one, imposed from without, but is rather the result of the dissolution of a position when pressed on its own terms. "It does not bring about its own theory, but merely serves as a principle to detect contradictions, negate them, and move on from them". The Phenomenology proceeds by virtue of the skeptical moment; Westphal expresses it thus: "the "need" for knowledge to "go out beyond itself" is a matter of consciousness detecting a discrepancy between its conception of the object and the object for it and revising its conceptions in light of this discrepancy. Manifest discrepancies are the motor of the dialectic, and hence the source of a 'need'".
Our understanding of the progress of the dialectic remains general. What still needs to be clarified, however, is how exactly the abandoning of a position shown to be inadequate leads to the form of consciousness that it does?
We took notice early on of the way in which Hegel separated his 'thoroughgoing' skepticism with skepticism typically understood. Here the nature of this distinction becomes essential to our discussion. The problem with standard skepticism, according to Hegel, was its insistence upon only the negative. In Sextus Empiricus, the skeptic's achievement is merely "the state of quietude in respect of matter of opinion"; the skeptic's tacit conviction being "that all belief is unreasonable". This paralysis in the face of knowledge, and insistence upon sheer nothingness as a final conclusion, is for Hegel unacceptable. "Skepticism deduces no result, nor does it express its negation as anything positive". What it overlooks is that the so-called nothingness that results from skepticism is not in fact an empty nothing. The nothing which results is determined by that which has been negated as that content is preserved and elevated in it. It has a content and thus a positive result. This principle, whereby negation itself points beyond to a new content, Hegel calls determinate negation.
So, negation works to move the dialectic forward, and to move consciousness to a more adequate form, in a specific way. Indeed, the immanence of the whole project depends on this idea that the next step is pointed to necessarily out of the very dissolution of the present one (i.e. that it is not introduced from without). And this is precisely what we saw from sense-certainty to understanding. Just as it is in the very way consciousness takes its object that causes it to become mired in contradiction, it is the very way in which each form fails that fixes the character of the next attempt, for "in the negation the transition has been made". Determinate negation is not an unwarranted addition onto a contradictory concept, but is rather the realization that the dialectical progression from one concept to another is driven from within the concepts themselves; "the new content is not deduced, but always has proven itself already to be that which endures the severity of contradiction". As Harris writes, it is a "systematic progression towards absolute knowledge through the reflective criticism of the forms of belief which present themselves in a genetically necessary sequence - i.e. a sequence in which the breakdown of each form of consciousness leaves the germ of the next one as its natural residue". For Hegel, this is skepticism taken to its limit, or seen in its self-completion.
Taken up this way in the Phenomenology, as both a regulating consciousness in the conception of its method, and as the principle of progression through its dialectical turns, it is not difficult to see how profoundly involved skepticism is in Hegel's entire project. Considering even the brief explanations offered here, the idea that Hegel was careless with regard to epistemology becomes increasingly implausible. To claim either that the rigour of justification and necessity was unimportant in his work, or that he took no interest in the issues of skepticism, is contradicted by close attention to the works themselves. Hegel takes skepticism seriously; but, he does not allow it to paralyze philosophy. Indeed, "Hegel contends that skepticism's target is dogmatism, not philosophy, for skepticism, rightly understood, is a permanent element in genuine speculative philosophy". This conviction to incorporate skepticism in philosophy, to recognize opposition and negation in their determinateness, had persisted in Hegel's thought several years before the Phenomenology was even begun. We need only look to his 1802 essay "On the Relationship of Skepticism to Philosophy, Exposition of its Different Modifications and Comparison of the Latest Form with the Ancient One", to see this clearly. It is there that he writes: "skepticism itself is in its innermost heart at one with every true philosophy".