Oligodendroglia cells are held in the sheath of Schwann, which covers myelin and provides insulation to the neurons in the central nervous system. The axon of each neuron is protected by a myelin sheath, this ensures the transmission of signals and allows nerve impulses to be propagated to the next neuron. This mylelination has a strong impact on behaviours as it profoundly increases the velocity of nerve impulses and thereby affects the temporal order of events in the nervous system (Biological Psychology, 2002, p. 69). Normal transmissions are so fast and automatic that it is hard to accept a delay between a thought and a muscle contraction. The speed of nerve conduction due to the presence of the oligodendroglia cells is up to approximately 260 miles per hour (Psychology 5 th ed., 1999 p.51). The myelin sheath around the axon is made up from 2 principle proteins, the myelin basic protein and the proteolipid protein.
Without the oligodendroglia cells forming myelin, nerve signals would become slowed or even completely blocked, thus causing symptoms of Multiple Sclerosis. In MS T-cells from the immune system become sensitised to the myelin basic protein and begin to attack it, this causes the body to try and repair the situation. Therefore in the initial stages of MS the oligodendroglia cells are not destroyed, but produce more myelin to compensate for the myelin being attacked. This causes the symptoms of MS to disappear, but only until the myelin degenerates again.
In later stages of MS the oligodendroglia cells are destroyed, this produces multiple demyelinated areas on the axons of the neurons and eventually a person with MS develops areas of scarring where the healthy myelin once used to be. These areas of scaring cause lesions to appear in seemingly random areas of the CNS white matter and because the severity of MS depends on the location and extent to which these lesions occur, the type of symptoms can vary ().
Myelination slows down the speed of conduction of neural impulses and thus can cause slowness of movement and loss of sensory abilities (Biological Psychology, 2002, p. 69). Also with the insulation gone, the messages being carried by the axons are no longer kept separate and this results in the sensory disorders and the loss of muscular control (Physiology Of Behaviour, 1991 p.29). Other symptoms of multiple sclerosis include numbness, difficulty with speech, muscle spasms and coordination problems. These problems with movement occur because the loss of the oligodendroglia cells weaken the electrical impulses from the brain and sometimes fail to transmit them at all.
The fusiform gyrus can be found in the medial part of the occipital lobe situated in the right temporal lobe. It is used in performing sensory discrimination of emotional stimuli and the activation of the fusiform has been reported during the perception of faces. Also several studies have demonstrated that a particular region within the fusiform gyrus, the fusiform face area, responds in a highly selective way to face stimuli. The fusiform gyrus has more than one function, it holds the functional region responsible for colour, and is used in the identification of faces and in the recognition of facial expressions ().
Damage to the fusiform gyrus can disrupt an individual's ability to retrieve information especially visual memories, such as the remembered face of a friend. If a tumour destroys the fusiform gyrus of the right temporal lobe then the left visual field will be affected. A lesion in the fusiform gyrus is associated with the loss of colour perception; this is known a central achromatopsia. Patients are usually aware of the deficit and report the world as being grey or 'dirty' and it can also affect one colour more than another (braincampus.com).
Another consequence of damage to the fusiform gyrus is prosopagnosia; this is a disorder where the patient is unable recognise faces. Patients can identify faces but they do not recognise whose face is present before them, they may not even recognise their own face in the mirror. Prosopagnosia involves both the temporal and parietal lobes but mainly originates from damage to the fusiform gyrus. Even though patients have difficulty in recognising faces there is a marked difference if a face is made psychologically 'stronger' by for example, presenting faces that are linked. Patients with prosopagnosia may also have difficulty in distinguishing between particular objects of the same class, e.g. makes of cars (Physiology Of Behaviour, 1991, p.187).
The fusiform gyrus is also related to facial expressions. A person with a damaged fusiform gyrus also has problems in recognising facial expressions of basic emotions and my find it difficult distinguishing between anger and frustration.
The substantia nigra is a group of neurons in the region of the midbrain whose axons go to the basal ganglia. The cell bodies of the dopamine system lie within this region and are involved in motor control via the basal ganglia and in particular to the striatum cells of the substantia nigra. The nerve cells in the substantia nigra communicate with other cells on the nearby striatum by releasing the neurotransmitter dopamine at the nerve terminals, which is also synthesised there and is the area of the brain that controls movement and balance (). The basal ganglia usually impose constraints on motor control, but the absence of these constraints yields persistent excess of movement or slowness of movement and marked changes in muscle tone (Biological Psychology, 2002, p.352).
The degeneration of the cells in the substantia nigra causes involuntary repetitive movements of the hand and arm, now known as Parkinson's disease. The cell bodies of dopamine that originate in the substantia nigra are no longer produced if the cells in the substantia nigra degenerate, this therefore causes a pronounced decrease in the dopamine content of the basal ganglia.
People with Parkinson's disease inexplicably lose more than 80% of the dopamine producing cells in the substantia nigra (). Without dopamine the substantia nigra striatum cannot send out certain messages as they are unable to travel across the nerve connection, and it is this that leads to Parkinson's. The disease is described as a severe disorder of movement that involves tremors of the fingers, slowness of movement and problems with maintaining posture. There can also be a loss of facial muscle tone and general difficulty in all motor efforts. There are many symptoms for Parkinson's disease but they vary substantially from person to person, making diagnosis quite difficult.
L-dopa (the precursor to dopamine) is administered to increase levels of dopamine in the brain in order to reduce the symptoms of Parkinson's disease. L-dopa enhances dopamine levels of the surviving cells but because the cell bodies in the brain stem degenerate, dopamine-containing terminals also disappear. Eventually too few dopamine-containing neurons remain in the substantia nigra to be influenced by the intake of L-dopa (Biological Psychology, 2002, p.353). Therefore L-dopa only relieves the symptoms and because the degeneration of the substantia nigra is progressive, there is no cure as yet. Recent reports have suggested that a more permanent cure would be to transplant new dopamine neurons from embryonic brains (Principles Of Biopsychology, 2001, p.26).
The mamillary bodies receive information from the hippocampus and are reciprocally connected to the anterior thalamic nucleus and the midbrain. These structures seem to play an important role in the memory process and have been described as 'a narrow funnel through which connections from the midbrain as well as the temporal lobe neo cortex and limbic system gain access to the frontal lobes.' (Mair et al., 1979).
Korsakoff's syndrome occurs due to neuronal loss in the mamillary bodies and is associated with cell shrinkage in a particular nucleus of the thalamus and the mamillary bodies. Mairal. (1979) examined 2 Korskoff patients and found that both brains showed shrunken, diseased mamillary bodies. It is distinguished by confusion and a deficit in storing new information (anterograde amnesia). This type of amnesia is usually caused by chronic alcoholism. The alcohol prevents the liver from metabolising the vitamin thiamine, which causes a thiamine deficiency, which in turn leads to the breakdown and loss of neurons, and because neurons are not replaced the damage is irreversible. Therefore Korsakoff's involves a progressive degeneration of brain tissue (Principles Of Biopsychology, 2001, p.88).
The dysfunction of the mamillary bodies causes the patient to fail to recall many items or events in the past, if the item is presented again, the patient does not feel familiar with it. They often show disorientation to time and place and may confabulate (fill a gap in memory with a falsification that they seem to accept as true) (Biological Psychology, 2002, p.541). Patients with this disorder usually suffer from some retrograde amnesia as well, but their primary deficit is the inability to store any new information in long-term memory. The symptoms are similar to those of people with damage to the prefrontal cortex, including apathy, confusion and memory impairment.
Like most patients with damage to the frontal-lobes, Korsakoff's patients have trouble recalling the temporal order of events, for example they cannot recall which of a series of world events happened the furthest in the past or which one happened most recently, they also can not recall which events from their own lives happened a long time ago and which ones happened recently.
Treatment with thiamine can sometimes improve the conditions, but the longer a person has remained thiamine deficient before treatment, the poorer the chances for recovery.