It is the method of the phenomenological reduction that distinguished Husserl from all others. Not only did he spend his entire career carefully writing further and further elaboration of its proper conception, but although many of his students took on the general idea of the reductions and incorporated it into their own work, not one followed him in its complete application. In fact, by the end of his life, Husserl's students had all to some degree or another turned away from his teachings, being convinced that Husserl had taken phenomenology down an overly idealist path. Now, it is obvious from the opening quote that the charge of idealism would be readily admitted by Husserl himself. From as early as Ideas 1, Husserl began to argue that the only possible conclusion to be taken from the phenomenological method was that of transcendental idealism. And although he maintained this position with increasing conviction for the remainder of his life, at the same time he maintained that by this he was taking no stance on metaphysics, or at least not an idealist metaphysical stance. He explicitly fought against his work being interpreted along the lines of idealism typically conceived (i.e. Berkeylan idealism), seeing his own contribution as staying within the realm of epistemology.
Despite Husserl's insistence to the contrary, the charge of metaphysical idealism can still be argued for convincingly. Roman Ingarden, in his work On the Motives which led Husserl to Transcendental Idealism, takes up precisely this issue. In this paper, I will first explain Husserl's reduction in terms of his philosophical project as a whole, its role as key methodological tool becoming apparent. Second, I will argue, following some of the criticisms laid out by Ingarden in Motives, that the reduction in the way Husserl conceived of it, can and must be interpreted as taking a particular metaphysical stance: an idealistic one. It will be crucial, in order to fully understand Ingarden's criticisms, and to do as much justice to Husserl as possible, to come to grips with how this idealism is unique, and therefore not to be confused with a Berkeleyan-style metaphysical idealism. Despite the fact that Husserl denied vehemently that he was committed to any metaphysical position, idealistic or otherwise, it will become clear that Ingarden's criticisms are justified, and that, acknowledged by Husserl or not, the reduction not only suggests, but insists significant metaphysical implications.
Although Ingarden is by no means the originator of the interpretation of Husserl as a metaphysical idealist, I have chosen his work for two reasons. First, Ingarden was for many years a student of Husserl, considered for much of that time to be Husserl's favourite. From this we can fairly expect that Ingarden had excellent opportunity to gain a sophisticated grasp of Husserl's work. Second, Ingarden was for his entire career centrally concerned with the idealism/realism debate, his thoughts made fully manifest in his magnum opus Controversy over the Existence of the World. The problem of idealism is not Ingarden's side project; it is the driving issue of his philosophical career. What this adds up to, in my mind, is a potentially more interesting and worthwhile critic. Indeed, I take Ingarden's critique to be based on a sound and charitable reading of Husserl, and I think he quite rightly elaborates (what he argues to be) inevitable metaphysical conclusions.
I will first offer only the briefest of sketches of Husserl's over-arching philosophical concerns before getting to the reduction in detail.
Influenced heavily by his early career in mathematics, as well as the reigning ideal of scientific objectivity, Husserl's goal was to set up for cognition absolute foundations. Philosophy, as the investigation into the meaning of being, and thus the most ultimate human discipline, must, for Husserl, identify itself with the scientific ideal, i.e. it must be objective and apodictic. What this demands is "the demonstration of an absolutely certain, indubitable philosophical cognition and the elaboration of a method of inquiry that may be systematically employed in order to ensure the validity of such cognition". Through the method he spent his entire life carefully elaborating, he believed to have established a way to provide clear and incontrovertible evidence for and thereby knowledge of that which is. Phenomenology, and its method of the reduction, was the only philosophy to achieve this standard.
The term 'phenomenology' refers back to Kantian terminology, where the phenomenon is taken as reality-appearing-to-consciousness, as opposed to the noumenon, or the realm of being of reality-as-it-is-in-itself. Generally, then, phenomenology refers to an investigation into the data given in consciousness, to be distinguished from speculative or non-immanent philosophizing. It purports to be a method of describing, rather than explaining or positing, the contents of consciousness; the contents being given as a result of consciousness' intentionality. The phenomena themselves are constituted by the directedness-towards that is the activity of consciousness.
Now, this perhaps would not be a significant enterprise if we were to take over the Kantian skeptical attitude. By this I mean the prejudice that the true being of anything, how it is in itself, is necessarily to be found only outside of consciousness. Clearly, taking on this belief would exclude phenomenology from succeeding in describing the real essence of any one of its objects of investigation. However, phenomenology as a whole takes its beginning in the conviction that, contrary to Kant, the essences of things are to be found in reality as it appears to consciousness. "He agrees with [Kant] in asserting that only phenomena are given, but he will claim that in them is given the very essence of that which is". If, then, the very essence of a thing is contained in the experience of that thing, we need only find a way of exploiting the immanence of experience in order to describe with absolute certainty the way being must be. It is for this task that a phenomenological method is required. And it is to the task of elucidating Husserl's method that we now turn. As Merleau-Ponty assures us, "[p]henomenology is accessible only through a phenomenological method".
Husserl asks us to begin, as phenomenology should, with the immediate experience that consciousness makes. In the first:
It is this awareness that Husserl terms the natural standpoint or natural attitude; named as such because it is the stance towards our world that we naturally take. In it, the world as spatial, temporal, and most of all immediate entity is always already in front of us, and we accept this experience uncritically. As long as we are in the natural standpoint, the world is simply and constantly there for me; and we understand ourselves as the ones experiencing it. It can be called 'nave' insofar as the question of the existence of this world, i.e. whether or not it really exists, or really exists in the way that it exists for me, is simply not an issue. Through all practical matters, whether mundane acts of sensation, or complex physical experiments, the fact of the world's there-ness is perpetually and tacitly accepted.
Now, it is Husserl's claim that the essence of things can be found in the phenomena: in how the world appears to consciousness. And since the essence of something is the way that something is, irrespective of any element of contingency, knowledge of the essence of something is knowledge with objective validity. This is the only kind of knowledge with which Husserl takes an interest. "In order, then, that there be an "essential" knowledge of things, it becomes necessary both that consciousness be viewed minus the contingent functions which accompany it and that the essences of things be disengaged from all that which is simply accidental to them". It is contingency that Husserl sees present in the natural standpoint, and so in order for his phenomenological method to be successful, it is from this natural standpoint that we must become "disengaged".
He asks that we begin by altering our attitude in a radical way. We do not deny what the natural standpoint posits; we do not replace a positive judgment about the world's existing with a negative one. It is very important, he insists, that we do not seek to alter our convictions in such a way. Rather, without changing the nature of the standpoint itself, "we, so to speak, "put it out of action" we "exclude it," we "parenthesize it"" . This Husserl calls the phenomenological epoche, a Greek word meaning a reservation of judgment about a particular issue. Our beliefs about the world are put to one side and must cease to play any influence in our thought.
A crucial clarification must be emphasized: the epoche is not an eliminating of factual existence or any kind of doubt about the world's existence as such. What is eliminated, however, is any kind of position regarding factual existence. Husserl wants us to set to one side the convictions of the natural standpoint because they are simply assumed: which means they are not necessarily warranted. To replace a positive belief in existence with a negative one would be to change one's belief, indeed, but it would not change the fact that it too is an assumption.
Along with the need to stand boldly aloof from our convictions about the existence of the world, we also make no use of any other theoretical presuppositions concerning it. This means that the theoretical entities of the natural sciences (this term is used as loosely as possible) are excluded from phenomenological description. All those pursuits driven towards the explaining of the real, or as Husserl often calls it, the transcendent world, are left out. These 'transcendencies,' such as logic, math, culture and religion, become no longer available to the phenomenologist.
The result of this epoche, once enacted, is that the world becomes present to us as pure phenomenon. It appears to us in an entirely different way, as we look on it with 'new eyes'. Instead of its appearing simply being the background to our practical pursuits, we now attend to the very fact of its appearing. It presents itself vividly as something of which we have a re-awakened basic experience; it is something that persists, insists, and claims to be; however, we now refrain from passing judgment on the truth of any claims of this sort. As Husserl says, we abstract from our presumptions, and
It is from this point that the reductions begin. The exact number and distinctness of each of the reductions is a point of considerable ambiguity in Husserl's texts. In no one place is the whole process mapped out in full completeness, and even where sections are explained, clarity remains an issue. I propose to divide the full reduction into three main steps: the psychological, the eidetic, and the transcendental. It is hoped that these divisions will serve well enough to relate the important results of the reduction as a whole, and that this aim will redeem the passing over of certain more complicated details.
The first step in this gradual movement concerns the purification of the psychological sphere. As was remarked above, the enactment of the epoche allows the world and its objects to appear to consciousness in their pure phenomenality; we undertake an investigation into what things are without taking any position that things are. The psychological reduction, as each reduction does, leads us back to a realm of more pure being, towards objective truth. At this particular step, our attention is lead back to the subject in its very attending. We disengage ourselves from the actual object of our attention and look at the subject's looking at the world. This is considered to be a purification because we are led away from the world and towards the activity of consciousness; it is a move away from the multiplicity and contingency of the transcendent world. It is Husserl's belief that the truth of things is not to be found in the transcendent world at all, but can only be found in consciousness.
The next level of reduction is called the eidetic. The term comes from the Greek word eidos, often translated as the act of seeing, or the appearance of something. Here our attention is turned from a subject's looking at the world to the very way of appearing done by the world. Again, we are not concerned with what exists, only with how it exists to the consciousness whose intending it is: "it looks at consciousness precisely insofar as its essence is to be consciousness-of something". It is through this attention to the mode of appearing that an object does that allows us to make use of the phenomenological technique of ideation. If the essence of something is what it is as unchanging or universal, and the essence of things are available to us through the phenomena, then in order to uncover the essence of a thing, we need to find out what is unchanging in the way it appears to consciousness.
The technique of ideation is a process which employs the imagination in order to subject the appearing of any one thing to a play of free variation. We imagine all the ways in which this thing could appear differently while still remaining what it was to begin with. For example, a book sits next to me on my desk. I experience it with particular aspectual characteristics which are unique to this experience: I see it as a book with a cover, as blue, with binding. The book would not be experienced the same way if its orientation with respect to me and my desk were altered. I submit the book to ideation, and therefore ask, in what way can this book be changed while still remaining a book? With both thorough reflection and imagination, we gradually discover what the essence of not this book, but book, as such, must be. Questions such as the following could be asked: Can it have no pages? Could it simply be papers in a binder? Must it be of a certain length? Could it be a pamphlet? Could it be a manuscript?
What emerges as the invariants in these exercises in ideation is the essence of whatever is under investigation, and it emerges as such through an act of intuition or 'seeing'. After a number of variations, which will depend entirely on the object in question, the essence is simply grasped immediately as the identical element. This is not to be understood, as Quentin Lauer puts it, as "an irrational leap beyond the data of experience. Rather it is intended as a rational penetration into the data of experience". Just where this essence is constituted however, remains to be seen, in the next reduction.
It is by the transcendental reduction that we come to understand the source of the object's meaning. Having said this, it is not to be taken as discovering only the source of the meaning of the object while the object itself has some other source. For Husserl, an object is truly object-as-meaning. It is not transcendent object, but rather object-for-consciousness, object-as-phenomena, which both amount to the same thing. It is because Husserl's understanding of object is none other than object-as-meaning that we can come to see, in the transcendental reduction, that the source of all meaning is the constitutive activities of consciousness' intentionality. This transcendental ego, in its essential mode of relatedness, constitutes the very meaning unities that appear in phenomena as intentional objects.
We must take notice of an important distinction: transcendental subjectivity constitutes its objects; it does not create them. Husserl does not espouse a kind of total idealism where the reality of transcendent objects springs from the very activity of consciousness. For him, the transcendent world of objects is there, the world does exist; however, the only world available to consciousness, and thereby for phenomenological, objective cognition, is the world-as-meaning. This 'seeing' that the phenomenological reduction facilitates is objective precisely because what is 'seen' is essential, and therefore necessary. For Husserl, to be essential and to be objective is the same: being that endures as identical despite plurality, perspective, or contingency.
Although Husserl never makes it explicit that the above methodological ideas occur in a chronological sequence proper, we are to take each as a necessary contribution to the phenomenological method as a whole. It is only when precisely these techniques are combined that the knowledge Husserl seeks can be accessed:
Having remarked above that Husserl does not support a position that sees objects as springing directly from the activities of consciousness, it may be wondered in what way then it is justified to attribute to him the position of metaphysical idealism. Yet this is precisely the position taken up by Roman Ingarden in his work On the Motives which led Husserl to Transcendental Idealism. Once his criticism has been developed, as it will be in the following, it will become clear that Ingarden is indeed justified in making this claim, and that Husserl is in fact committed to some form of idealism, and that this is inextricably tied to his making a metaphysical claim. For our purposes here, we will restrict ourselves to looking at how Husserl's conception of the reduction itself leads inevitably to an idealist conclusion.
Throughout his whole life, Husserl consistently denied that his phenomenology committed him to an idealist metaphysics. Although Ingarden argues that precisely this implication cannot be avoided, we would do well to note that Husserl did make it clear that he in no way supports idealism as it understood historically. The following two passages from Ideas 1 are illuminating on this point:
And indeed Ingarden does not propose that Husserl is claiming that the transcendent world of things is purely a construction of consciousness. As it has been emphasized in the previous, that at the very beginning of the phenomenological reduction Husserl expressly forbids himself from making any judgments about the fact of the existence of the transcendent world, it would certainly amount to no criticism at all if we were to suggest that he is in fact denying the existence of reality in this way. But there is a further subtlety to this distinction between realism and idealism that Ingarden points out:
It is just to this point that we must pay close attention: in order to justifiably attribute any sort of idealism to Husserl, the evidence is to be found in the  way in which the 'material' world, for him, exists.
The question of the reduction is precisely the question of the demonstration of indubitable knowledge about the sense of the real world. Through the initial epoche, our presuppositions about the world are set aside, in order that we can proceed, through the steps of the reduction, to an increasingly pure encounter with and therefore knowledge of the world as it appears to consciousness. The absolute being discovered in the transcendental ego, responsible for the constitution of all meaning, is to be contrasted with the realm of the transcendent - i.e. the world of things, taken by Husserl to be ultimately relative and contingent. Along with his understanding of the essential being of objects as being exclusively in the realm of consciousness, Husserl goes so far even to say that anything, insofar as it does not exist for-consciousness, is nothing:
What Husserl here denies is the existence of an 'in-itself' outside of the way phenomena appear to consciousness. Because Kant recognized this realm as existing, and containing in it the real being of things, he was forced to the skeptical conclusion that a complete knowledge of something as it is 'in itself' will always be impossible. For Berkeley, the problem of somehow bridging a gap between knowledge-for-consciousness and knowledge-in-itself is simply not an issue: consciousness and world are essentially identical. In something of a peculiar combination of the two, Husserl holds that the objects are out there, but they are not in themselves outside of consciousness. Object-for-consciousness and object-in-itself are not opposing terms: they are the exact same thing. "[O]ne must not let oneself be deceived by speaking of the physical thing as transcending consciousness or as "existing in itself". The objects of the transcendent world are not denied existence; rather, they are denied autonomy.
Indeed, the reduction as conceived by Husserl requires such a position regarding the 'in itself'. It proceeds successfully on the presumption that the world as knowable is precisely and exclusively the world of consciousness. The phenomenologist begins at the transcendent world, and the phenomena that they become as presented to consciousness, but the penetration towards true cognition ends at the realm of the ideal: in absolute constituting subjectivity. Despite the fact that Husserl insisted that the reduction does not lead us away from the concrete manifestations of the world in any way, it is to be wondered whether this is not the issue exactly. Instead of taking up the world of objects, the reduction involves only objects as experienceable, objectivities-as-meaning. As Ingarden points out, this means Husserl is
It is in order to escape the prejudice of dogmatic assumptions that we make no appeal to the transcendent world in our investigations, but as long as the definitive result of the reduction is transcendental subjectivity, the only world relevant for Husserl's objective cognition is the world of consciousness.
Now it could be objected at this point that Ingarden's criticisms are based on an unwarranted conflation of two realms that Husserl keeps distinct: the realm of knowing and the realm of being. Another way of saying this would be that Ingarden is confusing epistemological idealism with metaphysical idealism. Husserl is not making metaphysical claims, the objection would read, because the reduction only leads to conclusions about the world that we can know. There is no denial of the being of the 'real', external world. Thus, the reduction's implications are solely epistemological: all he is saying is that the only world of which we can have indubitable knowledge is the one constituted by consciousness.
The problem with such an objection is that it makes use of an overly simplistic characterization of idealism. For such a criticism to stand, making a metaphysically idealistic claim must amount to a denial of the actual being of the world outside of consciousness. However, one can assert the general existence of the world and still be a metaphysical idealist. In order to avoid a skeptical conclusion of the Kantian variety, Husserl cannot accept that the 'in itself' is outside the bounds of consciousness. Instead, the 'in itself' is literally divorced from the world. The physical world is ultimately unknowable, but not in the same way that it is for Kant. For Husserl, it need not concern us that we cannot go outside consciousness, for what is to be known outside of consciousness is not the object as it is 'in itself'. And despite the epistemological aim of such a move, there is no way Husserl can maintain it and metaphysical realism or neutrality at the same time. To say that there is no autonomous world 'in itself' outside the realm of consciousness is to deny a moment of existence, and this is more than an epistemological claim - it is a metaphysical one. It is a claim regarding not only knowability, but also the being of both the transcendent world and the knowable world. The evidence is in Husserl's own clear statements. The transcendent world exists, but it exists in such a way that it essentially lacks independence:
It is in this sense, then, and not in the Berkeleyan sense, that Ingarden interprets Husserl as a metaphysical idealist. And although it is different from idealism typically understood, it is undeniably an idealist stance: 'being' is made dependent upon 'being experienced'.
It should now be clear that Husserl's denial of metaphysical idealism is contradicted by significant evidence in his own works to the extent that we can call seriously into question the justification for such a denial. By his conviction that rigorous philosophy must take as its objects of investigation only the experiences of consciousness, Husserl established the phenomenological reduction as the way in which we can immanently describe the contents of those experiences, thereby producing knowledge which is absolutely certain. However, because Husserl's reduction functions to abstract from the objects of the transcendent world to the meaning-contents of intentional acts, and because such meaning is determined to be constituted solely through transcendental subjectivity, Ingarden is convinced that there is no way Husserl can avoid committing himself to the claim that the 'in itself' is to be found solely in the realm of consciousness. By directly restricting the being of the 'in itself' to the being of the ideal realm, and by making the transcendent world a mere intentional correlate of consciousness, that commitment in turn forces undeniably metaphysical implications. As Mitscherling summarizes:
Despite Husserl's maintaining otherwise, Ingarden persuasively demonstrates that the phenomenological reduction, as Husserl conceived it, "forbids the return to the objects appearing through the analyzed phenomena", the objects of the transcendent world being replaced entirely by their meaning-structure, affirmed as real 'in themselves' only insofar as they are experienced by consciousness.