Of all the ideas most often celebrated as Nietzschean in origin, there are perhaps none that receive as little explicit discussion as does the idea of perspectivism. In fact, as a singular position put forth to capture various attitudes regarding knowledge and morality, perspectivism is thematized only once in his completed works, and twice in the posthumous notes published under the title The Will to Power. Despite the scant mention of the position itself, the idea of perspectivism is really a very central notion in Nietzsche's thought. Indeed, the fact that the position itself is so seldom the subject of discussion is, paradoxically, an expression of its importance. In what follows we will see how support of perspectivism necessarily complicates the mode in which it is presented. I will then argue that Nietzsche's method of inquiry, as well as the various styles he employs as an author, are in direct response to these complications.
Generally, perspectivism is the view that one's values, goals, bias, interpretations, or perspective are all necessary for, rather than impediments to, knowledge. In maintaining this, Nietzsche stands opposed to all those philosophers whose theory of knowledge holds up disinterested and value-free as true knowledge's chief virtues. For him, the intellect is not an impersonal faculty that seeks out those truths that exist independently of the knower, but is tied intimately to the drives, needs, and instincts of the human animal. The intellect is put into action in service of the desires of the dominant will of its owner - what Nietzsche calls their will to power. Thus what the intellect conceives is never an independent thing 'the way it is in itself', but rather something that is essentially related to the will, an expression of a particular perspective. As he writes, "this necessary perspectivism by virtue of which every center of force - and not only man - construes all the rest of the world from its own viewpoint, i.e., measures, feels, forms, according to its own force". The important point here is that Nietzsche is not only claiming perspective to be a powerful force in personalizing the knowledge which each acquires, as though before the application of such a perspective the thing known does have a way of existing 'in itself', as though perspective was most accurately thought of as a measure of distortion. Perspective does not simply re-orientate already perceived moments into a more satisfying way of seeing; it is perspective which constitutes the very act of perception itself. In other words, to perceive is necessarily to perceive as something; to know is necessarily to know as something, where this 'as' points to that thing's relation to the will. Thus there is no pure perception or knowledge, as the very condition for any knowledge is that it bears some relation to some will's ends - knowledge is essentially interested. The 'apparent' world, informed by perspective, is not a distortion of the world 'in itself' for this latter world simply is not:
To speak of something's 'real' nature as a separate quality from its appearance is nonsense. Deleuze writes: "there is no truth that, before being a truth, is not the bringing into effect of [...] a value". If perspective or interpretation is taken away, no knowledge remains.
However, perspectivism generates for Nietzsche two paradoxes. First, Nietzsche's works contain many different but related views and concepts, perspectivism being one of them. It only makes sense to assume that he presents such views as the eternal return, the will to power, or the corruption of Christianity in some degree of seriousness. That is to say, Nietzsche must write what he does because he thinks that his views are (to use an equivocal and volatile word), true. Not only that, but the fact that he writes at all would seem to suggest that the dissemination of his views, thereby taking on the role of teacher, is part of his goal. The question that must be asked in light of this is the following: if Nietzsche does take his own views to be true, then how is this consistent with his perspectivism? If every view is only an interpretation, then must this not apply to his views as well? Does he not thereby effectively undermine his authority as a physician of culture? If, on the contrary, he does not take his views to be true, then we are faced with a more perplexing question: why did he bother to write at all? While this paradox arises out of the recognition that the tenet of perspectivism ought to apply to the writer espousing it, the second paradox focuses on the result of perspectivism turning on itself as a doctrine. The problem is straightforward: if perspectivism is correct, then every view is indeed an interpretation, since disinterested objective truths are a fiction. If every view is an interpretation, then perspectivism itself is an interpretation, meaning that it stands alongside many other possible and diverse interpretations. Thus, perspectivism is possibly incorrect, and every view is perhaps not an interpretation. The position would seem to undermine itself.
I do not think it is immediately obvious which of these two problems it is more important to address, if in fact they are not equally important. One could argue in favour of the former by insisting that rigorous logical consistency, such as that which is the subject of the second paradox, is not a law which Nietzsche obeyed, nor had any respect for. Thus the more practical issue of his role as a teacher that teaches every truth is only my truth takes precedence. However, although Nietzsche did criticize aspects of logic, this cannot be read as an attack on rigour and precision; both remained for him essential:
On the contrary, one could argue for the latter by insisting that whatever Nietzsche's opinions on logic, he ought to be subjected to contemporary standards nonetheless, as his relation to his audience in light of perspectivism will become a trivial matter if in fact perspectivism is shown to be a self-refuting idea. If perspectivism refutes itself in the vacuum of the logical realm, then any dissemination of such a view must too be inherently contradictory. Although I do not deny the importance of the logical consistency problem on its own, I do think that there are more interesting insights to be gained by considering the problem of Nietzsche's authorial credibility. Taking our cue from perspectivism's focus on the personal, let us examine how this paradox fits into the constellation of the author-as-perspectivist, and how Nietzsche himself interprets the problem within the writing where it occurs.
To be sure, this pursuit of coherence would be encouraged by Nietzsche himself. Most directly, he not only recognized the problem raised by self-referential perspectivism, but also refused to avoid it: "Granted this too is only interpretation - and you will be eager enough to raise this objection? - well, so much the better". In addition to this pointed remark, Nietzsche demonstrated a powerful distaste for those philosophers who not only perpetrated value laden interpretations as objective truths, but who were, by his diagnosis, cowardly and cunning enough to keep this fact hidden even from themselves:
It is this spirit of self-deception that is the cause of much of the hostility Nietzsche feels towards the philosophical tradition that preceded him. By masquerading objective truths in such 'bad taste', Nietzsche's targets create the obligation for belief where in fact there is only choice. But the immediate relevance for our examination is that it is precisely this 'courage of conscience' that is the focus of our problem. If, as seems to be the case in the above quote, Nietzsche encouraged his perspectivism to apply to his own position as the author, how does he respond to the obvious inconsistency it presents? We now turn to an analysis of that response.
The problem that persists, of course, is how can Nietzsche recommend an attitude of perspectivism while embracing that attitude himself? While attempting to present his views as explicitly his own, and suitable only for him or perhaps those who share a similar will to knowledge, he always runs the risk of seeming, like the philosophical tradition he so wants to distance himself from, as though what he presents are not his views but ones that have some claim to rational or unconditional authority. By discussing this problem directly in his works however, by going far enough to convince his readers again and again that all of it is no more than his opinion, he would effectively remove himself from the philosophical canon altogether, thereby ceasing to have any effect on an important sphere of audience. No, Nietzsche's rather original approach to the problem avoids this unattractive option. Rather than addressing the issue in the content of his works, he addresses it via the form. First, we will see how Nietzsche's execution of his Genealogy of Morals not only reveals the interpretations that are intimately involved in moral 'truths', but also, through his style, is able to draw attention to and undermine his own authority as the genealogist. Second, by taking note of the pluralism Nietzsche exhibits in the style of his presentation and the rhetorical tropes he employs, we will see how he creates for himself an unforgettably personal presence in his works, thereby conveying how necessarily individual are their contents.
In the preface and three essays that comprise his On the Genealogy of Morals, Nietzsche presents an account of the origin of the accepted moral standards that exist today, revealing the values, desires, and beliefs which were responsible for generating such standards. By using genealogy as his method, he uncovers the line of descent extending from 'ancestral' psychological states to the current system of morality. In this way, Nietzsche seeks not so much to examine the veracity of a moral truth to which society holds fast, but rather undertakes a project to expose the will that led to such a moral 'truth'. The focus is less on a logical analysis of the content of the ideas and more on uncovering the motivation behind those who espouse such ideas. This is not to say that arguments against the idea itself are not offered - for these are not omitted - but rather that the perspective from which such 'truth' springs is for him a more fundamental inquiry. For this perspective that he is so eager to bring to the surface comes logically and temporally in advance of the established 'truth'; thus the analysis that asks after motivation is one that is able to go deeper.
With his target set as Christian morality, he provides an account of how the current virtues of meekness, humility, justice, and forgiveness, all elements of what Nietzsche deems the slave morality, came to be known as the values which one ought to prize as good. In uncovering the etymological roots of the word 'good', he finds an opposing conception of morality than the one that persists now. 'Good', he argues, used to be a measure of status or hierarchical position. In ancient times, it was the warrior, the nobleman, and the aristocrat that embodied the standard of what was good. Character traits such as power, health, pride, boldness, naivet, and freedom - these were the qualities of the original moral man. The morality of today, however, was generated by the slaves, or the ones who were physically weak and subservient to the great noblemen. Inspired by the resentment they feel by being oppressed by the strong, the creative deed of the slave is to affirm himself by taking an imaginary revenge; the clever slave devalues the values held by oppressors and making what opposes it what is valuable. This hostile reaction rejects the values of the noblemen, characterizing them as evil qualities, while championing their impotence as meekness, their desire for revenge as justice, and their incapacity for revenge as humility. Driven by his hatred for his master, he negates the master's values and creates a morality for which it is good to be weak, so that he thereby can be on one level victorious against the master.
These values, rooted in reaction and resentment, are what Nietzsche argues to be the same that persist in Christian morality today. And, because it can only be made sense of in terms of reaction, its origin is not left behind but remains relevant, remains intrinsic to it, and can thereby be used in order to evaluate its validity. What Nietzsche aims to make clear is that Christian morality arises not from love and forgiveness, but guilt and resentment. What is also made clear, through the method of genealogy itself, is that even perhaps our most tacitly accepted 'truths' are far from objective or unconditional, and are instead always informed by certain motivations, by a certain perspective. In addition, those hidden motivations are inextricably tied to what they produce, and are therefore relevant when it comes to evaluating or providing a critique of current 'truths'.
However, while genealogy as a method of inquiry animates the very idea of perspectivism, while it reveals the interpretation behind the idea, it is at the same time an exercise in interpretation and evaluation itself. For of course the account provided by Nietzsche of the roots of Christian morality is not the presentation of an unconditional fact (as he opposes the very idea of such facts), but is his interpretation. The account must be irreducibly personal, as his preferences are put to use: "to interpret as a psychologist is to evaluate, according to its strength or weakness, the quality of the will required by an ideal, a belief, a conviction, a behaviour, or an institution". As we saw above, self-deception is something Nietzsche detests. It is in this spirit that he writes, "the lawgiver eventually receives the call: patere legem, quam iqse tullisti [submit to the law you yourself proposed]". Must not we then ask why ought we accept this genealogical account? Is it not the manifestation of one more partial and arbitrary point of view? Just as he criticizes those "English psychologists" for confusing their morality with morality itself, we must ask whether Nietzsche makes a similar mistake by confusing his truth with truth itself.
Although it is true that the practice of genealogy necessarily involves the problem of the authority of the genealogist, this is not something of which Nietzsche is unaware. Indeed, in his review of the book in Ecce Homo, he warns his readers that perhaps the most dangerous character present in the work is Nietzsche himself: "Every time a beginning that is calculated to mislead: cool, scientific, even ironic, deliberately foreground, deliberately holding off". The full story of his analysis is not on the surface, but rather, as we often find with Nietzsche, is more subtle and oblique. It is the variably mocking and ironic tone that persists through the work that alerts the reader to the real effect of genealogy: to multiply interpretations, to highlight the ambiguity of the critical enterprise. The vicious and strident characterizations of Christian values are not to be understood as the overbrimming confidence of another ascetic priest, but rather as a tactic to undermine his own authority by drawing attention to the bias evident in his own writing. He is convinced that ultimately this authority must be surrendered: "this pride has to be humbled, this evaluation disvalued: has that end been achieved?" In his performance of genealogy, Nietzsche not only reveals the interpretive grounding of moral standards, he is also able to draw attention to the interpretive nature of genealogy itself.
This point is made most strongly by the lack of any solution to the problems raised in the work. It would seem that only by revealing the real nature of Christianity's values, this will be enough for us to reject the whole enterprise. But what we are not given is anything with which we could replace that system of values so abandoned. At the close of his second essay, vague promises are made to the necessary coming of the Antichrist, and suggestions to a redemptive possibility are encountered throughout. And yet a new morality that could oppose the No-saying of the ascetic ideal is obviously not delivered. But this is an especially subtle tactic invoked by Nietzsche to avoid appearing as one who credits himself with unconditional authority. By leading us through his critique of Christian morality, minimally suggesting the possibility of a different morality, and then offering nothing determinate in the wake, he is able to make his point by showing us our strong tendency to become slaves all over again. By yearning for a redemptive alternative, we come to see that instinctively we want a new absolute, something which Nietzsche patently refuses to provide us with. Our having been misled is our enlightenment, or so he hopes. "The total value of the world cannot be evaluated; consequently philosophical pessimism belongs among comical things." Correlatively, the same sort of optimism is just as comical. Belief is not an obligation in response to accepted claims to unconditional authority, but is instead a choice. If we are to accept a point of view, keeping in mind always that it originates from particular and prejudiced sources, we are saddled with the difficult task of accepting not only the view in isolation, but the values, desires, and conditions of life which belong to it. As Conway writes, "unlike those contemporary Nietzscheans whose own authority conveniently eludes their otherwise potent irony, Nietzsche deliberately and preemptively invalidates any privilege that might accrue to him as a physician of culture".
Our second point of analysis concerns not a single work of Nietzsche's in particular, but a character that arises when all are looked at together; they exhibit an incredible variety of style. As he says of himself, "I have many stylistic possibilities - the most multifarious art of style that has ever been at the disposal of one man". Typically, treatments of Nietzsche's writing style highlight his use of the aphorism, the style for which he is best known, and one that occurs in several of his works. For example, Daybreak, Human All Too Human, The Gay Science, and parts of both Beyond Good and Evil and Twilight of the Idols all present themselves aphoristically. However, this by no means exhausts the variety of different styles with which he engages. In his Untimely Meditations we find the proper essay, and with On the Genealogy of Morals and The Birth of Tragedy a rigorous extended essay, or treatise. The Will to Power is composed not of aphorisms, but notes or fragments; the epic poem of Thus Spoke Zarathustra stands out as a stylistic masterpiece; works such as The Antichrist and Nietzsche Contra Wagner are most properly defined as polemic. Finally, with Ecce Homo, Nietzsche presents us with yet another style: the autobiography.
Besides the various frameworks within which his ideas are presented, Nietzsche also makes pervasive use of two rhetorical devices: hyperbole and the rhetorical question. In the case of the latter, these questions so laden with hidden meanings draw us into the discussion, like the opening to Beyond Good and Evil: "Supposing truth to be a woman - what?" Quite often the two are combined. His uncompromisingly provocative language forms both questions and statements that take us by surprise and sometimes offend us with their degree of intensity and exaggeration. In The Antichrist, he diagnoses Christianity as "the one great curse, the one great intrinsic depravity, the one great instinct for revenge for which no expedient is sufficiently poisonous, secret, subterranean, petty - I call it the one immortal blemish of mankind". Or, at the opening aphorism of Beyond Good and Evil, he asks "What really is it in us that wants 'the truth'? [...] why not rather untruth? And uncertainty? Even ignorance?" But it is in the posthumous fragments that we see the self-awareness in this hyperbolic style as a method: "The spell that fights on our behalf, the eye of Venus that charms and blinds even our opponents, is the magic of the extreme, the seduction that everything extreme exercises: we immoralists - we are the most extreme".
What are we to make of this variety in Nietzsche's stylistic presentation? A reason for why he changes styles so often does not present itself immediately. One might suggest that the variation is representative of Nietzsche's persistent efforts to find the best means with which to express his ideas. On such a reading, his transition from one style to another would be the expression of the previous style's inadequacy, which is then also abandoned as he is driven on to the next stylistic 'experiment'. Instead of being unified by an overarching pluralistic strategy, what would unify his 'attempts' would be a persistent striving to express his ideas through means that would not trap him in the philosophical tradition that he criticizes and is at pains to distinguish himself from. However, such an explanation cannot be correct. To assume that, for Nietzsche, there ever could be such thing as the perfect means of expression, the one that finally gets to the 'thing in itself' (i.e. Nietzsche's true thought), is to ignore his own dictum that "facts is precisely what there is not, only interpretations". More than that, to look at the variability in style chronologically, we can immediately note that some styles are repeated after long intervals. If a stylistic change did in fact point to inadequacy, then we would have to accept that Nietzsche returned to a style he had already decided to be inappropriate. But finally, Nietzsche's words themselves guard against precisely such an explanation: "The demand for an adequate mode of expression is senseless".
Alternatively, rather than trying to characterize the variation as a struggle to determine a single mode of expression (i.e. as a means to an end), one might suggest that pluralism is the end itself. On this view, Nietzsche's various styles are not attempts at a final completion of that enterprise, but instead are the expression of his explicit desire to avoid such finality. This heterogeneity persists, and was meant by Nietzsche to persist, for it serves to further complicate the content of his works by refusing all attempts at determinate, conclusive interpretations. It is a function of Nietzsche's perspectivism to insist upon the perpetual renewal of interpretation and to highlight the indeterminacy of meaning. Although I do think there is something right in this, I believe it ultimately goes too far astray. While we will soon see in the next point to be discussed that pluralism of style is indeed for Nietzsche an intentional choice, the sort of absolute undecidability proposed here goes beyond perspectivism into relativism. The former does not strictly preclude the idea that one interpretation can be judged to be better than another, and Nietzsche often argues with such a conviction in mind. Indeed, he opposes this extreme form of relativism along with absolutism:
Also, I think this reading is too quick to do away with the idea that we can find in Nietzsche a set of ideas and concepts that do in fact cohere with an assignable meaning. His pluralism of style need not foreclose on the possibility that there is indeed something to be learned from the content.
The reason for Nietzsche's stylistic pluralism is neither that it is a struggle to attain perfect form, nor is it merely the fulfillment of inherently indeterminate content. It is, rather, his response to the problem "that he wants his readers to accept his views, his judgments and his values as much as he wants them to know that these are essentially his views, his judgments, and his values". Here we return to the paradox set out above; here too the use of hyperbole and rhetorical questioning becomes important. Nietzsche's strategy for presenting his ideas and yet simultaneously underlining the existence of perspective is to embed those ideas in an irreducibly personal presentation. When an author constantly makes use of the same style, it is easy for that style, that which reminds us of the perspective from which those writings sprang, to disappear out of focus. Where style is not brought to the reader's attention, the presence of the author is marginalized. The perpetual change in Nietzsche's mode of presentation brings our attention vividly to his presence as the author behind what we are reading. Added to this, his pervasive use of hyperbole and provocative questioning magnify this presence. We cannot ignore the bias from which interpretation originates as we are again and again confronted with his "exaggerated, swaggering, polemical, self-conscious and self-aggrandizing, un-Socratic style". We cannot remain neutral or indifferent in the face of questions he poses not so that we better understand the answers he provides (when he does provide them), but so we will think about them deeply on our own terms. When we are focused on not only what is said but also how it is said, we remain attuned to the character of the author, and thereby recognize the values, desires, and general worldview that necessarily accompanies and has always already informed the content. In this way, then, Nietzsche exists as an example or incarnation of perspectivism itself. Through his stylistic variation, coupled with uncompromisingly vitriolic language, his opposition to the possibility of a neutral philosophical language is made clear. The point made by his experiments in form is precisely that form and content are inextricably tied to one another; and this idea is intimately tied to perspectivism itself: "all our actions are altogether incomparably personal, unique, and infinitely individual; there is no doubt of that". For, "in the end, Nietzsche's [...] style is less an expression of any cognitive muddle-headedness than it is of his methodological perspectivism".
As we have seen, the idea of perspectivism raises interesting difficulties. To hold that each person is inescapably immersed in a particular worldview "which has its origin in particular physiological, psychological, historical, cultural, and political needs, desires, beliefs, and values," while at the same time attempting to disseminate that very idea as an author is the problem Nietzsche must face, and has been the subject of our discussion. We have looked at two instances where he employs strategies in order to neutralize the effect of a dogmatic reception of his works by embedding those works within styles that serve to undermine his own authority and highlight his presence as just one bearer of interpretive practice. Although it is not certain whether these strategies guard perfectly against unthinking assimilation, we must admit that the Nietzschean idea of perspectivism not only a crucial element of the content of his works, but is exhibited in a highly original performance. And despite his efforts, Nietzsche recognized that the possibility of a truly creative, truly perspectival thinker lay not with him, but in its purest form only in the future:
For the present time, however, Nietzsche's remarkable performance is echoed in the words of Zarathustra: "This is my way; where is yours? - thus I answered those who asked me 'the way.' For the way - that does not exist, says Zarathustra".