The ear is our organ of hearing; throughout the world there are some "250 million people who have a disabling hearing impairment" (World health organisation, ). If the impairment is from birth or a young age it can lead to a retardation of development by causing a delay in language acquisition and impede school progress. Hearing impairment in adults can lead to vocational and economic difficulties resulting in social isolation and stigmatisation.
In the UK there is estimated to be about 9 million deaf and hard of hearing people, this number is rising as the number of people over 60 increases. Of the 9 million 698,000 adults are estimated to be severely or profoundly deaf, 20,000 children between the ages of 0 and 15 are moderately to profoundly deaf, 12,000 of these children were born deaf. (Statistics from RNID, )
The ear is made up of three different parts, the outer, middle and inner ear.
The outer or external ear consists of the pinna and external auditory canal. Sound travels along the passage to the eardrum (tympanic membrane) which is situated at the end. The canal also contains hairs and glands which produce wax (cerumen), together this is thought to keep the ear clean.
The middle ear is a cavity approximately 1.3cm across which is filled with air. A chain of three tiny bones, the ossicles stretch right across the middle ear cavity. They are the malleus (hammer bone), incus (anvil bone) and the stapes (stirrup). "Their function is to transmit mechanical energy from the tympanic membrane across the air filled middle ear to the fluid filled inner ear."(Wilson et al, 2002) There is a connection between the middle ear and pharynx via the Eustachian tube which helps to equalise air pressure.
The inner ear is made up of two parts, the cochlea and semicircular canals. Along the length of the cochlea are tiny hair cells, each cell has stereocilia which project into the cochlear fluid. "When sound waves enter the cochlea the stereocilia are moved which causes the hair cells to trigger an electrical pulse in the auditory nerve" (Burton et al, 2000). The nerve passes impulses to the brain which recognise them as different sounds. The semicircular canals are not used for hearing; they are part of your balance system.
There are many ways in which you could classify types of deafness, one way of doing this is to categorise deafness into varying severity. "Threshold is the level at which you can just make out the tone of a particular frequency. Thresholds are measured in decibels for hearing level (dBHL). Normal hearing is thresholds between 0-20 dBHL across all frequencies" (RNID, ). The greater the threshold, the worse the hearing loss.
Perhaps a more clinical way of classifying types of deafness is to split deafness up into four categories.
A thorough examination of a persons hearing requires an ear examination and hearing tests.
This essay has identified various tests which can be used to assess hearing. It is clear that screening neonates and children for hearing defects is important. The earlier the problems can be identified and managed, the better long term prospects for the child and family who will then receive the specialised support they need.
Routine clinical examination has a place, but mainly in the detection of ear infections and cerumen via an otoscope. The tuning fork tests will give an immediate indication as to whether there is a hearing deficit present; however these tests are crude and can only be applied if the patient can understand and follow a command. It has been highlighted that they are of little use in elderly patients due to the loss of ability, to hear high frequencies as we age.
The whispered speech test has advantages in that it is cheap, quick and can be performed on mass in the community by a range of health professionals. I.e. health visitors. This makes it a convenient test for screening purposes. However its major disadvantage is that again the patient needs to be able to understand a command and respond, which is only possible in children above approximately 3 years old. Another problem is standardising this test due to the loudness of the whisper.
The pure tone audiometry is probably the gold standard test; it is the most accurate at determining the type and extent of hearing loss. Its disadvantage is that it needs to be carried out in a specialised department by a technician. This renders it ineffective for community screening.
Finally the two tests which can be used in neonates and patients which cannot respond to a command are otoacoustic emission and auditory brainstem evoked response. The drawback to both these tests is that they require specialised equipment and so it is difficult to take them out into the community.