The change of dynasty in Spain at the turn of the 18 th century from Habsburg to Bourbon became a significant milestone for the future of Spanish America. Philip of Anjou, the grandson of Louis XIV of France in 1713, succeeded Charles II, the last of the Habsburg line. Spain's weak economical and military situation, the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713 and the Noticias secretas de America
 forced the Bourbons to reassess the aims and methods of the Spanish imperial government. This undoubtedly led to the formation of the Bourbon Reforms, which aimed to modernize the Spanish economy, society and institutions. Due to the direct relationship between metropolis and colony all reforms and changes adopted in Spain were transferred to Latin America. However the modifications applied by the Bourbons challenged the traditional and conservative status quo of the colony much to the anger of the three main power groups: the administration, the Church and the Creole elite. The transformations put into operation had been aimed not only to bring complete political and economical control of the colony under the Spanish monarchy but most importantly to benefit the metropolis. However ironically, the discontent and resentment with the enlightened absolutism resulted in rise of nationalistic feelings as the various regional populations developed a strong sense of regional identity. According to Stoetzer "the Bourbon reforms [...] opened the gates for the future revolution in the Indies" as they had formed the basis of nationalism, which at the turn of the 19 th century was one of the main driving motors for the call of independent states in Spanish America. However bearing in mind the political situation around the globe was not nationalism a natural and evolutionary product of the enlightened era? During the second half of the 18 th century both the American and French revolutions occurred therefore could have Spanish America just caught the "nationalistic fever"? The degree of the Bourbon reforms influence on the colony may be over exaggerated thus what other factors could have helped establishing the basis for nationalism and nation states.
The "reforming hand of the Bourbons" began to affect Spanish America only until Charles III (1759-88) reign in the second half of the 18 th century. Mainly Jose de Galvez, who had been on a number of visitas generales and so was well aware of the state of the colonies, had crafted the reforms programme. To Galvez it was the state of Spain, which was more important than the colony therefore the disproval of Creoles and elites, was not taken into account. After close study of the reforms it seemed that they all clashed with the Latin American way of life.
There were a series of new administrative changes, which included the establishment of the new viceroyalty of New Granada in 1740 and the viceroyalty of the River Plate in 1776. These new administrative subdivisions resulted in a massive shift in the economic orientation from the Pacific to the Atlantic, as the silver mining trade route, based in Upper Peru, was made more efficient. However at the same time the numerous local economies were dislocated and but more importantly the reform "encroached the Hispanic concept of freedom" as the main industries were in Bourbon control.
The introduction of the intendencia throughout the 1780's and 1790's marked an important development. This was a French administrative institution, which was a reaction to the decentralisation of the Habsburgs, which was aimed to correct the anarchy, modernise the Latin administration and end the alleged abuses of Indians. This institution was a symbol of the French spirit of order, which contrasted to the Spanish American one, and it also replaced the corregidores and the alcaldes mayores with the penisulares. This great political error caused the crown to make unnecessary enemies as the Creoles were discriminated against as all the administrative vacancies were filled by  penisulares, resulting in the Creoles loss of control. The institution was successful for a brief period in the finance and military field, however it backfired at the turn of the century since it had reawakened the political consciousness of cabildos as it had ironically increased their self-assurance. There was resistance towards the Spanish tutelage as the Creoles in the River Plate, Cordoba and La Paz called for the defense of municipal freedoms.
The Bourbons wanted to better utilise the Indies via the development of the wealth and growth of population. "They aimed at an increase of trade, production, consumption, and navigation, and at the centralization of revenue, protection of national industries, and a more equitable distribution of wealth." Consequently as the Bourbons advocated and implemented the un comercio libre y protegido
 the production, trade, working conditions and the distribution of capital improved. New areas of trade where open to colonial centres as Buenos Aires, Caracas, Cartagena and Havana could trade with other ports in Spain. However it was against some of the monopolistic positions of the Spanish American merchants who had greatly benefited from the monopoly of Cadiz and Seville. Furthermore it was the existence of the Spanish policy of an interventionist state where an artificial economic exchange continued between Spain and Indies that infuriated the Creoles the most. Other sectors of society "exacerbated anti-Spanish resentment" due to the various taxes and tariffs placed on the entire population. Indians, Creoles and the clergy were all harassed to "donate" to the Crown, whilst also suffering the dreaded alcabala
. Merchants were banned from trading with other nations, however their discontent was so zealous that free trade was allowed in 1789. Immediately this improved the economic situation as it "unleashed productive energies, opened broader markets and capitalized the mining industry." The fact that the state had to give in to Creole demands represented the slowly diminishing Spanish control and correspondingly the increasing self-awareness of the Creole population. According to Stoetzer the tax burdens and the unfair economic system "engendered a climate of resentment and a desire for some degree of local autonomy."
The regalismo doctrine was one of the major turning points in Latin American policy as it completely opposed previous values and traditions, which had been characterised by the "deep religious spirit [...] the Golden Age of Spain." The doctrine reflected the controversial European values, which imposed secularisation as the crown aimed to control the Church. The Church was the "prime source of the Habsburg's political legitimacy and a binding-force in colonial societies" which was divided by ethnic identity and religion. The Bourbon regalism lacked religious and traditional restraints on royal power thus they were regarded as tyrants and caused serious bitterness among the clergy and laity.
The Jesuits, who were the key religious orders at the time, "searched in Romantic ways for a Spanish American national conscience". Their exceptional missionary and educational work in schools and universities greatly deteriorated after their expulsion in 1767. However they became successfully engaged in political activities against the Spanish monarchy as revolutionary activists and promoted the atmosphere of republicanism and independence. They were the first to openly criticize the Spanish crown, Juan Pablo Viscardo and Servando Teresa de Mier, called for independence to preserve the Catholic faith in the New World. The religious critiques ran parallel to the attacks on despotism, as the Church was concerned with the rights of individuals against the state and sovereignty. It seems that the first to actually promote the ideas of independence and nationalism was the clergy; later on during the Wars of Independence they would emerge as the leaders of the uprisings.
There were a series of revolts and rebellions throughout Latin America, headed by either the clergy or the Creoles, as a reaction to the Bourbon reforms. The rebellion of Tupac Amaru II in southern Peru in 1780 was sparked off due to the mistreatment of Indians at the hands of the Spaniards. Tupac Amaru wanted to end the forced loans and rid the continent of the Spanish and therefore asked the Creoles for help. Some sided with him however the rebellion soon turned into a race war as the Indians began slaughtering whites on a grand scale. The revolt collapsed in 1782 due to the disunity among Indians and their lack of national identity. The conspiracies of the 3 Antonios of Chile in 1780-1781 and the Revolt of Comuneros in New Granada in 1781 were both rooted in republicanism and foreshadowed political independence and enabled the spread of revolutionary ideas. The plot of Gual and Espana in Venezuela in 1797 aimed to bring liberty to Spanish America and be linked to Spain only on the basis of language and history. Miranda's landings in Venezuela in 1806 failed to rally the inhabitants for independence despite the proposed federation of free townships. His call for a united and independent Spanish America was unpopular since there was a strong sense of regional identity due to the oligarchies. The British invasions of River Plate in 1806-1807 were highly significant as it gave birth to Argentinean nationalism and the citizens took matters into their own hands by abolishing the viceroy and defeating the British. These revolts reflected the fact that the imperial relationship between Spain and Indies was undergoing further change. They helped create a climate of opinion, which presented a fundamental challenge to traditional rule. Despite their failures they reflected the growing self-awareness of the population and were a sign of incipient nationalism for the Creoles thought of themselves as Americans and not Spaniards. At the same time they reflected the deeply rooted social and racial tensions resulting in conflict and instability, which arose when social gaps allied together to protest.
The feelings of nationalism and the concept of nation states amongst the Creoles may have been also influenced by the ideas of the Enlightenment and the writings of the Rousseau and Voltaire. Miranda was greatly inspired by the philosophers and by the revolutions in America and France. The literature of the enlightenment was circulated with freedom and gave rise to American literature as Creole writers in Mexico, Peru and Chile nurtured the greater sense of patria
. Consequently the literature of identity was born which glorified countries, acclaimed resources and appraised people. This was the beginning of cultural nationalism. The Spanish American interest in the Enlightenment could have been part of the "fashion" at the time but some historians that it was another form of reaction towards the Bourbon reforms.
Future nations states were constructed on the basis of the division into viceroyalties, which had been established by the Council of Indies and then by the Bourbon reforms. The oligarchs were firmly rooted and were based upon interests in land, ties of kinship, alliance with colonial bureaucracy but most importantly on a strong sense of regional identity. Spanish America was characterised by rivalry and competition not on co-operation hence the Creoles realised the differences among themselves and considered themselves either Mexicans, Venezuelans, Peruvians depending on their region. These countries despite having a common decent and language were defined by history, administrative boundaries, physical environment and unique societies. The parallel development of nationalism sided with the creation of nation states, therefore both have origins in the Bourbon reforms.
The Enlightened absolutism changed the relations between the power groups at the expense of the private sector as local elites interpreted the Bourbon "rational development" as an attack on their interests. The new abolitionism was very unpopular among all social groups and forced them to decide whether to reach for political power in order to prevent further instalments of enlightened legislation. The Bourbon reforms removed the legitimacy of royal authority in eyes of the Church, Creoles, Indians and common people, therefore they embarked on the belief that problems could be solved by autonomous decisions. Nationalism seems to have sprouted from the hate of the Bourbon reforms as elites and clergy united against a common threat. The major political upheavals in Europe and the ideas of liberty and equality seem to have only strengthened the Spanish American self-awareness and sense of national pride. Therefore conclusively the Bourbon reforms created the basis for nationalism and nation states.