What is slavery? According to Malinowski it is "...the denial of all biological freedom except in the self interest not of the organism but of its master. [...] The slave does not enjoy the protection of the law. His economic behaviour is not determined by profits and advantages. He cannot mate according to his choice. He remains outside the law of parentage and kinship. Even his conscience is not his own." The picture is very grim and entirely inhumane, the slave is totally dependable on his master's generosity and kindness. However despite this black description, slavery in Brazil was abolished only in 1888 while the British had outlawed it already in 1806. Why did it take so long for Brazil to finally introduce manumission? Was it due to the fact that a different type of slavery was implemented which turned to be more "humane"? Was the Brazilian colonial society so tyrannical and despotic that slave resistance was not powerful enough to influence the change? What factors enabled the continuation of slavery up until 1888?
Numerous historians and researchers have closely examined the problems of assessing the severity of slavery in Brazil. Some such as Chasteen, Levine, and Schwartz are fairly critical of the oppressive and harsh treatment of slaves, while others Foner, Freyre and Tannenbaum seem to paint "Brazil as a veritable haven for blacks." The publications of these historians tend to portray conflicting images of the lives of the slaves, however this arises from the multitude of factors and the intense complexity of the structure of society at the time. Nonetheless the situation of the slaves was not as brutal and heartless as Malinowski's quote suggests, the Brazilian colonial society which included the Catholic Church and the Master class did try to "humanize" the oppressions of slavery. However the degree of the mitigation is debateable.
The roots of Brazilian slavery trace back to the extensive sugar plantations in the beginning of the 16 th century. After being dormant for 30 years since discovery of Brazil in 1500 by Pedro Alvares Cabral, the Portuguese crown finally became interested in its colony. The new settlers realised the economic value of sugar production and unsuccessfully tried to persuade the Indians to labour for them. The Indians viewed working on plantations to be designed for females and were very ill adapted to performing the task both psychologically and physiologically. They were accustomed to work as freelancers and did not like the notion of exhausting work schedules. In addition to that, the natives suffered from the numerous diseases such as smallpox and measles, which had been transmitted from the Europeans who were more resistant to them. The consequence of this was a dramatic increase of the mortality rate amongst the Indian population, which was followed by famine. This in turn stimulated an economic crisis for the Portuguese and so to prevent the collapse of the sugar economy, which required a grand workforce, Indians were officially taken as slaves and forced to work on the plantations. However the demand for labour was too great and so Negroes had to be supplied from Angola and used as slaves.
Slavery was not a new idea to the Europeans especially the Portuguese it was a common feature in most modern European states. However the Church could never "proscribe slavery as unconditionally immoral as it functioned in the society of men" and admitted the economic necessity of them in Brazil. The Catholic Doctrine did not oppose slavery as such since the master and slave were equal in the sight of God, but there was a distinct difference between the Churches treatment of the Indians and the Negroes. The Jesuits arrived in Brazil as they were to evangelise the Indian pagans, they protected them from exploitation and "were tutelary and paternalist" in their relations with them. They created specially designed villages or aldeias, which entirely reorganised the Indian society and transformed them into a working force on the missionaries fields and plantations, much to the uproar of the local settlers. Consequently the natives were used as labour but did not suffer the hardships they would have encountered on normal plantations. However as the Indians were extremely recalcitrant and their population decreased whilst the Negro population increased, the Indians were regarded as exotic but the Negro was the main source of labour.
There has been a great deal of turmoil regarding the punishment and brutal, savage behaviour towards the Negro slaves. Not only were they abducted by force from Angola, but also the transport conditions were so appalling that about 20% of the slaves perished while crossing the Atlantic. They starved and thirst in the insanely cramped conditions, epidemics were frequent, but this environment broke the slaves will enabling subjugation. The harshness of life in Brazil and the foul living conditions forced the slaves to resist, however they paid dearly for impertinence. There are numerous accounts of barbaric treatment of slave's punishments that ranged from flogging to castration, novenas or breaking on the wheel. It was unsurprising that the slaves resisted, rebelled and consequently runaway forming quilombos, the most famous being Palmares, which was eventually destroyed by the Portuguese forces in 1694.
It seems evident that throughout the 16 th and 17 th century the situation of the slaves depended on the generosity of the master as settlers frequently ignored the royal legislation and continually practiced resgate which involved capturing Indians and selling them to plantations. The presence of the bandieras, which were bands of 200 men who tracked and hunted down Indians, later to be used as slaves also ridiculed the legal system. This ignited fierce opposition from the Church yet they were powerless to challenge the vast Brazilian coast and aid every persecuted victim. Technically the Portuguese crown had established an attorney-general under whose jurisdiction came all matters relating to the treatment of slaves and fines were placed upon those who neglected them, however the efficiency of this charges are unknown.
A historian, Philip Curtain, has estimated that at least 9 million Africans were shipped across the Atlantic between 1502 and 1870, from which one third were destined for Brazil, making it Latin America's largest single country to import so many slaves. The consequences of this are essential and are the origins of present days multiracial culture in Brazil. By the end of the 16 th century the blacks formulated 70% of the Brazilian workforce, which also meant that the blacks racially dominated Brazilian society. By 1715 the ratio between blacks and whites was 3 to 1 and by 1819 less than 20% of the entire Brazilian was purely white. Due to the interracial relationships established between the three dominant races: blacks, whites and Indians a new demographic dimension of intermediate ethnicity was created. Marvin Harris claims, "forty different racial types were now elicited" such as the mulattoes, mameclucos and cafusos. In addition to this the decrease of the pressure placed on the sugar plantations and the change towards coffee plantations and mining in the 17 th and 18 th century resulted that the relations between the master and slave became heavily personalised. It seems that masters slowly came to realise that through the improvement of slave working and living conditions, they were more effective in working and resisted less. But on the other hand some viewed slavery in economic terms and so resorted to the basic theory of slave management: "work them hard, make a profit, buy another." It was anticipated that there was an annual loss of 10% on the slaves, but this resulted from the unhealthy living conditions and the overworking of slaves. However by the 19 th century the masters realised that it was more productive for a worker to be free as he had more incentive to labour hence more than half the labour force was emancipated.
Tannenbaum claimed the Portuguese slave laws specifically preserved the human identity of the slave as he could marry freely, seek another master, own a plot of land and had the right to buy his own freedom. The Jesuits in 1750 managed to convince the Portuguese crown to issue a decree, which declared that all Indians were born free and could only be enslaved if they practiced cannibalism, or were captive in a "just war". In 1784 another decree stated the prohibition of branding Negro slaves. However there was "no policeman" to implement this law, even the priests and clergy could not enforce it, they could only obtain information about the treatment of slaves through actually visiting the plantations. This was only introduced in 1789 with the Real Instruccion, which reflected the humanitarian and protective approach of the Church. However they could not reprimand the master of the plantation besides it was difficult "to apply legal restraints to the planter's use of the lash".
David Brian Davis argues that slaves had technically 72 hours of leisure a week and Stanley Elkins claims that a master was "obliged to give liberty to his slaves on all Sundays and holidays which totalled 85 in year". In addition to that there were no legal bars to marriage, education and freedom, which was true to some extent, however the life of a slave rested in the senor de ingenio's hands.
Tannenbaum maintains that the master owned the man's labour but not the man, this may sound farfetched but by law and custom the slave could retain his produce and cultivate it on his plot, which later became his savings. This was the basis of self-purchase and throughout the 18 th was very popular; the coartacion was developed in 1871 and enabled payments for freedom in instalments. There were various ways of obtaining freedom but the master normally rewarded hardworking slaves with manumission. The old, the sick and the children of the owner of the plantation, even if they were illegitimate, could be let free. If a plantation fell into economic problems, the master would sell manumission at a low price, maintaining a slave was an expensive enterprise. The Church also managed to emancipate slaves as children if they were baptised then it was the godfather's responsibility to liberate them and in most cases the master was the godfather.
The living conditions of the slaves depended significantly on where they worked and in which part of Brazil. The coast was more comfortable than working in the mainland, whilst mining for diamonds and gold, the coast was also characterised by urban settlements. Life in the cities was more pleasant and less harsh than in the rural areas due to the greater power and importance of the legal system, which in cases aided the slaves. Rural areas were either haciendas or engenho plantations, where the structure of society was divided into the mill owner, lavradores and slave. One vital element that harassed entire Brazil population was the food shortages, but the masters soon realised that by giving plots of land to slaves they could develop subsistence farming which was an answer to the problem. Historians constantly debate about the social relations between races, Tannenbaum claims that there was social, economic and cultural prejudice but no racial as such. It was the type of employment one did that represented his social status and not Lockhart and Schwartz point out the colour of the skin that mattered.
Evidently the social structure of the Brazilian slaves is immensely complex and it is not possible to make a definitive, universal statement about the conditions of slavery life. There are masses of exceptions, various interpretations and consequently contradicting statements. The Church tried to mitigate the oppressive harshness of slavery through the use of Jesuits and Franciscans in their establishment of missions, this didn't come without a cost, as the Indian society was transformed in order to avoid exploitation by settlers. The Catholic Doctrine was not unanimously against the slave trade and the different approach to the Indians and Negroes resulted in prejudice and racial discrimination. The legislature was implemented but not everyone followed, as there was little incentive and actual authority to ratify and protect that oppressed. The Brazilian colonial society continued to use slave labour till 1888 and was one of the last countries to become rid of it. Slavery had been part of the Brazilian way of life but the fact that efforts were made to reduce its impact and by the 1880s most of slave population had already been set free, therefore Brazilian colonial society did not dent the humanity of slaves.