On October 29 1929 the Wall Street stock market crashed in the United States, which resulted in an immense worldwide economic crisis. The sorrowful nature of the event is reflected by the its informal name, Black Tuesday. The aftermath of the crash has been described as the Great Depression and its affects were felt throughout the entire 1930s. Consequently banks collapsed, domestic consumption fell, exports disintegrated due to the US investors recall of foreign assets and manufacturing output subsided by one third. Unemployment rose from 1.5 million in 1929 to over 20 million in 1932, which constituted 25% of the US workforce. Due to the US withdrawal of capital from world markets the similar consequences befell all countries involved in the capitalistic trade leading to the worlds worst economic recession. Numerous policies and plans emerged on methods of challenging the Great Depression, Nazi Germany pursued economic recovery via rearmament and public works program, Fascist Italy tightened its grip on the corporate state, France adopted restrictive autarchic policies such as high tariffs and import quotas.
The US adopted the newly elected President Roosevelt's policy of the New Deal. This policy did not have a specified principle and did not rely on any specific ideology; Alan Brinkley defines it as "chaos of experimentation". This is due to the fact that the New Deal was characterised by the interaction of several competing ideologies, critics claim they ranged from socialism via liberalism to fascism. Subsequently the policy has been attacked from both the left and right. Liberal scholars such as Frank Freidel and Arthur Schlesinger tend to view Roosevelt's policy in a more positive light rather than Robert A. Taft and Alexander Hamilton, who criticise the New Deal from a conservative perspective. Taft and Hamilton considered the "socialist" policies and government intervention as reasons for failure to restore the prosperity of the 1920s. The radicals from the New Left such as Barton J. Berstein and Paul K. Conkin on the other hand condemn the New Deal for its "pro-business manner" and "buttress for the corporate capitalist order."
The New Deal consisted of many different efforts to end the Great Depression and reform the U.S. economy; therefore it had successes and failures in the social, political and economic spheres. Its main aims were to remedy the financial crisis, promote industrial recovery and raise the price commodity. Due to grand scope of these issues the essay focuses upon the analysis of the New Deal based on the economic victories and fiascos. It appears that the New Deal was able to stabilise the economy in the short term however it was unable to rebuild the devastated economy in the long run. The success was varied, but it seems that there were enough successes to establish the 1930s as the most important episode of the twentieth century in the creation of the modern U.S. state.
Agriculture was a major component of the American economy and the effects of the Great Depression seriously struck the sector as farmers were forced to migrate due to their inability to pay the loans. During the Hundred Days, a series of programs were introduced to confront the issue. The Emergency Farm Mortgage Act enabled the refinancing of the farm mortgages and provided money for the farmers to redeem their previously abandoned farms. The Farm Credit Act established the Farm Credit Administration, which controlled the four major agricultural credit programs. Within 18 months the institution managed to refinance 20% of the all the nations farm mortgages and prevented the collapse of rural banks. The Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) aided the farmers in retaining "their surpluses of market by making loans [...] below parity prices and taking the crops as collateral." The centrepiece was the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) formed in 1933, which authorised marketing agreements between the agricultural secretary and the farmers. The farmers reduced their production of wheat, cotton, corn, hogs, tobacco, rice and milk in exchange for governments benefit payment. However these programs faced a series of grave problems, which threatened its success. There were logistical problems in controlling the surplus despite the government's imposition of heavy tax on those who violated their quotas. It was mainly due to the drought over the Great Plains that the production was reduced elsewhere the surpluses continued to increase due to miscalculations or greed. The AAA sponsored the controversial program of ploughing under of ripening crops and the slaughter of livestock as a means of raising the prices. This had a moral impact on the rural population who were baffled by the ethical obscenity of capitalism, nonetheless it proved to be effective. Consequently the farm income increased by 58% between 1932-1935 but the parity was only 80% at the end of the decade. The New Deal pumped $4.5 million into the pockets of farmers between 1934 and 1940, which doubled the net farm income from $2 billion to $4.6 million. However the main benefiters of these programs were the big landowners who discriminated against the small and medium sized operators. Furthermore the migration was a partial consequence of the AAA as tenants and sharecroppers were left unemployed. The Supreme Court abolished the program in 1936 but a new AAA was reintroduced in 1938, which was legitimate and came to dominate the nations future agricultural economy. Therefore the agricultural policy decelerated the agricultural downslide however it did not restore the strength of agriculture nor a balance between the country and city throughout the Great Depression. Nonetheless the new AAA "fixed the course of American agricultural policy for almost fifty years."
The industrial recovery was directed by the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA), which like the AAA was established during the Hundred Days. It suspended the anti-trust laws and enabled the formation of codes of fair competition for the nations trade and industries. As a result employees were allowed to form unions and bargain collectively, it protected them from employers by guaranteeing minimum wages and fixed hour shifts. As part of the program the Public Works Administration was set up with a $3.3 billion budget to construct highways, bridges, tunnels, federal buildings, military facilities. Accordingly structures like the Virginian Skyline Drive, Chicago's underground system and New York's Triborough Bridge were built. The National Recovery Administration was directed by Hugh S Johnson and aimed to stabilise the business sector through the use of codes, which would reduce the chaotic competition. It was meant to "herald an example of business, labour, and government cooperation [however it] became a source of disillusionment [...] and bitter political strife." Again there were immense logistical problems in establishing the codes, as the program had planned to establish these different codes for each single industry. Furthermore the only experienced persons qualified for setting up these codes were the businessmen, thus there were numerous accusations against large corporations who used to codes to stifle small and medium sized competition. There was no efficient enforcement to ensure the validation of the codes, as employers did not bargain with labour representatives "in good faith" as was naively expected. To resuscitate the program NRA launched a crusade for public support by issuing the famous Blue Eagle symbols. This fact reflects the weakness and insecurity of the agency and some have claimed that the turn towards the public was absolute desperation, as the businesses disliked the policy. Nonetheless the program was not an entire failure as the employees gained some rights such as a 40 hour week, prohibition of employment of under-sixteen year olds and a minimum pay of $13 a week. In the summer of 1933 NRA incited a short boom as the industrial production jumped to 101% of the 1923-1925 level. Workers could organize unions and protect themselves from employer interference, however the tension and uneasiness provoked by NRA resulted in bloodshed as 1,856 strikes occurred in 1934. Radicals claim that NRA needed organised labour to save the big businesses, however it "turned labour movement into a semi-public unionism whose organisation was part of the government program.". Despite the "construction of more than 34,000 projects including airports, electricity-generating dams, aircraft carriers; and 70% of the new schools and 1/3 of the hospitals built between 1933-1939" and the electification of Pennsylvania Railroad between Washington DC and New York by the PWA, it did not succeed in returning the level of industrial activity to pre-Depression levels. The American industrial economy required a large boost and not a policy of scarcity that was issued.
The New Deal strengthened the monetary system by passing the Emergency Banking Relief, which was crucial at the time, as four-fifths of all the US banks had closed by March 1933. By declaring the 4-day bank holiday the New Deal re-established the nations confidence in the monetary system as soon afterwards the deposits in reopened banks exceeded the withdrawals. The Banking Act of 1935 changed the Federal Reserve System by providing the board of governors more power in running the Federal Banks. Stoddard Eccles formed the act based upon the ideas of John Maynard Keynes who had advocated deficit spending to solve the problems of the Great Depression. This policy proved to be successful until the slump of 1937, which resulted from Roosevelt's decision to cut down the spending as deficit and inflation was increasing. The Administration returned to the Keynesian principles, which were most effective in stabilising the effects of the Great Depression. The Revenue Tax raised tax rates on incomes of above $50,000 but also "estate and gift taxes [...] corporate tax on all but small corporations." The aim was to close the growing deficit budget but it fell short of its promise as no significant federal revenue increase occurred nor was there any major redistribution of income.
In conclusion it appears that the New Deal policies of reviving the agricultural, industrial and monetary sectors of the economy was not that successful in the long run for the US was still suffering from unemployment at the dawn of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbour. The economy was still rather weak and evidently not of the level prior to the Wall Street Crash as domestic consumption and production remained low. The US continued to lead an isolationist policy until the very late 1930s, when it became involved in the outbreak of the II World War in Europe. The policies and programs implemented by Roosevelt succeeded in halting the worsening economic and social situation in America, as unemployment dropped and vast sums of money were spent on subsidising the depressed population. The Keynesian policy profited the economy as it slowly enabled the development of a self-momentum necessary to keep the flow of capital constant. However the industry required a greater push rather than just NRA and NIRA. Thus ironically the outbreak of the II World War provided the US with a market for selling its armaments and weapons. The New Deal has been criticised not only for its failure to return to the previous decade of prosperity but due to the government interventionist policy of implementing the programs. The changes that occurred due to New Deal in the economic, social and political sphere revolutionised the future of the United States of America.