Puritans first settled the town Salem in 1626 but ever since the ghastly events of 1692, it has became a milestone in the history of witchcraft and occultism. The events in Salem were most peculiar as they started "when a few teenage girls became entranced listeners to voodoo stories [...] and began acting strangely - shouting, barking, grovelling, and twitching for no apparent reason." These bizarre incidents resulted in mass witchcraft hysteria and paranoia as the adolescents accused numerous residents of the Salem of witchcraft and dealings with Satan. Consequently within a short period of time the local jail was overflowing with 200 suspected witches and warlocks, from which approximately 30 were executed. What is striking about this topic is the fact that Salem seemed to be an average, peaceful settlement and yet the outbreak of frenzy surpassed all precedents in its span and magnitude. The events in Salem were unique as they engulfed the entire community and the surrounding towns. The origins of this extraordinary situation are highly complex as they revolve around the conservative theology of Puritans, the internal pressures of society and external stimuli. Salem developed a self-momentum for witch hunting of its own that was not present in any other Puritan community. Why was this so?
The history of Puritans and their theology is fundamental in understanding the causes of the turmoil. They escaped Great Britain in hope of creating a Christian utopian society in the New World, as they were fanatical about their faith since they considered themselves the chosen people. They held very reactionary views about lifestyles and were hostile to the pleasures of life as they constantly asserted the basic sinfulness of humankind.
The Puritans believed that God continuously spoke to them through various occurrences such as "signs in the sky (comets, the aurora borealis), natural catastrophes (hurricanes, droughts), smallpox epidemics, the sudden deaths of children or spouses, unexpected good fortune." The only trouble was interpreting the meanings of these signs correctly.
A vital notion in Puritan mysticism was the entwining of the natural world with supernatural, spiritual and moral forces. In the preternatural world Satan played a crucial role as all ill fortune was attributed to him. It was believed that the Devil recruited witches and warlocks to harm humans and cause disorder; therefore witch hunting was a necessity. Wonders were unexpected events such as noises with no apparent source but were very important as they "reminded people of the radical contingency of their existence [...] and notions of nature [being] charged with spirits." Practices such as fortune telling, miraculous healings, and casting spells were considered morally ambiguous and referred to as wonders therefore witchcraft was "one of the many forms of wonder".
The Puritan community lived in constant fear of being cursed, attacked by Indians or punished by God. Witchcraft rumour spread very quickly and the number of cases between 1647-1662 only added to the extreme tension. They could not rely on English support therefore the young men formed the militia. However the King Philip's War decimated this force which led to constant Indian raids and the King William's War, threatened the security and peacefulness of the inhabitants as the French and Native Americans plundered the northern frontiers of the New England colonies.
Mary Beth Norton, the author of In the Devil's snare, acknowledges the importance of these raids, as the Indian had been associated in the New England Puritan mind as the "black man" or Devil, so the attacks were an allegory of Satan attempting to destroy the Puritan society.
The chronological lead up to the 1692 Salem episode presents the social insecurity the inhabitants endured and which later had an impact on the witch hunt.
A major social conflict existed within the community between the Townsmen and the Farmers due to a divergence of interest. The Townsmen were prosperous and exercised control over the farmers who constantly had to battle for their privileges and rights. There was constant competition and jealousy between the two factions and as Salem flourished new factors and institutions were brought into the confrontation. The rise of a merchant class amongst the Townsmen was inevitable but the farmers wanted to resist this pressure of commercial capitalism and social style, which they regarded as sinful. The lack of Salem's autonomy "exposed and intensified certain destructive patterns of political behaviour" and the unresolvement of questions regarding legislature and authority led to the "Bayley Dispute". The structural defects in the organisation resulted in the Villages helplessness in dealing with disputes, which only fuelled the various factions.
The issue Samuel Parris, experienced similar factional problems and witnessed the decline of the ministerial class.
Therefore Salem can be considered a deviant community as it relied on the authority of individuals, such as Israel Porter, Jr. Thomas Putner, and Samuel Parris. With the simultaneous growth of capitalism and population two families, the Putnams and Porters, emerged representing different interest groups. The shifting locus of control in village passed from the Porter's to the Putnam's, but the intermarriage relationships convoluted the situation. Samuel Parris' arrival resulted in another battle between himself and members of the congregation, as he was an ultra orthodox Puritan who used the Church as a podium to present his own resentments and obsessions. This crisis played a considerable role in 1692 as the Putnam's became the main prosecutors of the witches and the families of the anti-Parris faction, such as the Proctors, Nurses and Porters, were frequently accused of witchcraft. The Putnam's power was declining due to the familial changes of heritage and so the pursuit for witches "served as a psychic weapon to restore their prestige." It therefore appears that the "witchcraft outbreak was intimately connected with the factional conflicts which proceeded it" implying that the long festering local feuds and property triggered the prosecutions. The Putnam's used the Salem episode to restore their strength and rid the community of any threat to the heritage of the Putnam estate. It was not a conspiracy they had formulated but the circumstances at the time played into their advantage.
"The pressure for an outbreak of witchcraft activity came from overseas", since following the disputes between the King and Parliament, the number of witchcraft accusation drastically mounted. Throughout the period 1637-1647, Britain experienced the greatest number of witch hangings, while from 1645 to 1647 as many as 200 witches were killed. The high figures can be accounted by the presence of a witch hunting militia, which at the time was headed by the barbarous and bloodthirsty Matthew Hopkins.
The art of correct interpretation was a skill immensely cherished by the Puritans due to their great dependence of signs and wonders, which later determined the direction an event would follow. The adults shaped the course witchcraft accusations would take, however the young people soon became the catalysts of the witch-hunt, as it was mostly children who claimed to have the supernatural visitations. The adolescents "broke out of social rule becoming sources of moral authority." This fact has led historians to conclusions the fits, tantrums and hallucinations may have been only in the children's imagination, and the Salem episode was aimed at enlivening the tedious routines of everyday life. Bernard Rosenthal has forcefully argued the possibility of fraud in his book, Salem story. A more probable explanation claimed that adults manipulated children to remove neighbours and potential rivals. This may assumed since many of the accused were from the surrounding towns in Essex County so the children were not personally acquainted with the alleged witch or warlock. Rebecca Jacobs "was unable to pick him [the accused] out until a man standing behind one of them whispered into her ear." Clearly it seems that the children were puppets in the hands of the adults, but the possibility of the existence of a grand conspiracy is most unlikely.
There are various possible explanations of the fits and delusions the alleged victims suffered. John Demos suggested, "psychological conflicts underlying the New England belief in witchcraft had more to do with aggressive impulses than with libidinal ones." Furthermore it was the tensions in the mother-child relationship that were reflected in the witch hunting, so the attacks and convulsions were hostile and aggressive feelings attributed towards mothers and not witches. Through this psychoanalytical theory, Demos claimed that the children were faced with extremely difficult psychic tasks and the bizarre behaviour was attributed to the task, so the child was suffering from a post-traumatic stress disorder. This theory has its loops due to the limit data necessary to make a concrete statement. The reasons for the bleedings, pins and teeth marks on the witnesses bodies still remain a mystery, although there have been theories that the wounds were self-inflicted. The apparitions of ghosts, Satan and individuals may have been brought about by the consumption or inhalation of the mushroom ergot, which produced paranoid fantasies.
Why were three quarters of the accused women? The entire episode took place within a male dominated society, where the male had legal, political, ideological and economic authority over the women. The image of a woman being the great temptress and servant of the Devil was still very alive, Eve had seduced Adam into eating the forbidden apple, which had led to the downfall of man and the outcast from the Garden of Eden. Due to the social changes involving remarrying and 3 rd generation children, women began to test the constraints and develop a degree of independence by involving themselves in business transactions. Most of them were beyond childbearing age, without sons and brothers thus they waited to inherit property and live freely. Hence by defying the traditional rules they became outsiders of the community and so were easily targeted during the witch hunt frenzy. After all the accusations were primarily based on the peculiarity of an individual for those who threatened the established rule and social convention were perceived as being involved in witchcraft. The first woman to be accused was Tituba, who was an African slave and was blamed for the adolescent girls interests in fortune telling and occultism.
The end of the crisis was brought about due to grow of doubt over the validity of confessions and accusations after the deaths of Rebecca Nurse, George Burroghs and Giles Corey. Charges against well-connected and powerful people were viewed suspiciously and with reserve. Governor Philips pressed for the exclusion of spectral evidence, which consequentially led to the collapse of allegations as almost all were based on the testimonies of the victims. Inevitably the collapse of accusations led to the disbanding of the Court of Oyer and Terminer, and Increase Mather pointed out that Devil could take the shape of an innocent person, so people became more aware of themselves.
The Salem episode was a culmination of fears, tensions and social distress amongst the Puritan community. Firstly the existence of occultism and the theological connections between faith and witches played a significant role in determining the frenzy. The unresolved past disputes between the inhabitants and the development of various factions with opposing interests, stimulated the direction the witch hunting route followed. The massive social discomfort and fear of being attacked by Indians alongside the history of witchcraft in the colonies stressed the Puritans even more. The evolution of society and the presence of new possibilities proved to be too overwhelming for the Puritans who preferred to stay within a closed framework. The importance of individuals such as Samuel Parris and the Putnam and Porter families, whose unique personality characteristics caused further agitation to the Salem community. The impact of the British witch hunting forced the authorities to make a decisive stand against witchcraft. Salem was an aberration as it did not follow a normal pattern of witchcraft purges, it was brief and very intense. The world has never witnessed a similar event and hopefully it shall not have to.