On a personal basis death is the final stage of ones life. Friends, family and relatives may mourn the loss of the individual but have to come to terms with the bereavement. This can be facilitated through a funeral service as it provides the mourners last chance to say farewell to their beloved and marks a closed chapter of the person life. But how does a nation come to terms with loss? The Second World War has been claimed to be the darkest periods for the history of humanity due to the extreme number of casualties, which have been estimated at 62 million. This is undoubtedly an unprecedented figure. The war consumed civilians, military personnel, landscapes and cites whilst the aftermath can still be felt today. The end of the war in May 1945 marked a distinct turning point as the survivors befell victim to psychological trauma which resulted in a collective trauma for European societies. The consequences can be seen in the search for Nazi's as scapegoats, the creation of various conspiracy theories about Allied-Nazi agreements, the destruction of group identity as with the Ukrainians. But it can also play a key role in formation of new identities such as for the Jews or Poles. For a nation to face up to the tragedy, providing meaning for it, shapes the experience of collective trauma and facilitates the nation's recovery. Thus the form of remembering the dead, the "cult of the dead", serves to provide support to the bereaved, meaning of the dead and a justification of the sacrifice, thus ultimately legitimising the existence of the nation and the political system.
This essay aims to examine in political terms the importance of cult of the dead and how significant it is the nation building process. Through the narrative of the situation of post Second World War Poland, this essay shall examine the tools used by the newly established communist regime and assess its success of using the political cult of the dead as a means of legitimising its authority.
For the Polish nation, the Second World War has been one of the most traumatic experiences any nation has had to endure, it lost 15% of its population, of which were mostly civilians, who were either exterminated by the Nazi or Soviet terror. Statistics claim that 3 million Polish Jews were murdered by the Nazis, whilst a remaining 2.5 million died as a result of Soviet occupation from September 1939 and the mass deportations to Siberia. The Polish population was massacred in Volhynia by the Ukrainians, the failed Warsaw Uprising left the city in rumble and most of the officers' elite were wiped out in the Katyn massacres. From the military perspective, after the fall of Poland in October 1939, the Poles set up a resistance movement Armia Krajowa, which continued to destabilise the Nazi occupation. Numerous Polish individuals fought in the air, at sea, on land and by 1944 on all fronts; Western, Eastern and Southern. Furthermore their input was at times most crucial as the Squadron 300 and 303 defended the British skies during the battle of Britain, the breaking of the enigma by Polish mathematicians enabled the allies to decode German messages and the 2 nd Polish division opened the route to Rome at the battle of Monte Cassino in 1944. Poland was the first nation to be attacked in 1939 and it held out throughout the entire war on the Allies side. However at the Conference of Yalta the nation was betrayed by its Western Allies as Soviet domination was allowed with the establishment of the People's Republic of Poland. How could one provide meaning for such national suffering and justify the display of heroic valence which resulted in a tragic outcome?
The first major issue the communist party had to tackle was the memory of the sufferings inflicted by the Soviets, however this proved to be an extreme challenge. There was a deep rooted Russo-phobic sentiment that reached even further than the first partition of Poland in 1773, and which was reinforced by the Polish-Bolshevik war of 1920 alongside the constant anti-communist stance throughout the pre-war period. Therefore the memory of the war had to be readjusted in a manner to suite the communist party; as in an authoritarian regime individual memories are censored. As the American scholar, Catherine Merridale states, "personal memory is only part of the social of remembering, so it may appear irrelevant or even subversive to national projects of commemoration." Hence in light of the atrocities committed by the Nazis and the "liberation" from the occupation by the Soviets, the latter were viewed as the saviours. The crimes of the Nazi's were broadcasted constantly; the trials at Nuremburg transfixed the Polish nation as they sought revenge for the inhumane suffering. Landmarks such the Warsaw Ghetto, Auschwitz and Paviak became historical monuments to "victims of Nazi aggression", whilst relics of the Warsaw uprising were removed. The use of military metaphors and the language of heroism in party statements and media served as another means of depicting the Germans as almost lesser humans. Thus by default, this promoted the valence of the Soviet army, which was naturally incensed by them belonging to the Victors, the Allies. The communist's did not need to strengthen in particular the anti-German sentiments as Polish communities gathered together and forced many Germans out of the newly acquired lands, as it has been estimated that approximately 3 million Germans were 'evicted'. Thus clearly the "iteration of one kind of memory involves the forgetting of others," as all the deaths of the war were blamed directly on the Nazis, even those which arose from disease and malnutrition.
The suppression of information and knowledge on the evils conducted by the Soviets was performed by re-interpretation, 'hushing up' and actual banning. The Soviet invasion of Poland on 17 September 1939 was claimed to have been agreed with the Polish Government, whilst the Katyn crime was blamed on the Nazis, furthermore the lack of international support for the case only enhanced the communist position by providing greater mystification on the culprit. Polish history textbooks avoided similar "case sensitive" issues such as the Ribbentrop-Molotov pact and "the memory of Poland's role in all those aspects of the Allied Victory not directly connected with the Soviet camp was systematically erased from the record." Teachers caught mentioning national Polish heroes such as General Wadysaw Anders or Wadysaw Sikorski were simply imprisoned and the curriculum imposed the glorification of 'Moscow' Polish communists such as Wanda Wasilewska and General Bering. War memorials and cemeteries to commemorate the Soviet soldier's achievements and sacrifices of 1944-45 were erected in almost every Polish city, whilst "gravestones, obituaries, notices making any reference to the Polish government, the Home Army or to any foreign service were [...] removed by agents of the state police." The state sponsored commemoration aimed to rewrite the national story by inventing tradition where the past was overshadowed, as the replacement of the 3 rd May National Day commemoration with that of 22 nd July, recalling the creation of the Lublin government in 1944. Clearly meaning of death and suffering was not provided to all, as the state selected the deaths of those who died for the communist cause and used them as a means of legitimising its authority. Offering meaning inspired the principles of patriotism as significance and emotion could be attached to the sacrifice which corresponded to the needs of the population who sought a measure of coming to terms with the tragedy. By limiting the process of me-moralization to a selected group little comfort to the bereaved could be offered but this in turn stimulated a direct response anti-communist communities such as the Church and the Polish migrs.
The Church, through the application of rituals, religious and patriotic rhetoric and Christian idealism was able to partially provide consolidation moreover the historic attachment of the institution to the Polish nation building process, paved the way for the nationalisation of religious meaning of death. The language of the consolidation in light of Christian idealism generalised the sacrifice of the dead to incorporate the sacrifice of the bereaved thus redemption was achieved via a supreme sacrifice. Furthermore due to the legacy of the Catholic Church as the moral authority for the Polish nation and as a beacon of preserving national identity, it used the popular belief of mesjanizm as a manner of justifying the suffering. The metaphysical concept which emerged during the partitions ascribed the Poles with a messianic mission of "suffering innocently in order to redeem humankind". This principle was upheld by the communists partially since it weakened opposition but more importantly served as manner of unifying the Polish nation together, similar to monument of the Unknown Soldier. However the conviction exposed tensions with minorities living in Poland as the Jews were omitted in the notion and the stereotype of the Polish-Catholic was inflamed. Despite the glorification of the Polish national saint, Maximilan Kolbe, who sacrificed his life for a Jew at Auschwitz, Polish-Jewish relations remained strained. They intensified after the war and especially following exposition of the issue of Jedwabne massacre and other anti-Semitic pogroms, as it dealt a blow to the Polish self-image as the just martyr nation. Thus this conflict had a negative impact on legitimising the communist rule for the Polish nation did not entirely fit the messianic picture.
The Church proved to be a thorn for the Communist authority as well since it represented the values of a nation which were opposed to the principles of Communism. Furthermore the Church's vocation for truth was extremely damaging in light of the Soviet atrocities committed during the war as it provided ground for the commemoration of victims of Stalinism. The most appealing patriotic rhetoric of 'God, Honour, Fatherland' was also a challenge to the communist authority due to the atheist standpoint of the government. This resulted in a unique phenomenon for the Peoples Republic of Poland as the Church wielded the moral authority, thus simultaneously weakening the party's legitimate claim to governing the nation, which acted as the main obstacle in the Sovietization and may explain the Russian lenient attitude to change in communist politics, in contrast to the repressive methods used in Czechoslovakia and Hungary. Additionally the Polish population was very cynical and apathetic towards the communist regime due to the existence of 'another' memory of the Second World War thus reflecting the failure to fully indoctrinate and suppress the nation's true history. Despite the censorship repressive measures used to remove the 'enemies of the state' private memories were preserved as symbols and makeshift monuments remembering events such as Katyn massacre frequently appeared at cemeteries. Teaching of national history was not confined to the school but was actually acquired in the environment of the household and parish. This proved fundamental in undermining the political legitimacy of the communist government.
However there were individuals also refused to discuss personal memories, either due to the survivor-guilt conscience, fear of punishment or rehearsal of the experience only instigated further suffering. Nonetheless the migrs who had been labelled "imperialist agents" and "fascists" by the Communist regime constantly worked for the survival of the true accounts of the Second World War and thus provide comfort, support and meaning to the 2 million victims of the Stalinist oppression.
Therefore to conclude the political cult of the dead is extremely important in the process of nation building as it is may used by the nation to justify its existence and legitimise the system of power. Whether the nation was successful is a different matter as the Polish example clearly comes to show. The lack of legitimacy of the communist system explained the need for methods of coercion and reflected the corruptibility of the system. Meaning to death was expressed through various commemorations and rituals to glorify the sacrifice and provide dignity to the dead thus allowing coming to terms with the tragedy and understanding the contemporary situation. Not all death was accounted for as it did not coincide with the communist agenda, thus resulting in great disillusionment of society, leaving various communities still traumatised. However due to the competing memories of the war, a "double memory" emerged. The Soviet perspective removed soviet crimes and Polish heroic achievements through emphasis of the communist role as the great saviour of Poland, whilst the nationalist account which was taught by migrs, various Church members and patriotic individuals acknowledged Poland's messianic role. The private and public memories conflicted with each other; however private sphere's sense of collective understanding developed episodically and lacked an immediate political impact. The nationalist memory formed part of the Polish identity of opposition as "people without memory were easier to make slaves, thus by preserving memory they remained human".