The nature of human reasoning is a popular area of research in psychology. Its popularity has derived from questions about the rationality of human thought. Rational thought is sometimes defined as thought which is analogous to the laws of logic, where there is always a correct or incorrect answer to a problem and a finite approach to solving it (Eysenck & Keane, 2000). Many psychologists would disagree with this definition because they believe that reasoning does not have to be logical to be rational (Sloman, 1996, Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996 and Chater, Oaksford, Nakisa & Redington, 2003). Sloman (1996) focused, in depth, on the debate over rationality in human reasoning, and created a model involving two systems of reasoning to explain the variety of results found in experiments that investigated reasoning.
The two systems of reasoning proposed by Sloman (1996) are an associative system and a rule-based system. These two systems differ in their computations and, when one system is favoured over the other, the way a problem is approached. In the associative system, reasoning takes the form of detecting similarities between situations and events. Associations formed in the past can be drawn upon to solve a particular problem. The associative system does not involve the use of logic but does involve the use of general rules that a person has derived from experience. In the rule-based system, the rules are more specific and have a logical structure. Rules in the rule-based system can be represented in the form of symbols and problems are solved by direct application of these rules. To illustrate the difference between the two systems, Sloman (1996) uses the example of working out the amount of change to give to a customer in a shop. If a customer is charged sixty pence for their purchase and gives the cashier one pound, the cashier may use their associative system to draw from their knowledge and automatically provide the answer of forty pence change. If a rule-based system were used, the cashier would consciously perform mental arithmetic and calculate the answer of forty pence.
In order to confirm that these two systems of reasoning exist, evidence from psychological experimentation is needed. Tversky and Kahneman (1983) carried out an experiment to investigate judgement. They gave participants a paragraph to read about a person called Linda who was concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice. They then asked participants to judge the probability that certain statements about Linda were correct. Two of the statements were, "Linda is a bank teller" and "Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement." Eighty percent of the time, participants ranked the second statement as being more probable than the first. If this task is viewed in terms of mathematical probability the first statement should be more probable than the first, because it is more likely that one idea is true, than of this idea and another occurring together. The unexpected results can be explained by Sloman's (1996) associative system of reasoning. This system would recognise the similarity between the initial paragraph given and the contents of the second statement.
If participants genuinely believed that the second statement was more probable, why did they not try to defend their responses when the more logical answer was pointed out to them? People are able to see the problem from both points of view and this may be because they can obtain two different answers, depending on which system they reason with. They are able to accept the other point of view, but still believe that their original answers are justified. If there are two systems, as Sloman (1996) proposes, how can they both exist at the same time while giving contradictory solutions? In this case the answer provided by the associative system was accepted and the rule-based system was overruled. An interesting point to consider would be why the associative system was accepted over the rule-based system and whether there are any instances where the rule-based system is favoured.
A well-known task used in many investigations of reasoning is Wason's selection task (Eysenck & Keane, 2000). Participants are shown four cards placed on a table and given a rule that they must confirm or disconfirm by turning over a minimum number of cards. In the original task, the participants were given a rule involving vowels and even numbers. The majority of participants would turn over the cards with a vowel and an even number on them to confirm the rule. This choice of cards can be linked to the associative system because the participants are matching the cards to the elements mentioned in the rule; they are looking for similarities. However, applying laws of logic to the situation, participants will pick different cards and this approach can be linked to the rule-based system.
The original task favours the associative system but variations on the selection task have provided different results. Griggs and Cox (1982) gave participants the rule that if a person is drinking alcohol then they are over eighteen years of age. They were given cards in the same format as the original task but with pictures of people over and under eighteen and pictures of alcoholic and non-alcoholic drinks. In this experiment, the majority of participants turned over the cards that were the logical choice rather than carrying out the matching process, so according to Sloman's (1996) theory were using the rule-based system of reasoning. The results of this experiment suggest that the relevance of a task to everyday situations can have an affect on which system of reasoning is used. However, applying prior knowledge to aid problem solving is a feature of the associative system and in this case the knowledge initiated the rule-based system. This suggests that the two systems may have interacted to produce an answer. If the two systems are capable of interacting then this may be evidence against their existence. Their interaction could be due to the fact that they are not separate systems but just two components of a single system.
Models are often applied to tasks and these provide the expected means of solving the task and the expected solution that is to be reached. In the Wason selection task the model applied to the task was that of logic and, in the original task, this was not the model used by the majority of participants. Stanovich and West (2000) noted that it was commonly the case that the experimenters' models differed to those used by participants. Experimenter models were named "normative" (p.645) and the participant models "descriptive" (p. 645). Stanovich and West (2000) deciphered reasons why there was such a gap between the two models. One explanation they provided was the existence of two-process theories, such as the theory proposed by Sloman (1996). Examples of other theories adopting the dual process approach are Evans and Over (1996) and Levinson (1995), amongst others. Although not identical, the different dual process theories do have similarities and this suggests that even though Sloman's (1996) specific theory may not be correct, the general idea of two systems of reasoning, based on the similarities between the theories, may be correct.
Stanovich and West (2000) offer an alternative as to why there appears to be two separate systems of reasoning. They suggest that it could be linked to task construal. When a task is presented to a person, they will differ in their interpretations of the intentions of the experimenter or person giving the task. This can be illustrated using the Linda-the-bank-teller problem discussed earlier. Participants could have interpreted the question as asking what they believed to be true, given the evidence, rather than what the mathematical probability was. They may have believed that the experimenter intended them to give an answer related to the paragraph that they read rather than working it out logically. If this is true, then the variation in answers to a problem may not be due to two systems of reasoning, it may be due to interpretation of the task.
Stanovich and West (2000) have provided further explanations as to why normative and descriptive models differ. The occurrence of performance errors is one possible explanation. Performance errors occur when people fail to apply rules or logic, associated with Sloman's (1996) rule-based system, because of a temporary lapse in something as simple as concentration or attention. This would cause them to provide an answer appropriate to Sloman's (1996) associative system. Another explanation is provided by the existence of computational limitations. Some rule-based strategies can involve quite complicated computations that not everyone would be able to carry out. This would give them no choice but to apply an alternative strategy. Both of these explanations provide an alternative explanation for the normative/descriptive gap without relying on a dual process approach.
The question can be raised as to whether computational limitations are actually linked to the two systems of reasoning. Stanovich and West (2000) argue that intelligence may provide an explanation as to why both Sloman's (1996) rule-based system and associative system occur. Greater intelligence could mean that a person is more likely to use and accept a more logical system because they understand it. Someone less intelligent may use the associative system, but when the logic is explained to them, and they understand it, they will accept the rule-based system. From this point of view, the two systems of reasoning can exist and people of greater intelligence are more likely to use the rule-based system. Hardman (2000) disagrees with this argument because people will not always accept the logical system even when they understand it. He accuses Stanovich and West (2000) of not applying their theories to the correct type of task. He proposes that if the tasks were everyday, real world tasks then people would be less likely to accept the purely logical approach.
Intelligence is a continuum. It is not possible to separate it into two groups, one of high intelligence and one of low intelligence. Similarly, perhaps it is not possible to separate systems of reasoning into two distinct groups as Sloman (1996) has done. Many aspects of the two systems that Sloman (1996) has proposed may be considered to lie on a continuum (Newstead, 2000). The example given earlier, of change giving in a shop, highlights this. Here the use of the associative system provided an automatic response, whereas the use of the rule-based system required the shop assistant to consciously work through the problem. In real life, for actions to become automatic, a person must gradually learn the action and improve in various stages. An example that Newstead (2000) provides is that of driving a car. When first beginning to learn a person has to consciously think through all of their actions, and only after practice and gradual improvement do the actions become automatic. An entirely automatic response and an entirely logical, conscious response therefore are two ends of a continuum and not two distinct entities. This is also the case for the speed of processing. The associative system is considered to be fast and the rule-based system slow, but speed is a continuum.
Are there two systems of reasoning? Sloman (1996) has provided a very convincing case for the existence of two systems and is not alone in trying to derive two distinct systems as discussed earlier. The evidence suggests that problem solving is not approached in the same way by everyone, implying that there cannot be one system available. Evidence also suggests that there are many factors influencing what system of reasoning is used in any situation such as familiarity with the task, intelligence and how the task is interpreted. It is however difficult to distinguish two distinct systems of reasoning because many of their features are continuous. This leads to a conclusion that many systems of reasoning exist and are employed where viewed appropriate by the person performing the task and they vary in degree rather than specific kind.