Two important points to consider when conducting any form of psychological investigation are whether the research is reliable and whether it is valid. Reliability is concerned with how similar the results are to the actual phenomena they are trying to measure. This can be explained by how likely it is that the researcher will obtain the same results if they were to repeat their research again in a different context (Perkyl, 1997). Validity is concerned with whether the interpretations and conclusions drawn from the research are appropriate considering the type of investigation used (Maracek, 2003).
Questions of reliability and validity often arise when conducting research using qualitative methods. Examples of qualitative methods are participant observation, open-ended interviewing and case studies (Maracek, 2003). These ways of approaching research are defined as qualitative because they do not measure behaviour in a numerical way using a strict scientific procedure as in quantitative research. Because qualitative research does not reflect traditional scientific method, it is often stated that qualitative research cannot be reliable or valid. However, many arguments have contradicted this view.
One example of where both reliability and validity have been increased by using a qualitative method rather than a quantitative method is in a study by Al-Krenawi and Wiesel-Lev (1999, cited in Maracek, 2003). This study looked at Arab women's attitudes towards female circumcision. Their answers to close-ended questions provided results suggesting that they had no negative feelings about it. However, when they were able to speak freely they expressed how distressed they felt about it. The qualitative method, that did not restrict their answers, was therefore more valid because the data collected was about their true feelings. The qualitative method was also more reliable because it produced answers that would be found again if the study were to be repeated.
Qualitative methods and quantitative methods both have their uses and deciding on which method will be more valid depends on the research question. It depends on what kind of knowledge the researcher is seeking as to what method of research to use (Maracek,2003). In some cases, where little is known about the area of interest, using a qualitative method will provide the more reliable and valid results. If qualitative research is carried out, then an hypothesis can be generated from this research and a more quantitative approach can be adopted to test this hypothesis (Burt & Oaksford, 1999).
Some psychological tests are designed for a particular culture or people who speak a certain language. If these quantitative tests are then applied to a different culture, the results will not be accurate or reliable. It is important not to generalise in these situations because the validity of the results will be questioned (Cooper & Stevenson, 1998). Qualitative research does not involve generalisation and it is often the case that qualitative research can be carried out on a very specific group of individuals and can be designed specifically to meet the needs of the group. This will ensure high validity.
The points made so far have concentrated on how, in some cases, qualitative research can be the more reliable and valid method. There are times, however, when it is difficult to maintain reliability using qualitative methods because of the nature of the research. Perkyl (1997) highlights some of the difficulties in conversation analytic research. This particular research uses tapes and transcripts to record data and these must be of good quality so none of the information is lost and all the information can be conveyed to the public as evidence. The more information that is maintained, the greater the reliability of the research. Similarly, in field research, the written notes that the observer makes need to be accurate and the observer needs to make important decisions about what information to record as it is not possible to record everything. All the decisions the researcher makes will affect the reliability of the end result.
Psychologists often make a common distinction between qualitative and quantitative research. In quantitative research emphasis is based on controlling and manipulating variables. In a laboratory it is much easier to control unwanted variables and measure very specific aspects of behaviour. In this situation reliability will be high because researchers are likely to get the same results if they repeat the experiment under the same conditions. However, the validity of this type of investigation can be questioned because the participants are not in a natural setting and it is questionable whether the findings from this research can be applied to everyday life. Qualitative research is viewed as being opposite to this. It has high validity because it often involves observing behaviour where it occurs naturally but it also has low reliability because it is very difficult to control variables in a natural setting.
With both qualitative and quantitative research having varying degrees of reliability and validity depending on the context of the investigation, it seems appropriate for Cooper and Stevenson (1998) to propose a 'New Science' incorporating both qualitative and quantitative methods.