The authoritarian personality is a personality type that predisposes a person to obey unquestionably. People with this personality type are said to be prejudice against minority groups and believe strongly in obeying authority. They also have a general belief in the importance of power and dominance, and the insignificance of those below them. This is because they feel weak and therefore feel they need to be part of a powerful group and have a powerful leader.
The authoritarian personality has shown a trend in personality patterns formed in childhood. Research has found that those who score highly on authoritarianism tend to describe their childhood as being dominated by stern harsh fathers who insisted on absolute obedience. This theory is predominately a psychodynamic one as it is based on the idea of 'reaction formation', as a forbidden impulse is re-channelled into a safer course. In effect these minority groups are used as scapegoats as they are considered to be weak and powerless. In this case, the child is unable to express their anger towards their father and thus resulting in them redirecting their anger towards much safer targets such as minority groups (Gleitman, Fridlund & Reisberg, 1998). Defence mechanisms are used to hide their true feelings, for example they will repress their aggressive or sexual feelings and project those traits onto others. There is also a tendency to view the outside world as being populated with dangerous enemies who have to be attacked before they themselves are attacked. This personality consists of a lot of distrust for others. This negative view of people leads to the conclusion that harsh laws and order is necessary in order to control people.
These conclusions were however based on a limited sample of white middle class Californians; therefore it is questionable whether the theory can be applied to other cultural or socio-economic groups. Also the information on the patients's childhood was drawn from their own recollections and so the authenticity of the results cannot be certain.
The theory can also be seen as being incomplete. It explains why some individuals become fascists but it doesn't explain why racism and fascism became a widespread phenomenon. Some research has shown that even the fascist elites have had different types of education than that which would create authoritarian personalities. Also, it fails to study how society itself influences the rise of hate and acceptance of authority.
It is claimed that a person's attitude to authority is influenced by their attitude to their parents. (Adorno, Frenkel-Brunswick, Levinson & Sanford, 1950). However, variations in the degree of racism have been shown to be unrelated to type of upbringing (Sidanius et al., 1986).
The authoritarian personality is supported by the fact that the studies focus on the important relationship between social and political attitudes (Brown, 1965). Minority prejudice does tend to go with authoritarianism and people with this type of personality do also tend to hold certain political views such as, they are more obedient to authority and tend to accept the attitudes of those in power (Elm & Milgram, 1996). However prejudice has varied historically, therefore authoritarianism may just be a result of societal times and not ones family, as suggested by the psychodynamic approach. This calls into question the causality between authoritarianism and prejudice.
Further support comes from evidence that authoritarianism is more pronounced among people with less education (Chrishe, 1954). The theory supports this as working class parents are more likely than upper class parents to stress obedience to authority as they themselves are more likely to obey to the authority of a boss or a supervisor (Kelly, 1969). And it has been found that authoritarian parents tend to produce dominated children who themselves become authoritarian parents (Adorno et al.).
The theory of the authoritarian personality (Adorno et al.) is based on empirical research and determines susceptibility to prejudice and also patterns of belief and ideology. The theory was based on a research project where people who were believed to be highly authoritarian were interviewed; it was found that these people shared certain common traits. The purpose of the questionnaire was to measure anti-Semitism and to determine correlates of anti-Semitism. The answers from 2000 questionnaires were classified in order to put each individual on a scale of A-S (anti-Semitism), E (ethnocentrism), PEC (political-economic conservatism) and F (potentially fascist). These results helped to form the f-scale by assigning psychometric properties to the scales. The f-scale was validated by various means such as discriminated validation, conformity methods etc. It was developed as a personality inventory that measured the central attributes of authoritarian personality. The scale consisted of 30 items covering such issues as obedience & respect for authority, aggression towards deviant groups such as homosexuals, and general ethnocentrism.
The main criticism of the f-scale is a methodological one, all the items are worded in the same direction, and therefore agreeing with a statement would always mean that you support the authoritarian viewpoint. Therefore if you scored highly on the f-scale, there if no way of determining whether you are authoritarian or just acquiescent.
The more recent Right Wing Authoritarianism (RWA) scale (Altemeyer, 1996) claims that it has fixed the problem of acquiescence. This scale uses cognitive theory to account for authoritarianism instead of the psychodynamic approach that is used in the f-scale. The authoritarian sees the world in black and white terms, being unable or unwilling to tolerate cognitive ambiguity. In other words people with a high RWA will have a different cognitive set to those with a low RWA. It is based on the idea that authoritarianism is a personality trait consisting of three covarying components, Conventionalism, authoritarian submission and authoritarian aggression.
The validity of the f-scale has come under question a number of times. Even though research suggests that the f-scale does not measure what it sets out to measure, it does measure something that seems to have a significant effect on many other variables (Ray, 1990). Gabennesch (1972) suggested that a high f score represents narrowness of world-view and a narrow breadth of perspective.
The scale has also been described as a collection of 'Victorian values' (Hartmann, 1977); the attitudes were considered old-fashioned even when the f-scale was complied. Therefore we are unable to be sure if the scale is even socially relevant to today's society. What is considered as an authority personality type may not be applicable to today's culture either. In the 20's, obedience to authority was the norm and was actually expected of children. However, now, children are encouraged to be more autonomous. Therefore if someone were to score highly on the f-scale it could just mean that they are old fashioned and not authoritarian. Sanford (1977) suggested that due to changing times, interested researchers should attempt to define a new from of authoritarian personality that is related more to current social issues.
Relational studies have shown when correlating f-scale to various prejudice measures in South Africa the relation has been poor. The scale fails to explain prejudice in societies where prejudice is the norm (e.g. South Africa & Southern USA) as it only looks at the individual. Ray (1980) found a 0.59 correlation however, Orpen & Van der Schyff (1972) only found a 0.05 correlation. This implies that maybe the concept of authoritarianism would be more appropriate if it was applied only to societies where prejudice is normative.
It has been suggested that the potential for authoritarianism is actually quite high, given the right circumstances (Zimbardo, 1971). It is estimated that at least 80% of us have prejudices. Also, Milgram's study of obedience (1971) suggests that 65% of us would physically hurt someone if told to do so by an authority figure. This suggests that maybe there are parts of an authoritarian personality in all of us.
Research into the authoritarian personality is extremely important as the trait can lead to anti-democratic beliefs, ethnocentrism and prejudice. These types of social behaviour can have a detrimental effect on society as we have seen many times in history, for example in Nazi Germany or fascist Italy.
The authoritarian personality theory (Adorno et al., 1950) has been widely criticised as being inaccurate. However, even with its errors the authoritarian personality theory has pioneered a lot of research in this field, which in time will hopefully help to improve and expand on the theory.