Science is a key subject taught in primary schools today as part of the National Curriculum. Teachers draw upon the National Curriculum for guidance about what scientific concepts should be taught and to what age group they should be aimed at. In order to provide teachers with appropriate guidance, developers of curricula can refer to empirical evidence and theories about cognitive development.
One of the first major theories of cognitive development was devised by Piaget. He saw development as taking place in four stages; the sensorimotor stage, the preoperational stage, the concrete operational stage and the formal operational stage (Harris & Butterworth, 2002). Piaget devised tests to determine what stage particular children were in. These tests included assessing children's knowledge of specific scientific concepts. Many later experiments, however, contradicted Piaget's findings, as will be discussed later, and other theories of cognitive development were proposed, including that of Vygotsky and the information-processing approach.
Piaget's theory has been directly applied to the equivalent to the national curriculum in America (Good, 1977) and there have been consistent findings that children are taught concepts far in advance of what Piaget would suggest for their age group. This leads on to an evaluation of the current National Curriculum for science key stage one and two in England and how this compares to research findings. Also, today's teaching methods can be questioned as to whether they take into account enough information about children's nave theories and false beliefs and the part they play in the understanding of science (Pine, Messer & St. John, 2001).
The two stages of Piaget's theory of cognitive development that apply to primary school children are the preoperational stage, from two to six years of age, and the concrete operational stage, from six to eleven years of age (Harris & Butterworth, 2002). Piaget used conservation tasks to distinguish between these two stages (Fogelman, 1970). In the conservation of liquid task, children were shown two containers of equal volume but different shapes. Water was poured from one container to the other and the children were asked whether there was still the same amount of liquid. Preoperational children answered "no" because they were directly led by their perceptions and perceived the water level to be lower or higher. Concrete operational children said "yes" because they were able to reverse the process and say that if it was poured back into the first container it would be the same.
Good (1977) led an investigation into the types of science topics taught to elementary school children and how they were taught. He made comparisons between what Piaget would have claimed different age groups were capable of and what they were expected to learn by reviewing science textbooks. Grade 1 pupils (six to seven-year-olds) were seen as only being able to learn through physically acting on objects so books with diagrams and pictures would not be of much use. Grade 1 pupils were taught about the earth, moon and sun system and also about the weather. These concepts would be very difficult to grasp at this level because the children's thoughts involve a lot of animism. Animism in this sense would be thinking that the sun and moon go away and "sleep" at appropriate times, or the sun "hides" behind clouds.
Grade 3 pupils (eight to nine-year-olds) are still dependent on their perceptions as grade 1 pupils are, but their thinking is more flexible. They are able to perform simple classification and have a stable concept of time. Topics such as the interaction of force, motion and friction and the nature of sound cannot be fully understood because they are theoretical and cannot be directly perceived. In these cases it is possible for children to rote learn the information, which can then be fully understood at a later date. Concepts that can be internalised by grade 3 children, because they are more concrete, are descriptions of animals and their young and characteristics of common plants.
Grade 5 pupils (ten to eleven-year-olds) are borderline between the concrete operational and formal operational stages and are still mostly limited by concrete thinking with little abstract thinking. They cannot isolate and control variables in experiments. They have difficulty in understanding concepts such as gravitational forces and centrifugal forces because they have to look at complex diagrams that represent motion, and be able to visualise the motion themselves. This research implies that children's capabilities are very limited and that the majority of concepts they are taught they are unable to fully understand. It is quite likely that this is not the case, as Good (1977) points out, because development is a continuous process and should not be seen as discrete stages, so some preoperational children will be capable of concrete operational tasks and the same with concrete operational and formal operational children. Another aspect of children's capabilities that must be considered when designing a curriculum is that there is a three year age span in academic achievement within each age group (Good, 1977). Teachers should therefore be able to adapt tasks to fit all abilities within their classes.
One of the major alternatives to Piaget's theory is the idea of information processing models of cognitive development. These models are similar to Piaget's in that they view development as occurring in successive stages and advanced understanding develops from less advanced ideas (Meadows, 1993). The emphasis in these models is on how information is represented and processed to create a knowledge base. During development, links are made between pieces of information and there becomes an increasing number of ways to access particular information. Children's ability to create and use effective strategies becomes more advanced as they develop. Information processing models focus on how knowledge is organised at different ages and not just what children can or cannot do. Looking at how children learn rather than what they are able to learn at a particular age, may be of use in the classroom to aid their learning. It may therefore be appropriate to consider the information processing view when devising a curriculum.
Another major alternative to Piaget's theory and the information processing models is an approach to cognitive development originally devised by Vygotsky. This approach sees the child's social environment as being a major influence on cognitive development (Meadows, S. 1993). There is a large emphasis on language ability, because it is seen that the development of children's logic develops along-side social speech. Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development or ZPD can be directly applied to the classroom situation. The ZPD is the difference between what a child is capable of achieving on its own and what it can potentially achieve when aided by others. This suggests that some of Piaget's tasks could have been completed more successfully by the younger children if they were given help and guidance by an adult. In a classroom situation, a teacher can help a child reach its full potential by ensuring they give correct instruction and guidance.
Although large influences in the history of developmental research, Piaget's theory, information processing models and Vygotsky's theory are not the only influences on what should be taught in the curriculum. There have been several, more recent, studies that have looked at specific scientific concepts and children's ability to understand (Goswami, 1998). Quite often, these studies have shown an understanding at a very early age.
One area of science that has been studied recently is biological understanding. There have been several studies into children's understanding of animal movements, including that by Lamsfuss (1995 cited in Goswami, 1998). Her experiment involved showing four and five-year-olds different pairs of tracks, represented by dot patterns, and asking them whether they had been left by an animal or a machine. The children classified the irregular tracks as animal tracks and the regular tracks as tracks left by machines. This shows that young children understand about animal movement and they were able to classify different types of tracks. According to Piaget's theory, children of this age are not able to classify things into categories, but this was not the case in this experiment. Further evidence for young children's abilities to classify animals was provided by Pauen (1996, cited in Goswami, 1998). In this case the children were able to separate the same biological kinds into sub-categories depending on visual dissimilarities.
Part of learning about science as a whole, is understanding about scientific experimentation and manipulating variables to produce required effects and causal reasoning plays a large part in this. The first, most basic step to understanding causal reasoning is to understand the relationship between cause and effect. Investigations into this phenomenon have found that the understanding of cause and effect is well established by the age of three to four years (Goswami, 1998). The next step is to understand cause and effect in a chain of events. To do this a child must be able to make a transitive inference and this can mostly be achieved by age five (Goswami, 1998). Full scientific reasoning, however, is not established until eleven or twelve years of age (Kuhn, 1989, cited in Goswami, 1998). Younger children do not understand how to control confounding variables so that experimental variables are isolated and are the only variables to "cause" the result. They do not have a full understanding of hypotheses and evidence.
Research on the understanding of causal reasoning and scientific experimentation has great relevance to the current National Curriculum in England. Both the key stage one and key stage two science curriculum have a section entitled "scientific enquiry" (National Curriculum online). In key stage one, this section includes consideration of what might happen before seeing an experiment performed, and being able to communicate what happens to others. According to Goswami (1998), this should be well within the capabilities of children this age. Also, in key stage one, the emphasis is on asking questions about situations that are familiar to the child and occur in every day experience. This fits in with Piaget's idea that a child of this age can only reason about phenomena that are directly perceived. The child is not asked questions about theoretical concepts. In key stage two, the "scientific enquiry" section includes the role of manipulating one factor while controlling others in order to measure effect. Kuhn (1989, cited in Goswami, 1998) found that primary school children were not capable of this. Although this idea is too advanced for key stage two pupils to fully understand, it does not mean that it is not appropriate to be taught at this stage. If older primary school children are given this information at this point then they may be able to understand it and use it once they have moved on to secondary school.
As well as focusing on what theories can be taught to children while they are at school, it is also important to identify what theories children have already developed from the home environment and how these can contribute to their learning. Pine, Messer & St. John (2001) gave different aged children a balance task where they had to balance a beam that was weighted at one end. Pre-school children were able to complete this task by trial and error, but six and seven year olds could not complete the task. This is because the older children had developed a nave theory that in order to balance objects, the fulcrum must be placed in the middle. Children develop many nave theories that need to be corrected through education and Pine, Messer and St. John's (2001) point was that teachers need to be more aware of these nave theories when teaching new concepts. They suggest that in order for a child to understand a new concept the child's false beliefs need to be brought to their attention. The new concept then appears more meaningful and is easier to accept. Asking children what their current beliefs are is important in teaching and should be highlighted in a curriculum.
It is very difficult to decide what concepts should be taught in a curriculum and when the appropriate time is to introduce them. Research into cognitive development can help to a certain extent but should not be strictly followed as there are many exceptions and no firm rules to follow. Children are always able to rote learn information, if they have the memory capacity, even if they cannot fully internalise the information. If teachers identify the extent of an individual child's knowledge and capabilities then they can produce work for the child that matches their capabilities and helps them to extend their knowledge without being out of their range of thinking.