The purpose of this experiment was to investigate how effective the use of Lorayne's (1958) mnemonic technique was at improving memory of people's surnames immediately after learning and 24 hours after learning. The memory for names of high and low imageability was also studied. 40 participants took part, 20 were given the mnemonic technique to use and 20 were not instructed as to how to remember. There was a significant difference recall between the technique group and the control group, F(1,38) = 8.911; p< 0.05. There was also a significant difference between the recall of high and low imageability names, F(1.38) = 6.203; p< 0.05. There was no decline in recall after 24 hours. The mnemonic technique, therefore does help recall and is useful for memory in the long term as well as in the short term.
In everyday life, people come across social situations in which they are required to remember people's names. Lorayne (1958, cited in Morris, Jones and Hampson, 1978) devised a mnemonic technique for improving recall of surnames when given the faces of the corresponding people. The technique involved creating a visual image that was similar to the surname or easily reminded the person of the surname. For example, for a Mr. Gordon, the name can be converted to garden. The next stage was to select a prominent feature of the face and interact the image with that feature. In the example, this could be Mr. Gordon's large nose and the visualisation could be a garden growing over his nose.
Morris, Jones and Hampson (1978) carried out an experiment to test the effectiveness of this mnemonic technique. They tested 40 participants, 20 were placed in the mnemonic group and given the technique to use, and 20 were placed in the control group and given no technique. They found a significant difference between the recall of the mnemonic group and the recall of the control group, with recall being higher for the mnemonic group.
The aim of the current experiment was to develop Morris, Jones and Hampson's (1978) experiment further by testing the recall of participants 24 hours after learning as well as immediately after. If Lorayne's mnemonic technique was to be useful in everyday life, it must help people remember names for a long period of time, not just a few minutes. If the technique was a success, it would mean that a person could remember someone's name on their second meeting, which could be days after their initial meeting.
There are many theories of forgetting, including Tulving's (1974, cited in Eysenck and Keane, 2000) cue-dependent forgetting and context-change theory. This theory concentrates on how the information to be remembered is encoded and how this produces a unique or distinctive trace that can be retrieved easily. Applying this theory to the mnemonic technique, it can be assumed that making a face distinctive and memorable in this way, will help prevent it being forgotten. A similar theory was developed by Craik and Lockhart (1972, cited in Bower and Karlin, 1974). Their 'depth of processing' approach stated that material is more likely to be remembered when a strong memory trace is created by high levels of processing.
Richardson (1999) suggested that higher levels of processing, and consequently remembering, can be achieved if the material has high imageability. In this experiment, names were chosen for either their high or low imageability, in other words, how easy it was to form a distinctive, clear image from the name. It could then be hypothesised that names with high imageability would show better recall and less forgetting between the two trials than names with low imageability.
The means and standard deviations for the number of correct recalls are shown for each main variable in Table 1. A three-factor mixed analysis of variance was conducted on the results. The main effect of technique was significant, F(1,38) = 8.911; p< 0.05. The main effect of imageability was also significant, F(1,38) = 6.203; p< 0.05. There was no significant difference between the results of session 1 (the initial test) and session 2 (the test 24 hours later). There were also no significant results for any interactions of the main effects.
The mnemonic technique did improve recall overall for the surnames and the results therefore agree with the findings from Morris, Jones and Hampson's (1978) experiment. The results also show no significant difference between the recall in session one and session two so memory for the surnames did not decline over 24 hours. However, it is not possible to conclude that the mnemonic technique is the reason for the lack of decline, because similar results were found for the control group. It may be true that memory for names of people does not decline over a 24 hour period regardless of what memory strategy is used.
It is possible that participants placed in the control group used their own imagery technique to help them remember the names because they were given no instructions about how to remember. This would account for the greater number of high imageability names being remembered in both control and technique groups and could be the reason for no decline being found between sessions. However, whatever techniques were used, they were not as effective as the technique being taught. For further research on this point, it may be useful to instruct the control group about how to remember, for example, by asking them to repeat the name over and over again, instead of allowing them to use their own imagery technique.
The great variation between individual scores in both the technique and control conditions can be explained by Paivio's (1971, cited in Richardson, 1999) research using his 'Individual Difference Questionnaire'. From this questionnaire, Paivio distinguished between two types of individuals; those people who habitually used forms of thinking based upon imagery, and those who use forms of thinking based upon verbal processes. Those who use verbal processes would struggle to use imagery in either condition. This would especially account for the few low scores obtained in the technique condition where participants found the mnemonic technique difficult to use.
Overall, Lorayne's (1958) mnemonic technique does help to improve memory of people's names in the short and long term, but it must be considered that not everyone is suited to the technique, and some people may find that their own techniques are just as helpful.