Antisocial personality disorder is also known as psychopathy, sociopathy or dissocial personality disorder. In the 'Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders' or 'DSM-IV', it has been grouped in cluster B of axis II. The manual defines individuals with this disorder as having a tendency to repeatedly break the law without regarding the feelings and rights of people who may become victims of their crimes. DSM-IV includes evidence of impulsiveness in its description, and signs of aggressiveness and lack of empathy. The manual also defines someone with this disorder as being at least eighteen years old and having a history of conduct disorder earlier in life.
As a result of their criminal behaviour, many people with antisocial personality disorder end up in prison and there are many questions about how the criminal justice system could better understand these individuals and deal with them in an appropriate way, encouraging them not to re-offend. Some of these questions may be answered by considering the bio-behavioural approach to this disorder. In order to work with people with this disorder it is necessary to try to understand the way they think such as their capacity to understand emotion and how this effects responsibility for their acts (Ciocchetti, 2003). It is also important to consider the findings of behavioural studies on passive-avoidance learning of psychopaths (Thornquist & Zuckerman, 1995 and Newman, Patterson, Howland &Nichols, 1990), as well as research on 'delay of gratification', (Newman, Patterson & Kosson, 1992) and 'the response modulation hypothesis', (Newman, Schmitt & Voss, 1997). Biological accounts can also give insight into the problem, including accounts of neuropsychology (Smith, Arnett & Newman, 1992), and studies of genetic influences using twins (Carey, 1992). Finally in order to help people with antisocial personality disorder, different types of therapy need to be addressed and the effectiveness of these therapies considered.
In his article 'The Responsibility of the Psychopathic Offender', Ciocchetti (2003), describes how psychopaths are incapable of forming relationships because they cannot relate and respond to the reactions of others. He proposes that psychopathic offenders cannot be fully responsible for their actions because they lack emotion and do not understand the full impact of their actions like non-psychopathic offenders do. He also argues that psychopathic offenders must be treated differently to non-psychopathic offenders because they lack moral values and do not respond to common forms of punishment. Ciocchetti emphasises his belief that appropriate psychiatric care would be far more appropriate than common punishment.
A number of experiments have been carried out to investigate why people with antisocial personality disorder do not respond to punishment. They especially look at passive avoidance learning (Newman et al., 1990 and Thornquist & Zuckerman, 1995). It has been shown that psychopaths are deficient in avoidance learning and this is caused by 'poor fear conditioning', (Eysenck, 1967, cited in Newman et al., 1990). Psychopaths have a reduced level of fear arousal and this interferes with learning to avoid situations that appear unpleasant to people without the disorder. However, a study by Schmauk (1970, cited in Newmanal. 1990), found that psychopaths did not tend to react to social or physical punishment but did react when punished with loss of money. This suggests that psychopaths are capable of some sort of avoidance learning and criminal justice should consider other ways of punishing them that they react to and learn from.
A study by Newman, Widom and Nathan (1985, cited in Thornquist & Zuckerman, 1995), showed that psychopaths were more likely to respond to a loss of reward for not responding to a 'positive' stimulus than a punishment when responding to a 'negative' stimulus. This suggests that encouragement to take positive action is a lot more effective than punishing negative acts. Prisons could try to encourage people with antisocial personality disorder to concentrate on positive activities, to discourage them from negative activities, including breaking the law. Experiments on 'delay of gratification' have also been carried out to further investigate the response of psychopaths to reward, (Blanchard, Bassett, & Koshland, 1977; Widom 1977, cited in Newman, Kosson, & Patterson, 1992). In Widom's (1977) experiment participants were offered immediate cash payment and the decision to refuse it and get twice the amount the following week. Participants were measured on the MMPI Psychopathic Deviate scale and it was found that those with higher scores on the scale were more likely to accept the immediate cash payment. The ability to resist the immediate reward is a measure of self-control, (Newman, Kosson & Patterson, 1992), and this suggests that people with antisocial personality disorder have limited self-control.
The studies mentioned so far have concentrated on behavioural accounts of antisocial personality disorder. There have also been investigations into whether there are biological or genetic differences between psychopathic and non-psychopathic offenders. In a study by Smith, Arnett and Newman (1992) both psychopathic and non-psychopathic participants were divided in to groups of either low or high anxious psychopaths or low or high anxious non-psychopaths. They were then tested on different tasks designed to use different functions of the brain. Vague support was found for the hypothesis that psychopaths would perform poorer on tasks involving the frontal lobe. Also low-anxious psychopaths did not perform as well as low-anxious non-psychopaths on certain tasks involving block design. This study suggests that there may be some differences in brain functioning between psychopaths and non-psychopaths.
Antisocial personality disorder and criminality have been found to have genetic factors. In St. Louis a link has been found between females with hysteria and first-degree male relatives with antisocial personality (McGuffin, Shanks & Hodgson, 1984). Also, a higher concordance of personality disorder was found in MZ twins than in DZ twins (Slater & Shields, 1969, cited in McGuffin, Shanks & Hodgson, 1984). Genetics factors have also been shown, in adoption studies, to influence criminality. A study by Hutchings & Mednick (1975, cited in McGuffin, Shanks & Hodgson, 1984), showed that people were more likely to commit crimes if their biological father was a criminal than if there adopted father was a criminal. Criminality was even more likely if both biological and adopted fathers were criminals.
Whatever factors cause antisocial personality disorder, theories of how to treat people with this condition need to be put into practice in the form of therapy. The most popular is individual psychotherapy along with the use of a cognitive-behavioural approach (Kraus & Reynolds, 2001). Methods which seem to work are concentration on anger management, alcohol or drug abuse, which the patient may have a problem with, and empathy training in order to try and understand how their actions affect others. Suggestions have been made that people with antisocial personality disorder should not take part in group therapy and individual therapy is more appropriate (Yalom, 1985, MacKenzie, 1997, cited in Kraus & Reynolds, 2001). Family and marital group therapy, however, have been considered more appropriate than other types of group therapy (Melroy, 1995, cited in Kraus & Reynolds, 2001).
In some situations, medication has been used as well as therapy, to alleviate some of the symptoms, although there are no drugs to treat the disorder specifically (Gabbard & Coyne, 1987, cited in Kraus & Reynolds, 2001). Most drugs are used to treat symptoms of aggression which are expressed by many people with antisocial personality disorder. There are some concerns about the use of drug therapy because many patients have been known to abuse the medication or become addicted to drugs such as benzodiazapines (Kraus & Reynolds, 2001).
When criminal justice and law enforcement are dealing with criminals with antisocial personality disorder they have to understand their reasons behind the crime and find appropriate ways to help them. It is important that they understand that imprisonment by itself is not an adequate way to punish psychopaths in order to stop them committing the same crimes again. They should also learn that making therapy available to psychopaths may help them with their antisocial personality disorder.