In order to exam whether 'A happy worker is a productive worker', it is worthwhile to look back the literature which deals with the relationship between satisfaction and performance. Academics and researchers proposed different views about this issue, Bradfield and Crockett (1995) concluded that there is little evidence to suggest that employees' attitudes bear any simple or appreciable relationship to performance on the job. However, by contrast, Herzberg et al (1957) provided a quite different conclusion: there is frequent evidence to suggest that positive job attitudes are favourable to increased productivity. Facing these contradictory opinions, the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance will be examined in detail firstly. Then the determinants of job performance and job satisfaction will be discussed, finally the conclusion and suggestions for management in the real world will be provided.
Empirical support for each of the theoretical positions outlined above has been weak, With respect to the first assumption (satisfaction causes performance). Steers stated that "the fact that workers are satisfied does not mean they will necessarily produce more, only that they are satisfied" (1981: 309). Regarding the second position (performance causes satisfaction), he said that "there is no compelling argument that performance must necessarily cause satisfaction, particularly if performance goes unrewarded" (1981:310). Petty et al 1984In other words, employee satisfaction does not necessarily lead to high employee performance, while highly productive employees are not necessarily the highly satisfied employees. The underlying reasons are both job performance and job satisfaction are caused by a variety of factors.
To sum up, the relationship between job satisfaction and job performance is still debatable due to the weak academic and empirical evidence. Also, it is find that job performance is mainly determined by ability, motivation and opportunity, while job satisfaction is affected by environmental, personal, social, cultural and situational factors. Thus, a happy worker can be a productive worker or vice verse, however, employee satisfaction does not necessarily lead to high employee performance, while highly productive employees are not necessarily the highly satisfied employees. Moreover, the causality between job performance and job satisfaction might not be the interests for management in practice; however, in order to win in the increasing competition, effective manager can provide both productivity and satisfaction for the organizations. The techniques such as 'goal setting' and 'job enrichment' can be used jointly. The increased autonomy, feedback and task identify that typically accompany job enrichment programs should facilitate management to gain higher levels of employee job satisfaction. On the other hand, the use of goal-setting program should enhance employees' task performance. Lastly but very importantly, the existence of individual differences and culture differences should be taken into account when management are seeking for greater job performance and job satisfaction.