In the literature, academics hold different views of what is happening in the world economy, some researchers believed that strong globalisation is taking place and a notion of a 'globalized' world has been accepted (Ohmae, 1995; Reich 1991); while others suggested that although national economies may in some ways be highly integrated, it is not so much a global world but a more internationalized one. Moreover, there is a great debate on the implications of globalisation (or internationalization) for the role of nation states. On one hand, some globalists indicated that '...in terms of global economy, nation states have become little more than bit actors' (Ohmae, 2000:207); on the other hand, people supposed that nation states have played and will continue to play a key role in the global economic integration process (Weiss, 1997). In order to critically evaluate Ohmae's statement, this essay will firstly focus on the extent of economic globalisation, how far has economic globalisation gone? And then the second part will provide the evaluation of the impacts of globalisation on the power of nation states. A conclusion and further considerations will be given lastly.
To sum up, although some aspects of the world economy are becoming more integrated than before, 'globalisation' is not a single, unified phenomenon, it is a conjuncture of economic, political, cultural and technological forces. Hence the world economy is not genuinely a globalized one, but still an internationalized one with more emphasis on the importance of regional economy. Moreover, the process of internationalization has not eliminated the power of nation states; nation stats have played and will continue to play a significant role in the development of the world economy. Furthermore, since the capacity and adaptability of nation states differ, nation states will response to the international economic changes differently; strong nation state's facilitation will help people to be more successful in exploiting the opportunities. Finally, with the increasing development of regional economy, nation states collectively regulating economic through regional groups and international agencies will become more important; and global governance which express the interests of the nation states embodied will be required.