During last decade there has been a growing interest in the topic of employee participation and involvement and successive Workplace Industrial Relations Survey (WIRS) and Workplace Employee Relations Survey (WERS) have confirmed that the use of direct employee involvement (EI) has become considerably more extensive while the use of indirect EI has declined during the last 20 years (Cullyal. 1999; Millwardal. 2000).As defined by Marchington (2001:234), EI 'represents a concerted attempt by employers to find participative ways in which to manage their staff... Its aims are those which support the achievement of management's goals, either directly in relation to performance improvements... or indirectly through higher levels of employee commitment, satisfaction and identification with their employer.' Generally, there are two forms of employee involvement: indirect and direct EI. According to Marchington and Wilkinson (2005: 400), indirect EI is 'where employees are involved through their representatives, usually elected from the wider group', such as joint consultation, work councils and collective bargaining. Direct EI is 'concerned with face-to-face or written communications between managers and subordinated that involves individuals rather than representatives.' (Ibid) Examples of direct EI include team briefing, quality circles, problem-solving groups, team work. In order to evaluate the use of direct EI by UK employers, this essay will begin with the analysis of the empirical evidence for the use of direct EI techniques by UK organisations; then the key motives for UK employers to operate these direct EI techniques will be evaluated followed by the critical assessment of the benefits which have been gained through the use of direct EI techniques; a conclusion and some implications for UK organisations will be provided at last.
In order to assess the empirical evidence for the use of direct EI techniques by UK employers, two successive surveys (WIRS & WERS) are chosen as the data source. WERS are not only comprehensive in scope, but also are statistically reliable and representative of British employment; while although WIRS is not as comprehensive as WERS, it provides more detailed explanations, therefore the combined use of these two surveys will represent a more reliable and representative picture about the use of direct EI by UK organisations. Generally, there are three main categories of the use of direct EI techniques which will be examined as follows (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005).
Having evaluated the increased use of direct EI techniques by UK organisations, this section will turn to look at the reasons why UK employers have an interest in direct EI initiatives.
Firstly, as suggested by Marchington and Wilkinson (2005), one of the major factors shaping direct participation within organizations is the competition and pressure from the product market. These competitions not only apply to private sector but also to public sector which has been subjected to the forces arising from deregulation and commercialization and linked to notions of customer choice (Ibid). As Poole et al (2004:497) explain, 'increased competition and concerns about economic performance have encouraged the development of EI as a route to better market performance.' For example, National Transport Corporation (NTC), a public service organisation which is undergoing 'commercialisation' into a business unit, has operated the national Total Quality Management (TQM) and team briefing schemes and some local EI initiatives in order to open up a new and direct line to employees and hence improve their performance (Ackersal. 1992). Moreover, the development of new technology (such as just-in-time system) and the scale of direct contact between staffs and customers required more direct communication between employers and their employees in order to achieve business success (Emmott 2002). Employers are expected to increase the level of employee commitment to the organisation and improve the performance or productivity from the use of EI techniques (Marchington 2001).
Secondly, since many academics and managers regard EI as a central element in the bundle of practices associated with high commitment or 'soft' human resource management (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005), organisations operate direct EI techniques and adopted them as a part of 'soft' human resource management approach (Emmott 2002). Some researchers argue that employers are now moving away from old ways of organising work around Taylorist principles to the new form of work organization (Geary and Dobbins, 2001), since managers have now begun to realize that workers respond best when they are 'given broader responsibilities, encouraged to contribute, and helped to take satisfaction from their work' (Walton 1985:76). However, others argue that EI technique is just a new form of management control; to have an extension in management control is their primary motive of introducing this new form of work organization (Geary and Dobbions, 2001). Therefore it is a dual strategy of management to implement direct EI techniques, not only providing more autonomy to employees but also seeking greater control over the work by setting demanding performance targets and holding employees responsible for their achievement (Ibid).
Thirdly, since direct EI techniques can offer an alternative source of information, especially through downward communications, it can be considered as an alternative to that provided by the trade unions (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). Direct EI techniques could help to erode distrust and enable employees to identify more with their employers and hence diminish the role of the union (Ibid). Some organisations have introduced direct EI techniques with the objective of marginalizing trade unions (Marchington et al 2001). For example, according to WIRS (2002), six organisations reported that undermining the role of recognised trade unions had been one of the aims of their employee involvement initiatives.
Fourthly, another likely cause for organisations to operate direct EI techniques is fashion. Introducing direct EI techniques into the organisations might be either a bright idea from the senior management or requirement from a major customer or just want to keep up and follow the practices of others (Ackers et al 1992). Since there is a relatively low technical base to implement those techniques compared with the introduction of new information technology, it has been easy for managers to introduce these new practices without extensive profession training (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). As the work by Staw and Epstein (2000) showed, some organisations did EI because of 'reputational effects' since their organisations were seen as more innovative and having better management if they operated EI techniques.
Finally, we should bear in mind that organizations may operate different forms of techniques for different purposes. For example, the principal purpose of downward communications is to inform and 'educate' staff, ensure employees understand the strategic direction of the business so they are more likely to accept management plans and help to achieve business success (Marchington 2001); while problem-solving groups are designed to achieve production or service goals (such as productivity improvements or zero defects) as well as enhance employee morale and commitment (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). Moreover, the organisations with different HRM strategies will have different interests in direct EI techniques. Organisations have a 'hard' HRM strategy, which focus more on cost control, deskilled jobs and lack of investment in training, tend to have weak interests in the use of direct EI; on the other hand, organisations have a 'soft' HRM strategy, who treated employees as an important asset of the organisation and a potential source of competitive advantage and whose product market competed on the basis of quality rather than price, tend to have a strong interest in the use of direct EI techniques and a variety of forms of techniques may be present in practice (Marchington 2001).
A number of senior managers and consultants have made grand claims about the benefits of employee involvement to the organisations (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). They claimed that the implementation of EI techniques will have a big impact on employees' attitudes, lead to higher levels of employee commitment and hence improve business performance (Marchington 2001). According to the WIRS data (2002), when the organisations they surveyed were asked if they have actually achieved anything positive from employee involvement, the overall answer is yes. Similar to the 1999 WIRS results employee relations and employee commitment and motivations are the areas most likely to benefit from EI initiatives. Moreover, some studies have indicated that employees tend to be more satisfied and motivated when they are working in team situations than in the more traditional ways (Edward and Wright 1998; Geary 1993). In addition, Wilkinson's et al (2004) research also support this argument, among their 18 case studies within UK and Republic of Ireland, two-thirds of the managers reported some improvements in employee attitudes and behaviours as a result of employee voice. Many managers commented that the use of EI techniques helped to generate a better environment and contributed to the improved performance (Ibid). Cunninghamal. (1996) also reported organisations gained benefits in terms of cost savings, improvements in quality and increased employee commitment through the use of EI techniques.
However, some researchers are still sceptical about the possible impact of EI on employees' attitudes and more especially on employee commitment and performance (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). For example, Marchingtonal. (1992) find that employees do not think team briefing has a great impact on employment relations or on their attitudes to work and over three-quarters of respondents indicate that there is 'no change' in the case of commitment. Cotton (1993:87) makes this point effectively with the example of quality circles, 'at most these (quality circle) programmes operate for one hour per week, with the remaining 39 hours unchanged. Why should change in 2.5 % of a person's job have a major impact?'
Besides the above contradictory arguments about the benefits of the use of direct EI techniques, evaluating the impact of direct EI is tricky for a number of reasons. Firstly, there are some problems in specifying precisely what is meant by commitment, improved employee attitudes and how it is measured (Guest 1992).As the data from WIRS (2002), although majority of respondents have admitted the improvements of performance since the implementation of EI techniques, a number of employers said their responses to these questions were based on their subjective feelings rather than hard evidence. Secondly, although Guest et al (2003) study confirm the association between HR practices and organisation performance, it is difficult to specify the precise contribution of direct EI since it does not take place in isolation but as a part of a bundle of HR practices (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). As Pfeffer (1994: 31) notes, 'it is important to recognise that the practices are interrelated, it is difficult to do one thing by itself with much positive result'. Moreover we should notice that direct EI techniques or HR practices is only one factor among many that can affect organisation's performance. Factors, such as technology change, shifts in the labour markets will also affect the performance (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005). Thirdly, even we agree that there is a significant association between the use of direct EI techniques and performance; it is very difficult to determine the direction of causality (Ibid). Even for Guest et al (2003) study, they failed to show HR practices causes higher performance. It could be argued that superior organisational performance contributes to positive employee attitudes rather than the conventional view (Marchington and Wilkinson 2005).
Furthermore, researchers also find that the impacts of using direct EI techniques on employee attitudes and commitment appear to be influenced by a number of factors. In other words, the results organisations gained through the use of direct EI techniques vary according to a number of factors. Firstly, different forms of direct EI techniques have different impacts on employee attitudes. For example, Cotton (1999) suggests that self-directed work teams have a strong effect on employee attitudes while job enrichment has an intermediate effect and quality circles have a weak effect. Secondly, management's business strategies and approach to HRM, worker's previous experience of participation and work in general affect the employees' reactions to direct EI and hence the impact of direct EI on employee attitudes, commitment and organisational performance (Marchingtonal. 1994) For example, it is easy to see a link between 'open' management styles and positive employee responses to EI initiatives; while in those organisations having a tightening-up management styles, employees were les positive about EI techniques (Ibid). In Geary and Dobbins' (2001) case study about the introduction of teamworking in the pharmaceutical industry, they find that employees are more committed to the introduction of team working since management made an enhanced support to company's competitive strategy and committed to employment security. Also, regular 'bad news' conveyed through team briefing can therefore be converted into negative assessments of the briefing system itself or direct EI techniques (Ibid). Finally, Marchington (2001) notes that the effectiveness of implementation of direct EI techniques is dependent upon a number of factors and the effectiveness of the operation of direct EI techniques will affect the benefits gained to the organisations. These factors include the coherent and well-planned development of EI techniques as part of a broader HR strategy; support from senior management; enthusiasm and commitment from line mangers; sufficient training for supervisors to deliver EI; complete coverage and cooperation with trade unions.
To sum up, empirical evidence has confirmed that the increased use of direct EI techniques by UK organisations during the last 20 years, although the extent of the use is not clear due to the limitations and problems of definitions and survey design. Moreover, it is found that the use of direct EI techniques vary according to forms of techniques, sectors, workplaces size and the presence of HR specialists. In addition, the key motives for UK organisations to implement direct EI techniques include responding to the competitive pressures; increasing employee commitment and organisational performance; changing to the commitment approach and diminishing the role of trade unions. Organisations operate those initiatives for different reasons depending on their HRM strategy and environment in which they operate. Furthermore, although in theory the direct EI is connected with high levels of commitment and organisational performance, this prediction is quite problematic in practice. Organisations' gaining from direct EI techniques varies according to the forms of techniques they implemented; their management styles and the environment the organisations operated as well as the employees' previous experience about the techniques. Definitely the use of direct EI techniques has some value for the organisations, but in order to achieve a better result, employers need to carefully consider the congruence among their approaches to EI, the remainder of their employee relations policies, and the market context within which the organisation operates. Although the Information and Consultation Directive has focused attention on representative participation, as Beaumont and Hunter (2003) pointed that the combination of direct and indirect consultative arrangements has the potential to improve organisational performance, so organisations which have direct participation alone will probably need to adopt a dual approach for the best result.