Isolated chloroplasts and an oxygen electrode were used to investigate photosynthetic control, P/O ratio and the effect of uncoupling agents such as ammonium chloride on them. Uncoupling agents such as ammonium chloride prevent the formation of a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane and mechanisms such as ATP synthesis that diminish the proton gradient, remove a constraint on the rate of electron transport. Hence the rate of oxygen evolution is enhanced by a smaller proton gradient. Non-cyclic photophosphorylation alone is capable of providing sufficient ATP per molecule of NADPH to satisfy the demands of the Calvin cycle. The rate of oxygen evolution is dependent on the irradiance level that the chloroplast are exposed to.
Research into photosynthesis is often carried out on suspensions of isolated chloroplasts, for example photophosphorylation. This reaction is part of the light reaction and is studied in broken chloroplast therefore allowing the access of artificially added hydrophilic reagents such as electron acceptors to the thylakoid membrane. The oxygen electrode is a tool in conjunction with a light source that allows the continuous measurement of photosynthetic activity in such research.
The Hill reaction (2H 20 + 4Fd ox 
 O 2 + 4Fd red + 4H+) is a light-dependent oxygen evolution in the absence of NADP+ reaction, which requires the non-physiological electron acceptor ferricyanide to be present for it to proceed. Plastocyanin is located on the luminal side of the ferricyanide - impermeable membrane therefore ferricyanide can only accept electrons from a donor on the stromal side of the PSI complex. Hence the evolution of oxygen in the Hill reaction with only ferricyanide present as the electron acceptor requires the activity of both photosystems (Figure 1).
Cyclic phosphorylation (ADP + P i 
 ATP) as the name suggests is driven by cyclic electron transport in which the electron in the reduced ferredoxin molecule is transferred to the cytochrome bf complex rather than to NADP+. As a result there is no net oxidation-reduction or oxygen evolution. In contrast to this, non-cyclic photophosphorylation (H 20 + Fd ox + nADP + nP i 
 1/2O 2 + Fd red + 2H+ + nATP) involves the non-cyclic electron transport in a similar form to that of the Hill reaction. Much controversy over the real value of n exists. n is often referred to as the P/2e- ratio or P/O ratio (i.e. number of ATP molecules synthesised per pair of electrons transferred or per oxygen atom equivalent evolved). The value of n though must be greater than 1.5 if non-cyclic photophosphorylation alone is to provide enough ATP per molecule of NADPH to satisfy the demands of the Calvin cycle. Otherwise cyclic phosphorylation would be required to fulfill the deficit that a situation of n less than 1.5 would create.
The aim of the experiment was firstly to demonstrate the Hill reaction. Secondly to calculate a value for the P/2e- ratio and investigate the effect of uncoupling agents such as ammonium chloride and decreasing chlorophyll concentration have on photosynthetic control and the P/2e- ratio.
The method was adhered to as stated in the laboratory manual 'Experiment: Photosynthetic electron transport in isolated chloroplast using the oxygen electrode.' With the exception that in part 3 (ii) the amount of chlorophyll in the reaction vessel was halved to that of 75g.
When the external light from the two LED's was turned off the rate of oxygen evolution decreased from 23.41 to 4.81 mol/O 2/mgchl./hour a reduction of 79% (rates 1 and 2 respectively). Upon turning back on the 2 external lights the rate of oxygen evolution returned back to approximately what it was before the lights were turned off (though 26% higher). Upon addition of DCMU (rate 4) the rate of O 2 evolution decreased to
8.93 mol/O 2/mgchl./hour; a reduction of 62%.
Upon addition of ADP + P i the rate of reaction increased from 0.78 (rate 5) to
1.45 c.u./min (rate 6) an increase of 87% this increase lasted 2.2 minutes after which the rate (rate 7) reduced back to that of the rate before the addition of ADP + P i. From this, one is able to calculate the P:O ratio of the reaction to be calculated as 2.68. Also one is able to calculate the number of "extra" oxygen atoms evolved as a result of having added 0.64moles of ADP which is equal to 1.43x10 14.
Addition of NH 4Cl increased the rate of oxygen evolution from 24.64 (rate 8) to 92.40mol/O 2/mgchl./hour (rate 9) an increase of 275%, subsequent addition of ADP +P i (rate 10) further increased this rate to 117.04mol/O 2/mgchl./hour an increase of 27%. When the amount of chlorophyll in the reaction mixture (rate 15) was halved to that of 75g the rate of the reaction was reduced by 33% in comparison to rate 1 while the rate of oxygen evolved increased by 35% in comparison to rate 1.
The reaction mixture containing the limiting quantity of potassium ferricyanide (1.5mol) did not become a limiting factor on the reaction until after 2.2minutes. This is confirmed by the fact that the rate reaction and rate of O 2 evolution pre and post addition of ADP (rates 13 +14) was equal to that of the reactions in which potassium ferricyanide was in excess (rates 5+6). After 2.2 minutes the rate of reaction and evolution of O 2 rapidly decrease to zero within 1 minute. From this one is able to calculate the number of moles of oxygen present in the 3ml reaction volume as 0.246molO 2, the reaction mixture contained a supply of FeCN 6
3- which would be exhausted after the evolution of 0.375mol of oxygen. The proximity of these two values (34%) gives a measure off the accuracy of the calibration of the electrode.
The addition of ADP but no P i increased the rate of oxygen evolution from 21.74 to 30.01mol/O 2/mgchl./hour an increase of 38% (rates 11+12). This increase in oxygen evolution post the addition of ADP but no P i is 33% lower than that of the corresponding reaction (rate 6) in which inorganic phosphate was added in addition to that of ADP.
Photosystem II contains 2 chlorophyll molecules; they are often referred to as P680 since they absorb light at a maximum wavelength 680nm. On excitation by a photon, P680 rapidly transfers an electron to the nearby pheophytin from which the electron is transferred firstly to the tightly bound plastiquinone at the Q A site and secondly to the Q B site at which an exchangeable plastiquinone is located. A second electron and the uptake of 2 protons are required to reduce the plastiquinone to QH 2 at the Q B site. The source of electrons that neutralise the positive charge formed on the P680 is that of water molecules bound at the manganese center. The center is oxidised one electron at a time until 2 bound water molecules are linked together to form a molecule of oxygen which is then released from the centre into the luminal side of the thylakoid membrane.2
DCMU is an electron transport inhibitor and binds between the two plastiquinone molecule sites (Q A and Q B), therefore inhibiting the flow of electrons in photosystem II. Thus after one flash of light only one-electron reduction of Q A to a semiquinone occurs since DCMU will block the transfer of the electron to the Q B site and thus prevent QH 2 production. Since QH 2 can not be produced, a semiquinone will accumulate at Q A and the reaction centre can not be oxidized and reduced on later flashes of light. However with no oxidation of P680 the manganese center will not be a strong reducing agent and so will not extract an electron from water molecules and so no oxygen will be evolved.1,2
Plastiquinol produced by PSII transfers its electrons one at a time to a plastocyanin in the thylakoid lumen; the two protons released from plastoquinol are released into the thylakoid lumen further enhancing the proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane.
Photosystem I contains a special pair of chlorophyll a molecules P700 that initiate photoinduced charge separation. The electron is transferred first to a chlorophyll at site A o and then to a quinone at site A 1 and then to a set of 4Fe-4S clusters. From which the electron is transferred to ferredoxin, the positive charge on the P700+ is neutralised by the transfer of an electron from the reduced plastocyanin.
As described both photosystems I and II centers P680 and P700 respectively utilize light energy to initiate charge separation i.e. photoinduced charge separation. The source of the electrons that are used to neutralize the positive charge formed on P680 and P700 is that from water molecules bound at the manganese centre and reduced plastocyanin respectively. In the absence of light, photoinduced charge separation can not occur, thus there will be no positive charge on either P680 or P700 to neutralize. Thus no oxygen will be evolved and no oxidation of plastocyanin by photosystem I and hence no reduction of ferredoxin. However in the experiment oxygen evolution was greatly reduced 79%, therefore indicating that photoinduced charge separation was still occurring. The reason for this lies in the experimental procedure. The external LED light source was turned off but the reaction vessel was still exposed to light from the windows and ceiling lights. Therefore at the greatly reduced photon level the rate limiting step of oxygen evolution is that of light absorption rather than the oxidation of plastoquinones.
The potential energy in the proton gradient is used to convert ADP and P i to ATP by allowing the protons to return to the stroma through the CF oCF 1 complexes located in the thylakoid membrane. Potassium phosphate is the source of inorganic phosphate required in addition to ADP to allow ATP synthesis to occur in the chloroplasts given that a sufficient proton gradient exists across the thylakoid membrane. ATP synthesis is therefore described as being coupled to electron transport in the thylakoid membrane.
A reduction in the proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane increases the rate of electron efflux from PSII and that of oxygen evolution. Since at a high proton gradient, it is more difficult for the reduced plastoquinones within the membrane to become oxidised for they must give up protons against a concentration gradient. Thus as the percentage of reduced plastoquinones in the membrane increases and the number of oxidised plastoquinones which are capable of accepting electrons form Photosystem II decreases. The rate of electron efflux from Photosystem II decreases however if the proton gradient is diminished the situation is reversed. A greater percentage of oxidised plastoquinones in the membrane will exist capable of accepting electrons, thus the rate of electron efflux no longer becomes the limiting factor in oxygen evolution but rather that of light in the case of non-light saturated photosynthesis.3
Agents that reduce the proton gradient across the proton gradient drive a greater rate of electron efflux and therefore oxygen evolution from PSII, examples of such agents are ammonium chloride and ADP+ P i. Addition of ADP and P i and the presence of a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane drives ATP synthesis. ADP and P i are condensed together to form ATP by the movement of protons through ATP synthase, thus ATP synthesis decreases the proton gradient across the membrane. Once the source of ADP and or P i is exhausted, ATP synthesis will no longer be able to occur. Therefore the proton gradient will no longer be dissipated and the proton translocation action of PSII and cytochrome bf will increase the proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane. As a result of the increased proton gradient the flow of electrons through PSII will reduce along with the rate of oxygen evolution to that of the rate before the addition of ADP + P i.
Ammonium chloride is described as an uncoupler since it dissipates the proton gradient and thus the potential energy for ATP synthesis. Ammonium chloride is able to do this since in solution it dissociates to NH 3 and H+. Since ammonia is uncharged it is able to cross freely the thylakoid membrane and enter the lumen where it re-associates with protons again to form an ammonium ion. As a result, protons in the lumen are removed without passing through the CF oCF 1 complex and so the proton gradient is destroyed without being utilised for ATP synthesis 3. Addition of ADP and P i in addition to that of ammonium chloride further decreased the proton gradient and thus further increased electron flow through PSII resulting in a further increase in the rate of oxygen evolution.
Upon addition of ADP but no P i the rate of oxygen evolution increased, though at a reduced rate than the corresponding reaction in the presence of both ADP + P i. One would expect no increase in the rate of oxygen evolution, since ATP synthesis will not occur and so the proton gradient will not be dissipated either. Therefore suggesting contamination of the reaction vessel by inorganic phosphate and or alternatively residual inorganic phosphate in the chloroplast which was at a sufficient concentration to drive ATP synthesis and thus increase in the rate of electron flow in PSII. Contamination by ammonium chloride another agent that could possibly decrease the proton gradient is unlikely. This is because the rate of oxygen evolution pre addition of ADP is 6% less than that of the corresponding rate i.e. 1 which was conducted before ammonium chloride was added to the reaction vessel for the first time. In previous reactions it was shown that the concentration of inorganic phosphate was the limiting factor on the rate of ATP synthesis and thus oxygen evolution. Since the conditions at which the experiment was run in comparison to that where inorganic phosphate was artificially added were the same. Any residual concentration of inorganic phosphate in the chloroplasts would be at such a low concentration in comparison to the reaction in which it was artificially added would result in a reduced rate of ATP synthase activity and thus proton gradient dissipation. With a higher proton gradient than the reaction in the presence of both ADP and P i the rate of electron of flow through PSII will be less thus explaining the lower rate of oxygen evolution.
Halving the concentration of chlorophyll in conditions which are known not to be limiting and to produce a recordable amount of oxygen evolution one would logically expect half the amount of oxygen to be evolved over a set period of time. This would occur since there are half the number of chlorophyll capable of producing oxygen, a reduction of 33% was observed. Experimental error such as dilution, light differences and differing rates in the activity of the isolated chloroplasts due to their condition are the most likely reasons for the deviation of this value from a theoretical 50% reduction. The rate of oxygen evolution is greater than when the amount of chlorophyll present was double even though the rate takes into account the amount of chlorophyll involved in the reaction. Three possible reasons for this exist, firstly the second sample of chloroplasts were in a better condition following extraction than those used in the first rate calculation. Secondly the chloroplasts suffered less diffraction of light since less chloroplast were present therefore the rate of photosynthesis was greater. The third and most likely reason is that of the accuracy of instrument in its ability to measure oxygen evolution, evidence for this lies in rates 1 and 3. These rates are from a chloroplast reaction mixture that was subjected to the same conditions, but were separated by a period of darkness. The third rate was calculated once the chloroplast had equilibrated to the light following a period of darkness however this rate of oxygen evolution was 26% greater than rate 1.
Ferricyanide allows the Hill reaction a light dependent oxygen evolution in the absence of NADP+ to occur. Plastocyanin is found on the luminal side of the ferricyanide impermeable membrane thus ferricyanide can therefore only accept electron from the donor on the stromal side of PSI. Therefore oxygen evolution with ferricyanide requires the activity of both photosystems i.e. non cyclic phosphorylation. The P/0 ratio from the experiment is equal to 2.7 indicating that the non-cyclic photophosphorylation will make enough ATP per molecule of NADPH to meet the requirements of the Calvin cycle. The minimum value that the P/O ratio can take to fulfill the requirements of the Calvin cycle is that of 1.5.
Ammonium chloride as discussed destroys the proton gradient and increases the concentration of oxidised plastoquinones. Thus the rate of ATP synthesis decreases however the rate of flow of electron through PSII and hence concentration of reduced plastocyanin increases. Reduced plastocyanin no longer becomes a limiting factor for PSI in the process of producing reduced ferredoxin which is utilised in the conversion of NADP+ to NADPH. The number of ATP molecules synthesised per oxygen atom equivalent evolved will decrease i.e. the P/O value will decrease. Thus non-cyclic phosphorylation would be insufficient to provide sufficient ATP per molecule of NADPH to satisfy the demands of the Calvin cycle. Cyclic phosphorylation would therefore have to occur to produce enough ATP to cover the deficit and the high concentration of reduced plastocyanin would permit this to happen.
4FeCN 6
3- are reduced per O 2 molecule that is evolved, the concentration of potassium ferricyanide added in reaction 3(i) is equal to 1.5mol thus the supply of FeCN 6
3- will be exhausted after 0.375mol of oxygen have been evolved. After which point, oxygen evolution will cease because the pool of oxidized plastoquinones to accept electrons from PSII decreases to such a low level and so will that of the flow of electrons through the system. This will occur since the reduced plastocyanin becomes oxidised by PSI by donating its electron to the positively charged centre (P700+). However if the supply of oxidised ferredoxin is exhausted then there will be no flow of electrons through PSI and so the reaction centre can not be oxidized and reduced on later flashes of light. With no oxidation of P700, the centre will no longer be able to extract an electron from plastocyanin and the concentration of which will grow. Hence when the supply of oxidized ferredoxin becomes exhausted no oxygen evolution can occur. Reduced ferredoxin can not be regenerated become the experiment was carried out in the absence of NADP+. Having a known concentration of potassium ferricyanide and a known amount of oxygen that can be evolved, one can test the accuracy of the calibration of the oxygen electrode. The data from the experiment indicates that the calibration of the curve is -34% the actual amount of oxygen evolved. Thus the rates measured in the course of this experiment could be up to 34% lower than what they actually are.