Over the last twenty years qualitative research has risen from an approach of the study of social issues to a widely practiced method for understanding how people view themselves and the world around them. Qualitative research involves findings that are not arrived at by statistical or other quantitative procedures. The data used in qualitative research varies in many form, the main focus of the essay will be on verbal report data and discourse analysis.
Discourse analysis focuses on verbal report data; this consists of texts, both oral and written and on the roles and strategies of the speakers and the readers who participate in that text. It does this by studying the organization of language above the sentence or the clause, and therefore examines larger linguistic units, such as conversational exchanges or written texts. It is, therefore, primarily concerned with the use of language in social contexts and is the leading method in social psychology.
Qualitative research, using verbal reports, has made many contributions to psychology. The first is that it enables us to gain a better understanding of social life and social interaction from our study of social texts. It does this by emphasizing how social reality is linguistically constructed (Potter & Wetherell, 1987). Coyle (1995) suggests that 'language in the form of discourses is seen as constituting the building blocks of social reality.' Discourse analysis sees language as a constructive tool from which people create a version of events by selecting from the range of linguistic resources available to them. The way in which they use language, and what they gain from the resulting constructions, is then analysed. This, in turn, helps to 'negate the cognitive reductionism that characterizes much of what passes for social psychology and offers the possibility of a truly social psychology' (Coyle, 1995).
The methodology used in discourse analysis does, however, have its flaws. Discourse analysts are sometimes accused of putting words in the mouths of those whose discourse is being analysed. This is especially true in verbal interviews. An interview can be a very good way of getting an idea of the way in which people use language, however, it is important for the interviewer not to confuse their own constructions of the word with those of the patients' (Potter, 1996). Patients may also find that it is advantageous for them to under-report or over-report their thoughts or feelings when giving verbal reports. Due to the influence an interviewer can have on a patient, discourse analysts have been increasingly turning to the study of records of natural interaction (e.g. conversations, newspapers and recordings of counselling sessions) as opposed to interviews where even the most open-ended interview can have set topics and themes. Also individuals may not be aware of the consequences their language has, therefore asking participants to comment on their own analysis is inappropriate, which is a method some psychologists prefer to use.
Qualitative research can also play a primary role in hypothesis generation without the need to appeal to a post modernist philosophy, which questions the need for set criteria exists in judging the products of qualitative research (Denzin & Lincoln, 1994, as cited in Merrick, 1993). In theoretical sciences the depth of knowledge from past experiments and theories constrain the choice of sensible hypotheses (Burt & Oaksfield, 1999). Therefore it is suggested, that in the light of recent views that considering psychology as a science, we need qualitative research to fill the gap in relation to the lack of theories. Qualitative methods systemize and give structure to the process of hypothesis generation. The resulting hypothesis can then be subject to objective testing in a truly scientific way. However we do have to be aware that it is difficult to conduct objective experimental tests using qualitative research. People may not always be willing or comfortable with sharing their experiences with the experimenter. In this case, it may be more appropriate to change the type of verbal report used. For example, people may feel more at ease verbally expressing their feelings in the form of writing.
Whether qualitative work can ever being considered a scientific method is questionable. It has been proposed that there is no way to establish the validity or reliability of scientific claims or observations in qualitative work, (Jessor, 1996, as cited in Merrick, 1993). Validity, within a discourse analytic approach, can be achieved through the presentation of the source texts and analytical processes, thus making clear the researcher's interpretation (Potter & Wetherell, 1987). Provision of these source texts enables readers to evaluate and assess the adequacy of the analysis presented (Potter, 1996), the reader can then decide whether the interpretation is valid and could even offer their own interpretation of the data. Therefore discourse analysis requires a balanced compromise between the presentations of enough source texts to allow the reader to assess the validity of the researcher's analysis, without inundating them with detail. It is also important to bear in mind the difficulty involved in presenting large amounts of data in research reports due to submission guidelines of psychology journals. Hopefully as research into discourse analysis increases, journals might adapt their guideline in order to cater more for qualitative research (Coyle, 1995). Reliability of a method can be easily established when experimental work is involved, as is can, as a method, be just a matter of test and re-test, however this cannot be done with qualitative research. An alternative possibility is to combine a group of studies together in order to build upon previous work. (Potter, 1996) this can then be used to check if similar results have been found.
The criticisms associated with qualitative research indicate that we need to formulate a set of criteria that allows the quality of analysis to be evaluated (Denzin & Lincoln, 1994, as cited in Merrick, 1993). Having said this, it is also possible that we could evaluate the research, especially in terms of validity, by using the above-mentioned method of allowing the readers to judge the interpretations themselves. The use of verbal reports and discourse analysis has increased in popularity as a research method and has resulted in many contributions to the study of psychology. Nevertheless, this method does have its problems. Discourse analysis does not have an answer to any psychological query; therefore it cannot be plugged into a particular pre-defined question. Therefore discourse analysis should not be seen as just a research method but also as a whole perspective on social life, (Potter, 1996). Also, there is the hope that in the future, discourse analysis will continue to develop further and offer considerable more contributions to the various aspects of psychology.