Mitochondrial myopathies in particular those that are situated in the cytochrome b of the bc1 complex, exacerbate free-radical damage by enhancing superoxide production. Superoxide damage to DNA and protein is a major contributing factor in many diseases of old age. Thus an understanding of the structure and mechanism of the complex is central to our understanding of the aging process. The mechanism of the Q-cycle will be discussed first, then that of the structure of the mammalian cytochrome bc1 complex. Finally the evidence for the movement and function of the iron sulphur protein will be discussed with reference to the Q-cycle
Cytochrome bc1 is the second of the three proton pumps located in the respiratory chain. Located in the inner mitochondria, the complex catalyses electron transfer from ubiquinol to cytochrome c by a proton motive Q-cycle mechanism, in which electron transfer is linked to proton translocation across the inner mitochondrial membrane.1 Thus the complex contributes to the generation of the electrochemical proton gradient that subsequently drives ATP synthesis as well as ion and metabolite transport.2
Mitochondrial myopathies especially those that are situated in the cytochrome b of the bc1 complex, exacerbate free-radical damage by enhancing superoxide production at the Qo site.3 The production of the ubisemiquinone anion is an unavoidable intermediate of the Q-cycle. Molecular oxygen has access to the ubisemiquinone anion located at the Qo site; there is a finite chance that it may donate its electron to O 2 rather than b
L therefore forming a superoxide anion. These superoxides are capable of causing oxidative damage to the surrounding DNA and protein this is a major contributing factor in many diseases of old age. Thus an understanding of the mechanism of the bc1 complex is central to our understanding of the aging process.3,4
Ubiquinone is a quinine derivative with a long isoprenoid tail, the number of isoprenoid units depends on the species e.g. mammals contain 10 isoprene units. Quinones can exist in three oxidation states (Figure 1); electron transfer reactions are coupled to proton binding and release a feature key to cytochrome bc1.5 Ubiquinone (Q) and ubiquinol (QH 2) exist in the inner mitochondrial membrane in large molar excess over that of other components of the respiratory chain.4
The mode of function of cytochrome bc1 is best described by considering two consecutive single turnovers of the enzyme.2 In the first turnover a molecule of ubiquinol from this bulk pool is oxidised at the Q o site near the P-side of the inner mitochondrial membrane in a concerted reaction. One electron is conveyed to the Rieske iron-sulphur cluster yielding a ubisemiquinone anion, which reduces the cytochrome b
L.6 The Rieske iron-sulphur cluster oscillates to within electron transfer distance of cytochrome c 1 therefore facilitating the transfer of an electron form iron sulphur cluster to c 1 haem which is then transferred to cytochrome c.1 The reduced cytochrome c molecule is now free to diffuse away from the enzyme. The second electron is transferred from the ubisemiquinone anion to cytochrome b
L and then to b
H and finally to a bound ubiquinone bound at the Q i site reducing it to a ubisemiquinone anion. As ubiquinol is at the Q o site is oxidised to ubiquinone 2 protons are released to the cytoplasmic side; the ubiquinone in the Q o site then diffuses back into the ubiquinone/ubiquinol pool (Figure: 2a).5
In the second turnover a second molecule of ubiquinol binds to the Qo site and the Qo site reactions are repeated.2 The ubiquinol is oxidised, one of the electrons is conveyed through the Rieske iron sulphur cluster to cytochrome c1 which reduces a second molecule of cytochrome c. As before a ubisemiquinone anion is formed in at the Qo site. Two further protons are deposited on the cytoplasmic side through the oxidation of ubiquinol. The second electron is transferred from the ubisemiquinone anion to cytochrome b
L and then to b
H and finally to the bound ubisemiquinone anion at the Q i site. Upon the addition of this second electron, the ubisemiquinone anion takes up two protons from the matrix to form ubiquinol. The removal of these two protons from the matrix contributes to the formation of the proton gradient (Figure 2b).5
After two complete turnovers of cytochrome bc1, two molecules of QH 2 have been oxidised at the Qo site to form two molecules of Q and one molecule of Q is reduced to QH 2. Two molecules of cytochrome c are reduced, four protons are released in the cytoplasmic side and two protons are removed form the mitochondrial matrix.5 (Equation: 1)
Equation:1 5
The cytochrome bc1 complex is a homodimeric, multisubunit membrane complex comprising of 3-11 protein subunits of which only three contain redox active prosthetic groups.2 The complex of the two monomers has a two fold axis of symmetry that runs vertically between the two monomers.8 The overall shape of the bc1 complex dimer from a bovine mitochondrial described below is similar to that of a chicken complex (Figure: 3). The dimmer extends from the membrane 75 into the matrix space and 38 into the intermembrane region on either side of a transmembrane region 42 thick thus giving a total length of 155 perpendicular to the membrane.9
The three subunits which form the catalytic core of the enzyme are as follows: the Rieske Fe-S subunit which contains a [2Fe2S] cluster non-covalently liganded to the protein through two cysteines and two histidines; cytochrome b which contains two haem groups held together through non-covalent interactions between bis histidine residues; cytochrome c1 which contains a haem c group in contrast to cytochrome b they are covalently attached to the protein by thiol ether linkages to cysteines. The cytochrome bc1 complex contains two active sites, one for ubiquinol oxidation (Q o) and the second one for ubiquinone reduction (Q i).2,5,6
The topographical arrangement of the three electron transfer protein subunits in the cytochrome bc1 complex are as follows. Cytochrome b is a transmembrane protein with eight transmembrane helices, with the haem bL located near the P surface of the membrane and the haem bH located towards the N side of the membrane. The redox potential of the haem bH is approximately 60-120mV more positive than that of haem bL, this difference facilitates electron transfer from haem bL to the haem bH even though there is an opposing membrane potential.6,7 Cytochrome c1 and the Rieske protein are located on the P side of the complex where both are anchored to the core of the complex by single transmembrane helices; their catalytic domains are located in the intermembrane space(Figure: 4).1
Structural analysis of the bc1-inhibitor complexes reveals two separate inhibitor binding pockets, located at opposite sides of the membrane for Qo and Q i site inhibitors.9 The Qo site is located on the P-side of the inner mitochondrial membrane while Q i site is located on that of the N-side of the outer mitochondrial membrane; both sites are located at the border of the hydrophobic core of the complex
(Figure: 4).1
From X-ray crystallographic studies of cytochrome bc1 it was discovered that the Rieske iron sulphur protein occurs in several different conformations depending on the crystal form and the presence of Qo site inhibitors. In native bovine crystals only a small intensity anomalous signal for 2Fe-2S was found to haem bL indicating that the majority of the Rieske iron sulphur protein was to conformationally mobile to be observed in X-ray diffraction.7 Crystallization studies of cytochrome bc1 in the presence of the inhibitor stigmatellin, which is thought to bind to the 2Fe2S cluster and mimic a reaction intermediate the Fe-S subunit is in a fixed conformation proximal to the haem bL (called the b state). In the presence of inhibitors such as myxothiazol or methoxy-acrylates which are thought to displace Q or QH 2 at the Q o site without directly interacting with the 2Fe2S cluster. The Fe-S subunit is released from this fixed conformation.2 In the absence of any inhibitors the Fe-S subunit can be found in a conformation with 2Fe-2S close the cytochrome c1, called the c1 state (Figure 5).7 A novel shuttle mechanism for the Rieske iron sulphur protein has been proposed. It is based on these structural studies and the evidence from the Q-cycle and that of the structure of the bc1 complex before the movement of the Rieske iron sulphur protein was detected. The details of this evidence which pointed towards the movement of the Rieske iron sulphur protein is described below.
The Q-cycle described previously, explains how the first electron from the QH 2 oxidation flows to the Rieske iron-sulphur cluster but fails to suggest why the second electron fails to follow the same route. The second electron takes the less thermodynamically favourable route [redox midpoint potential E m (bL, bH) << E m (FeS,c1)]. The path of this second electron through the cytochrome bH and its translocation across the membrane is critical for the formation of a 
 across it.2
The distance between b
L and b
H is that of 21 and 27 between bL and 2Fe2S cluster, given that ubiquinol is bound between b
L and 2Fe2S cluster then the observed fast electron transport rates can be accounted for. However the distance between haem bL and 2Fe2S cluster is 31 which is too great to account for the large electron transfer rate between the two redox centres.9
Ubiquinol enters the Qo site and binds to the P1 site, the ISP is in the b state conformation. The oxidised state of the 2Fe2S cluster of the Rieske protein is close to the surface of the protein and is held in position by electrostatic interactions with amino acid residues close to the Qo site. Ubiquinol becomes oxidised and one proton is released followed by the transfer of one electron to the ISP. Upon accepting this electron the 2Fe2S cluster becomes reduced therefore the strength of these stabilising interactions reduces. The Rieske protein dissociates and rotates through ~57 so that the same conserved docking surface of the Rieske protein that interacted with the cytochrome b now interacts with cytochrome c1 (b).8 After the second proton is released the ubisemiquinone radical relocates and occupies P2 site, this is also thought to enhance the dissociation of the ISP. The dissociation of the ISP prevents the second electron from being conveyed to the ISP, since the distance (~16.4) between the Qo site and the ISP is too great for electron transfer.8 Thus the second electron is transferred to the bL and then to the bH haem possibly causing a conformational change in cytochrome b, which results in the release of the reduced ISP to a second position closer to cytochrome c1 where it can transfer its electron. X-ray crystallographic studies have shown three positions rather than just two. Electron transfer to the haem of cytochrome c1 occurs, the 2Fe2S cluster becomes reduced and so does its affinity towards cytochrome c1, thus the Rieske protein dissociates and moves back towards the Qo site (figure 6).4,9
The Cytochrome bc1 complex transfers electrons from ubiquinol to cytochrome c and links electron transfer to the translocation of protons across the membrane via a mechanism called the Q-cycle. From X-ray crystallographic studies of cytochrome bc1 it has been proposed that the Rieske iron sulphur protein undergoes a large conformational change, which facilitates the rapid transfer of electrons from ubiquinol bound at the Q o site to cytochrome c. A link between the conformational changes at the ubiquinol binding site and that of the movement of the iron sulphur protein has been discovered, and this is thought to be involved in the bifurcated oxidation of ubiquinol. The structure of the complex has provided great insight into its mechanistic features such as the bifurcated oxidation of ubiquinol. A greater understanding of the structure of the bc1 complex is enabling the mechanisms of the Q-cycle and the prevention of superoxide production at the Qo site to be understood in greater detail.