The senses sight, smell, touch and hearing provide us as humans with the means to detect a diverse set of external signals with great sensitivity and specificity giving us a perception of external environment allowing us to alter of perform, informed decisions based upon that. The cell signalling mechanisms of the senses, with regards to their activation, amplification and termination will be discussed before finally comparing and contrasting the different mechanisms. The neurobiology of the senses is out of the scope of this essay and so will not be discussed in any great depth.
The senses touch, heat, light, sound and smell allow us to perceive different aspects of are external environment i.e. shape/texture, temperature, sound and odor respectively. These signals are then processed and combined with additional information in the central nervous system allowing us to perceive the situation and alter or perform, informed decisions based on that of the external environment. For example the ability to recognise an attractive pleasant smelling rose (sight, olfaction) and to be capable of picking the rose up without damaging it (pressure sensing). The study of how the brain perceives these cell signals and responds to them is that of neurobiology.
Olfaction, phototransduction are examples of G-protein linked 7TM receptors, while thermo/pressure sensing and hearing are examples of mechanosensory transduction. The contrasting and similar mechanisms go far to explain many aspects of the senses, such as the sensitivity and the speed of transduction. For example the ability of humans to locate sound sources, is achieved by the transduction mechanism. . The importance of the study of cell signalling is clear to see, for it has given new understanding to many diseases and allowed the development of new drug therapies e.g. pain-management for arthritis
Phototransduction is the process by which a photon of light is captured by a molecule of visual pigment which generates an electrical response in a photoreceptor cell 1. These photoreceptor molecules are located in the retina of the eye and are sensitive to wavelengths between 300 and 850nm, often referred to as visible light. Vertebrates contain two types of these photoreceptor cells called rods and cones and are so named due to their distinctive shape. Cones function in bright light and are responsible for colour vision, while rods function in dim light but do not perceive colour 2.
Phototransduction will be discussed with regard to rod photoreceptors as opposed to cone photoreceptors for they have been studied in greater detail; however the mechanism is thought to be similar. Rods are slender elongated structures (figure 1); the outer segment where photoreception occurs consists of approximately 1000 discs which are membrane enclosed sacs containing photoreceptor molecules 2. In rods the photoreceptor molecule is rhodopsin, which is a transmembrane protein linked to 11-cis-retinal, upon photoabsorption it decomposes to opsin and all-trans-retinal.
The human olfactory system is capable of detecting and discriminating approximately 10,000 odors which are structurally diverse and carry information about the environment 4. Odors must have the capacity to be volatile e.g. the scent of a rose, for the odor must be inhaled to reach that of the main olfactory epithelium located at the top of the nasal cavity. Volatile molecules can bind to receptors in the nasal cavity eliciting a electrical signal which is transmitted from the axons of the olfactory sensory neurons to second order neurons in the olfactory bulb which in turn project to the olfactory cortex and then to other areas off the brain 2.
Odorant recognition creates a ligand bound receptor which activates a G protein (G olf olfactory specific). The GGTP stimulates adenylyl cyclase (ACIII) which converts intracellular ATP to cyclic AMP which binds to the intracellular face of a cyclic nucleotide gated causing a conformational change favouring the open position 5. Na+ and Ca 2+ flow through this open channel, thus depolarising the cell. An inactive OSN maintains a resting potential of approximately -65mV, if the membrane potential becomes 20mV less negative then the cell reaches a threshold and generates an action potential. Ca 2+ ions play an important amplification mechanism, since they are capable of activating a Cl- Ca2+ dependent ion channel causing the efflux of Cl- (OSN maintains an unusual high intracellular Cl- concentration) this acts to further depolarise the cell therefore adding to the excitatory response magnitude.
Sound waves enter the ear and are funnelled into a structure with in the inner called the cochlea. The cochlea is a fluid-filled membranous sac that is coiled like a snail shell 2. The cochlea contains approximately 16,000 hair cells; from the flattened apical surface of a hair cell protrudes a structure called a hair bundle consisting of a cluster containing 20-300 stereocilia (Figure 8). Each stereocilia contain an actin cytoskeleton ensheathed by a plasma membrane. These actin filaments are extensively cross linked by fimbrin to form parallel rows spaced approximately 10nm apart giving rise to either a liquid like order or alternatively one that displays hexagonal symmetry 6. The stereocilia vary in height across the length of the hair cell so that the increment between successive ranks is constant and they are hexagonally packed. At the tallest region of this mirror symmetrical bevelled structure a single axonemal cilium referred to as the kinocilium projects with as of yet an undefined function.
When a hair bundle is deflected in a positive direction, the elastic gating springs transmit the external force to the transduction channels. The channels open probability depends on the tension in these springs, thus when tension is high channels spend most of their time open. The open channel admits dominantly K+ but also Ca 2+ leading to the depolarisation of the cell (Figure 9) which opens voltage gated calcium channels. The resultant Ca 2+ influx mediates the release of the excitatory afferent transmitter, glutamate and/or another compound that can excite glutamate receptors on the primary afferent neurons 7.
The molecular mechanism with which sensory neurons detect mechanical change or force, are still very poorly understood 13. However this does not prevent one from forming a general mechanotransduction model based on known facts and that of other similar mechanisms. As with other sensory mechanism speed and sensitivity in the mechanosensory cells are vital. Thus any proposed mechanism is unlikely to involve that of a second messenger cascade but rather the direct effect of mechanical force on that of transduction channels. These channels are likely to detect a deflection of an external structure i.e. skin relative to an internal structure such as the cytoskeleton These transduction channels are a source of stimuli amplification since they allow the rapid entry of a large number of ions e.g. Na+ Ca 2+ and it is thought likely to generate a Na+ dependent action potential. TRPV4 has been proposed as a suitable channel involved in mechanosensation for it is known to be located in the keratinocyte and that mice deficient of TRPV4 were found to be insensitive to mechanosensation8.
The senses touch, heat, light, sound and smell all occur in specialised cells which show significant specialisation for the sensing of a given stimulus (Table 2).
Olfaction and phototransduction both use analogous of the 7TM receptor family attached to G-proteins. Upon stimulation by the by the appropriate stimulus i.e. odor and photon respectively, the7TM receptor activates the attached G-protein which in turn which regulates cyclic-nucleotide-gated ion channels. Both utilise different G proteins: Olfaction G olf, Phototransduction: G t however the action of both G proteins is mediated by the alpha subunit. The target of these alpha units is to activate two different target proteins (Table 3).
Both pressure sensing and hearing are examples of mechanosensory transduction for they take mechanical stimuli and convert it into that of an electrical signal which is transmitted to the brain. Hearing takes sound waves and converts the deflections that they cause on the stereocilia into electrical signals, while pressure sensing takes the direct pressure on the skin to promote the opening on ion channels resulting in the generation of an action potential.
The difference in speed of perception between that of G-protein linked senses (olfaction, phototransduction) and that of direct sensing (thermo/pressure sensing and hearing), for it does not utilise cyclic nucleotides or secondary messengers in transduction. Advantages which stem from this alternative strategy is that the enzymatic cascades that generate the second messengers or cyclic nucleotides e.g. cGMP in phototransduction provides a source of amplification. By the use of intermediates, feedback is possible to gain control of adaptation e.g. phototransduction Ca 2+ acts as a second messenger to deregulate cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase thus promoting the opening of CNG ion channels. Obviously direct transduction has its own advantages otherwise the hearing mechanism would not be evolutionary favourable and less organism would utilise this mechanism. Direct transduction allows for great speed (transduction occurs faster than it does in sensory neurons), this feature is utilised to allow humans to hear different frequencies and to enable us to locate sound based on small temporal delays i.e. less than 20s. All the named senses utilise ion channels to generate an action potential, ion channels are themselves a source of amplification for they allow the entry of 10 4 ions per second. The importance of amplification is that it allows the senses to posses their great sensitivity and the ability to generate a reliable response to that of their agonist e.g. Phototransduction: a rod cell is able to detect one photon.
Adaptation in all the sensory cells requires the cell to be 'reset' to that of the unstimulated state. The adaptation mechanism involved in heat sensing and pressure is unknown, however in olfaction, phototransduction and hearing it is known to be influenced by the presence or absence of Ca 2+ (Table 4)
The photoreceptor cells: rod cells exhibit cell hyperpolarisation when activated by a photon, while negative hair displacement in hearing also causes hyperpolarisation it does not lead to a message being transmitted to the brain. However the hyperpolarisation in a rod cell reduces the rate of transmitter release, which acts to excite the postsynaptic retinal neurons, since the transmitter acts to inhibit them (Figure 3). While in olfaction, hearing, touch and pressure upon excitement they undergo depolarisation and the generation of an action potential.
Olfaction and Phototransduction involve 7TM receptors bound to G-proteins in specialised cells: olfactory sensory neuron, rod cells which undergo signal transduction cascades analogous to each other. Hearing and thermo/pressure sensing are examples of direct mechanotransduction. Hearing is known to take place in the specialised cell called hair cells however the cells which are responsible for thermo/pressure sensing remain elusive along with a detailed understanding of their cell signalling mechanisms. Direct mechanotransduction mechanisms display greater speed in signal transduction as opposed to that of G-protein linked cascades; however they forfeit the amplification that G-protein cascades bring. Ca 2+ has been identified as an important ion involved in the process of adaptation in all the cell signalling mechanisms discussed. The importance of adaptation can not be stressed enough for it gives us as humans such great sensitivity in our senses.