The kinetics of the protease enzyme -chymotrypsin was studied spectrophotomically by measuring the breakdown of the substrate p-nitrophenyl trimethylacetate. The pH optimum of the enzyme was determined to be 7 and the biphasic reaction mechanism of -chymotrypsin was observed. The kinetic constants of the -chymotrypsin-catalyzed hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl trimethylacetate K 3 and K 2/K s were found to be 2.87x10 -4 sec -1 and 345molLs -1 respectively. The constants A and B were observed to be dependent on only the enzyme concentration while the rate constant b was determined to be only dependent on the substrate concentration.
The serine protease enzyme: -chymotrypsin is a protein of molecular weight 24,800 1. It synthesized in the pancreas and secreted into the small intestine where it acts as a digestive enzyme and catalysis the hydrolysis of proteins. The hydrolysis of the peptide/amide bonds is specific and occurs between amino acids containing large hydrophobic side chains; phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan in proteins 2.
Peptide and amide bonds in proteins and synthetic ester substrates are hydrolysed by an acylenzyme mechanism i.e. by a covalent bound intermediate. The first stage of which is that of the enzyme and substrate form a non-covalent enzyme-substrate complex held together by the physical force of attraction between the two particles. The hydroxyl group of Ser-195 located in the active site of the enzyme attacks the carbonyl group of the substrate (nucleophilic attack) to form the acyl-enzyme releasing the amine or alcohol. The acyl-enzyme intermediate is then hydrolysed, releasing the carboxylic acid component of the substrate resulting in the regeneration of the 'free' enzyme 3.
Chymotrypsin contains a series of sub-sites across its surface onto which the polypeptide substrate can bind; there is no well defined cleft or groove for substrate binding. With the exception of the primary binding site which the side chains of aromatic amino acids on the substrate can fit. The biding pocket is a well defined slit 10-12 deep, 3.5 to 4 by 5.5 to 6.5 in cross section, these dimensions provide a pocket which provides a snug fit around an aromatic ring (6 wide to 3.5 thick). The pocket is lined with non-polar amino acids thus provides a suitable environment for the binding of non-polar or hydrophobic side chains of the substrate 2. The binding of a suitable side chain in to this slit positions the adjacent peptide bond into the active site for cleavage 3.
The reactivity of Serine-195 is due to the attachment of the imidazole ring of histidine-57 which is also hydrogen bonded to the carboxylate of Asp-102 forming a catalytic triad. The key reason is that histidine polarizes the hydroxyl group of serine therefore generating an alkoxide ion which is a stronger nucleophile than that of the hydroxyl group attached to serine 3.
Hartley and Kilby examined the catalysis by chymotrypsin of the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl acetate (PNPA). The product of the catalysis (PNP-), is bright yellow with a strong absorbance at 400nm allowing the reaction to be followed at great ease spectrophotometrically. When PNPA is present in large excess the release of PNP- is linear with time (Figure 1), however if this linear line is extrapolated back to time zero it does not extrapolate to zero absorbance. This is since the hydrolysis of PNPA proceeds with an initial 'burst' of p-Nitrophenolate release followed by the slow zero-order release of product. The biphasic release of product implied a two step reaction mechanism, the burst face was a stochiometric process between substrate and enzyme since 1mol p-nitrophenol corresponded to 1 mole enzyme. The first stage of the reaction is the rapid acylation of some of the groups on chymotrypsin by PNPA releasing a stochiometric quantity of PNP-. The second slower step is the hydrolysis of the acylenzyme followed by the fast reacylation of the free enzyme by that of PNPA accounting for the slow zero-order reaction4.
The hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl trimethylacetate occurs at far greatly reduced rate than that of the p-nitrophenyl acetate and so the reaction can be followed by simple spectrophotometry rather than by special stop flow techniques.
The ability to measure protein concentration accurately is an essential technique in protein biochemistry including that of enzymology where it is important in determining the specific activity of an enzyme. Proteins are complex and variable in structure and because of this not one assay technique is capable of measuring the absolute protein concentration. Numerous assay methods have been developed, each of which measures a different aspect of the protein and often have different sensitivity ranges e.g. Folin (Lowry) measures the reduction of the reagent by tryptophan, tyrosine, cysteine and histidine residues sensitivity 5-100g Biorad measures hydrophobic interactions between protein and reagent, sensitivity 20-100g. Therefore different assay techniques may produce different protein estimations so the importance of using the same assay method when comparing the concentration of unknowns when they are compared is off great importance.
The aim of the experiment was to determine the pH optimum and the concentration of -chymotrypsin in the stock solution by Folin (Lowry) and Biorad assays as well as to investigate the biphasic kinetics of -chymotrypsin action.
The method was adhered to as stated in the laboratory manual 'The Kinetics of Chymotrypsin.'
The pH profile of -chymotrypsin shows a bell shaped profile with the exception of the data point at pH 10.2 with a ~ pH optimum of 7.0. An increase in absorbance indicates an increase in the rate of hydrolysis. The rate of hydrolysis increases as the pH of the solution increases i.e. deprotonation of the enzyme until the pH optimum of the enzyme is reached after which the rate of hydrolysis by the enzyme decreases.
Table 1 details the concentrations of -chymotrypsin estimated by both the Folin (Lowry) and Biorad assays for the experimental data as well as the class data (For calculations see appendix 1). The Folin protein estimation of the concentration of the stock solution of -chymotrypsin is 58% greater than that of the class average, whilst the Biorad protein estimation is 51 % greater than that of the class average. The average protein estimation of the stock solution of -chymotrypsin derived from both assays is that of 431 mg/ml, 61% higher than that of the class data value of 106mg/ml.
Figures 3 and 4 show the catalysed hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl trimethylacetate by -chymotrypsin in the six assays, the appearance of the product p-nitrophenoxide is biphasic. There is an initial rapid exponential release of product followed by that of a slower (zero-order) release of p-nitrophenoxide. See appendix 2 for calculation of constants A, B and the rate constant b which were calculated from figures 3 and 4, see table 2 for the summary of results. No plateau of absorbance was observed indicating that substrate was in excess for each of the six assays. Doubling the concentration of substrate concentration at constant [E]o Figure 3 assays 1, 3 and Figure 4 assays 2, 4 the constants A and B remain unchanged (gradient of zero order rate remains the same) while the rate constant b doubles (difference between absorbance at end of exponential phase i.e. doubles).
Table 2 summarises the results derived from figures 3and 4 which is that as the enzyme concentration is doubled at a constant [S]o (assays 1,2 and 5,6), the constants A and B double while the rate constant b remains unchanged. Doubling the concentration of substrate concentration at constant [E]o (assays 1, 3 and 2, 4) the constants A and B remain unchanged while the rate constant b doubles. The assays 3 and 4 contradict the first statement since as the enzyme concentration is doubled at a constant [S]o the constants A and B remain unchanged however the rate constant b supports the first statement since it remains unchanged. N.B. See appendix 2 for calculations of the data summarised in table 2.
The average deacylation of the acyl-enzyme rate constant (K 3) for the -chymotrypsin-catalyzed hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl trimethylacetate is equal to 2.87x10 -04 sec -1 38% greater than that of the literature value of 1.3x10 -04 sec -1.(2) The average rate constant of acylation of the enzyme over that of the equilibrium constant (K 2/K s) is equal to 345 molLs -1 20% greater than that of the literature value of 231molLs -1.(2)
The enzyme purity of the enzyme solution is equal to 35% (See Appendix 2 for calculations).
The rate of reaction for the enzyme was measured by the change in absorption, the substrate was yellow and not very soluble due to its size (observed by the formation of a yellow fraction and a colourless one when Casein was added to the buffer). Once the reaction was stopped at the appropriate time interval, it was important to separate the substrate and its hydrolysed form (product) since both were yellow and so the undigested protein was allowed to precipitate out of solution and only digested protein was measured.
The bell shaped pH profile of -chymotrypsin for the hydrolysis of the neutral substrate suggests the presence of two ionising groups which play a key role in the catalytic reaction. The midpoint of the left of the pH profile shows that the rate of the catalytic reaction increases as the deprotonated form of an ionising group with an apparent pK of 5.5 is formed. This pK can be associated with the imidazole group of histidine which would be unprotonated in the catalytically active form of the enzyme.
The deprotonation of the imidazole group allows it to polarise the hydroxyl group of serine-195 which generates an alkoxide ion which is stronger nucleophile than that of a hydroxyl group. Therefore greater protonation of the imidaole group creates a stronger nucleophile which results in the greater probability of successful nucleophilic attack of the carbonyl carbon atom of the substrate hence increase in the rate of reaction. The midpoint of the right hand side of the pH profile indicates that the rate of reaction decreases as an amino acid with an apparent pK of 8.5 is deprotonated. Cysteine has a pK of 8.5 however the amino isoleucine would be charged at neutral condition therefore there must be another mechanism rather than deprotonation of Cysteine responsible for the decrease in the enzyme reaction rate. The mechanism is due to the removal of the positive charge (deprotonation) from the amino-terminal isoleucine resulting in the histidine-40 reforming a salt linkage with Asp-194 which obstructs the substrate binding site. Therefore the decrease of enzyme reaction rate is due to a decrease in affinity of substrate to the active site and not the decreased efficiency of the catalytic capabilities of the enzyme. Therefore the optimum pH is defined as the pH at which the enzyme possess its greatest catalytic activity, figure 1 shows that this pH to be that of 7.0 which is lower than that of literature value pH 8.0 2. The difference in values of the pH optimum and the occurrence of the anomalous point at pH 10.2 is most likely to have occurred through pippeting errors. Greater clarity to the experimentally derived pH optimum could have been obtained if a greater number of increments in the pH buffers were used in the construction of the curve i.e. differences of 0.1 rather than 0.5.
-Chymotrypsin shows biphasic kinetics since there is covalent modification of the enzyme i.e. an initial burst followed by a slower zero rate order reaction. If no covalent modification of the enzyme occurred, the release of product would be directly proportional to time until substrate is exhausted and then no more product would be released (figure 5).
The enzyme purity of the reaction (35%) is much lower than that of what one would expect i.e. 75-90% given that the reaction was carried out in excess. Reasons that are likely to have contributed to this dramatic drop is that the enzyme became denatured somewhere in the experimental procedure. The most probably point was that the, -chymotrypsin was kept in the back of fridge before receipt and subsequently froze and was gently defrosted upon receipt. This extreme of temperature is likely to have denatured some of the enzyme irreversibly while some reversibly thus reducing the percentage of active enzyme expected in the given concentration of enzyme therefore reducing enzyme purity.
-Chymotrypsin catalysed hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl acetate occurs at a greater rate than that of p-nitrophenyl trimethylacetate since the methyl groups on p-nitrophenyl trimethylacetate result in steric hindrance of the molecule giving rise to a slower rate of hydrolysis. Steric hindrance occurs in this case since methyl groups replace the hydrogen atoms in p-nitrophenyl acetate, the methyl group are much larger and therefore result in the greater overlapping of electron clouds resulting in a loss of energy and therefore reactivity. Thus a greater amount of energy must be put into the formation of the acyl enzyme and its subsequent breakdown since there is a loss in the reactivity in the substrate i.e. methyl groups create a steric barrier which must be reached before the molecule will react.
The constants A and B are dependent only on enzyme concentration thus confirming the two following equations A=K 3[E o] and B=[E o]. Evidence for this comes from assays 1,3 and 2,4 in which enzyme concentration was doubled as so was that of A and B while altering the substrate concentration in assays 1,3 and 2,4 had no affect on either A or B. The rate constant b is dependent only on the substrate concentration confirming the following equation b=K 2[S o] / K s. Evidence for this comes from the assays 1,2 and 3,4 and 5,6 where the substrate concentration remained the same (within the assay pair) and b remained unchanged. While if the substrate concentration is doubled at a constant enzyme concentration as in the assays 1,3 and 2,4 the rate constant b doubles. Assays 3,4 contradicted the statement that A and B are dependent on enzyme concentration since when the enzyme concentration was doubled within the assay pair no change in the constants A and B were observed. The absorbance's for both assays from the raw data (see attached laboratory day book) are very similar suggesting that human error is to blame i.e. the same volume of enzyme was pipetted into both assays. When the constants A and B and the rate constant b were described as doubling or remaining constant there was variation up to 20% in the figures. This was put down to accuracy of the assays i.e. pippeting errors; however it was felt that the nature of A, B and b could still be explained with confidence since the variation was not large enough to mask the true trends in the data.
The experimentally derived value of k 2/K 3 and K 3 show percentage error of 20 and 38% when compared to that of literature values. These percentages are high suggesting that improvements in experimental procedure should be implemented if the experiment was repeated. The largest source of error is likely to lie in pippeting errors which are human technique. Though greater definition of the exponential (burst) phase one could utilise the stopped flow spectrophotometric technique which would allow the reaction to be followed on a millisecond time scale rather than a 15 second time scale. Greater definition of the exponential phase would increase the accuracy of the rate constant b and K 2/K s since both are taken from this poorly defined region. Overall the ability to separate the exponential phase from the zero order reaction would improve the accuracy of the following since they are all derived directly or indirectly by the line equation of the zero order reaction.
The biphasic nature of -Chymotrypsin catalysed hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl acetate is explained by the serine nucleophilic attack with the substrate resulting in the formation a covalently bound enzyme-substrate intermediate. During the burst phase of reaction the substrate binds to the enzyme where the alkoxide ion (strong nucleophile) of serine-195 attacks the carbonyl group involved in the peptide bond of the substrate to form an acyl-enzyme intermediate releasing p-nitrophenoxide. During the zero order phase of the reaction the intermediate is hydrolysed releasing the carboxylic acid component of the substrate and therefore regenerating the free active enzyme. Acylation resulting in the formation of the acyl-enzyme intermediate is a reaction that occurs at a greater rate than that of the deacylation of the intermediate thus explaining the biphasic nature of the enzyme.
The difference between the protein estimations derived from the two different types of assays i.e. Biorad and Folin (Lowry) performed on the unknown concentration of -chymotrypsin is large in both personal and class data: 45 and 38%. The difference between the protein estimations yielded by the different types of assays lies in the fact that they measure different attributes of a protein. Folin (Lowry) measures the reduction of the reagent by tryptophan, tyrosine, cysteine and histidine residues sensitivity while Biorad measures the hydrophobic interactions between protein and reagent. The results demonstrate the importance of using the same assay method when comparisons of two samples of the same protein at unknown concentrations are compared with reference to their protein concentrations. The difference between the class data and experimental data is large for both assays (~55%). The class data set is larger than the experimental data therefore the values posses a greater degree of reliability. The experimental data is clearly an overestimate of the stock solution, the data for experimentally derived protein estimations for the different assays shows a low range (see appendix 1). Thus indicating that the error did not lie in the dilutions that occurred after the extraction of the appropriate volume of the 1/1000 diluted enzyme solution. The absorbance's for both assays were outside the standard curves therefore contained a concentration to great for the assays to measure accurately. The fact that the data for each assay contains a low range and the average of each type of assay is ~55% greater than that of the corresponding class data assay suggests that the dilution of 1/1000 of the stock solution is in error. Both assays used the same 1/1000 diluted stock solution which gives one a unifying cause of error for both types of assay. Thus the 1/1000 diluted stock solution was not diluted correctly; this is due to human error and poor pippeting technique.