The CF 1 as part of the thylakoid membrane and in its isolated form following its dissociation from the membrane via chloroform was exposed to a variety of pretreatments and its ability to both synthesise and hydrolyse ATP was studied. Tentoxin has two sites of action one located on the CF 1 which inhibits catalytic activity while the second located on the CF 0 leads to restoration and stimulation of catalytic activity. ATPase is activated by light via thioredoxin or alternatively by DTT and deactivated in the dark, an increase in temperature also increases the catalytic activity of the enzyme. A low pH across the thylakoid membrane and excess of ATP favours hydrolysis rather than synthesis; the catalytic activity of CF 1 is greater in its isolated form rather than when it is membrane associated.
The proton ATPase of chloroplast is regulated by light: it undergoes activation upon illumination and decays back to the latent state in the dark. There are two key factors that are involved in this light activation: protonmotive force and thiol reduction. The photosynthetic electron transport chain is responsible for the evolution of oxygen and the reduction of NADP+ but is also responsible for the acidification of the thylakoid lumen and therefore the creation of the proton motive force. The protonmotive force on its own is insufficient to activate the chloroplast ATPase; reduction of an intramolecular disulphide bridges in CF 1 is also required. This reduction is achieved in vivo by thioredoxin which is in turn reduced by ferrodoxin-thioredoxin reductase. These regulatory elements are often lost during in vitro studies in which the chloroplast membrane is ruptured however reductants such as dithiothreitol (DTT) are capable of reducing the regulatory intramolecular bridges in CF 1. Dark inactivation of the CF 1 complex occurs due to the reoxidation of the enzyme by endogeneous oxidants and the dissipation of the pH. The regulation of CF 1 by light ensures that ATP is not continuously hydrolysed during periods of prolonged darkness when the pH would be insufficient to drive ATP synthesis.1
The rate of ATP synthesis can be measured in an assay in which ATP production is measured by measuring the rate at which NADPH is produced since it has a high absorbance at 340nm. While ATP hydrolysis, is measured by the appearance of inorganic phosphate produced by the hydrolysis of ATP.
The aim of the experiment is to investigate the regulation of the catalytic activity of the chloroplast coupling factor (CF 1) by measuring its ability to both synthesise and hydrolyse ATP and the effect that various pretreatments have on this. These pretreatments will be performed when CF 1 is part of the thylakoid membrane of chloroplast and isolated N.B. a solubilised coupling factor will be utilized when the CF 1 is released from the membrane.
The material and methods was adhered to as stated in the laboratory manual 'Bioenergetics Experiment 2' with the following exception that 100g of chlorophyll suspension was used rather than 25g in the experiment.
The chlorophyll concentration of the stock solution that was used in the experiments in which the CF 1 was part of the thylakoid membrane of the chloroplast was equal to 2.00mg/ml.
Table 1: The rate of ATP hydrolysis in reaction mixtures 1-3, show that of only a minor difference between the three preparations, while preparation 4 shows a 4 fold increase in the rate of ATP hydrolysis in comparison to preparations 1-3.
Figure 2: The production of ATP by ATP synthase in the presence of DTT displays a trend displays a greater trend towards that of a linear one than that of the rate corresponding to no DTT, it must be noted though that neither displays a truly linear trend. The production of ATP at any given time point in the presence of DTT is greater than the corresponding tube in the absence of DTT.
Table 2: The ATP synthase activity at any of the time points in the presence of DTT is greater than that of the ATP synthase activity in the absence of DTT.
The concentration of the chlorophyll used in the experiments in which isolated CF 1 were used was equal to 1.41mg/ml, thus the total chlorophyll content of the original sample of 1.30ml was equal to 1.96mg. From this the volume of chloroform required to be added to the resuspended supernatant in part B.1 was equal to 59l.
Figure 2: From the standard curve of bovine serum albumin the protein concentration of the original sample was equal to 0.39mg/ml therefore the protein content in the original sample of 1.30ml was 0.49mg.
Table 3: The rate of ATP hydrolysis increases with the temperature from room temperature to 60C (pre-treatments 1,3 and 2,4). This increase in the rate of ATP hydrolysis between the temperatures in the presence or absence of DTT is that of a 5 fold increase in the rate. The presence of DTT at room temperature and at 60C increases the rate of ATP hydrolysis by 2 fold in comparison to that of the sample conducted at the same temperature.
Table 4: The rate of ATP in hydrolysis in isolated CF 1 is greatly reduced by the presence of Tentoxin (79%) in comparison with that of the control; however ammonium chloride has no significant effect on this rate (1%). The rate of ATP hydrolysis in CF 1 when they are part of the thylakoid membrane in the presence of both ammonium chloride and that of tentoxin increases, 38 and 62% respectively.
ATPase undergoes activation in the light and deactivation in the dark in vivo. Thiol reductants and oxidant are thought to be products of the electron transport system in light. This raises the question as to why the enzyme will preferentially interact with either the reductant or the oxidant. The answer for this lies in conformational changes that the enzyme undergoes (Figure. 4). In the latent enzyme a regulatory disulphide bridge located in the -subunit becomes exposed due to the formation of pH (b). The exposed disulphide becomes reduced by thioredoxin which is reduced in turn by ferredoxin and the activity of photosystem 1. Alternatively the disulphide bridge can be reduced by DTT, this reduction activates the enzyme (c). Thus to activate the enzyme, light is required to generate a pH and a reduction agent such as thioredoxin and or DTT must be present in the chloroplast stroma. In the dark, ATP synthase returns to its latent form since reduced ferredoxin and thioredoxin are no longer formed and the decrease in the pH stops the inhibition of the oxidation of the enzyme. Thus the disulphide bridges form between cysteines, 6 residues apart in the sequence regenerate under these more oxidizing conditions. H 2O 2 is thought to be involved in the oxidizing and thus deactivation of ATPase. Evidence for this lies in that the major site of peroxide production (acceptor side of photosystem I) is located close to that of the thioredoxin reducing system which forms a loose complex which is also associated with the same membrane.1,2
The theory stated above coupled with the fact that ATP hydrolysis is favoured by minimizing the proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane and the presence of excess ATP explains A.3. Mixture 1 showed minimal ATP hydrolysis, since there was no light to activate the ATP synthase. Even in the presence of DTT (mixture 2) the rate of reoxidation of the ATP synthase by oxidants such as H 2O 2 was too great to allow an increase in ATP hydrolysis in comparison to mixture 1. In mixture 3 the presence of light created a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane therefore allowing the synthesis of ATP. However the excess of ATP favored hydrolysis rather than synthesis, the rate at which this was achieved was equal to that of what the conditions in 1 and 2 evoked. The same logic for mixture 3 applies to that of 4 however with the addition of DTT a greater percentage of the ATPase become activated thus the rate of hydrolysis per chloroplast also increases.
As temperature increases given that the temperature to which the enzyme has been increased to does not result to detrimental de-naturation in regard to catalytic activity the following rule of thumb can be applied; a 10C temperature rise doubles reaction rates. Reaction rates increase since the number of successful collision of substrate with the enzyme active site increases, thus explaining the increase in the rate of ATP hydrolysis in B3 mixtures 1, 3 and 2, 6. Since it is known that activation of CF 1 is dependent on the disruption of disulphide bridges in the complex it is logical given the evidence that heat is also capable of performing this at 60C. Thus heat at 60C is capable of mimicking the activating effects of light. Once in the isolated form CF 1 loose their close association with the thioredoxin reducing system since they are no longer membrane associated thus the chance of the regulatory disulphide bonds being reduced by thioredoxin decreases. However upon the addition of DTT which mimics the activating effect of thioredoxin a greater percentage of CF 1 become activated therefore explaining the 2 fold increase in ATP hydrolysis in the presence of DTT.
When the CF oCF 1 complex is in intact chloroplast and they are exposed to light, a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane forms and the potential energy from this is use to convert ADP and P i to ATP by allowing the protons to return to the stroma through the complex. Hence why photophosphorylation (ATP synthesis), is said to be coupled to electron transport in the thylakoid membrane. Ammonium chloride is an uncoupler because it dissipatesthe proton gradient therefore destroying the potential energy that would be used for ATP synthesis. Ammonium chloride is able to do this since in solution, the NH 4+ ion dissociates to NH 3 (ammonia) and H+. Ammonia is uncharged and so can freely move across the membrane and into the lumen, where it re-associates with protons to again form an ammonium ion. As a result, protons are transported bypassing ATPase. In A4 in the presence of ammonium chloride there is a decreased proton gradient and a ATP concentration in excess explaining why ATP hydrolysis is favored rather than synthesis. In B4 the rate of hydrolysis is not significantly different from the control since both involve CF 1 complexes which are removed from the thylakoid and so are not influenced by uncoupling agents.
Tentoxin selectively affects the function of the ATP synthase of the chlorophyll used. When isolated the CF 1's catalytic activity is inhibited strongly (79%), however when the CF 1 is membrane bound in intact chloroplast its catalytic activity is increased therefore indicating two site of binding. One of which is located on the CF 1 which inhibits catalytic activity and the other located on the CF 0 which leads to restoration and stimulation of catalytic activity.
Low intensity illumination is not the optimum illumination required for maximum photophorylation thus explaining why a linear relationship between the activity of ATP synthase and time is not shown. At an optimum illumination an optimum proportion of the CF 1 will be activated and therefore the chloroplast will produce the optimum quantity of ATP. Hence when DTT is added to chloroplast a greater proportion of ATP synthase's will become active (DTT reduces ATPase independent of light). Therefore explaining why chloroplast with DTT display greater ATP synthase activity at any given time point in comparison to that of chloroplast with no DTT. This increase in ATP synthase by DTT raises the activity closer to that of which one would expect to be exhibited under optimum condition. Explaining why the activity of ATP synthase in the chloroplast plus DTT shows a trend closer to that of a linear one than that of the chloroplast without DTT. If the chloroplast were exposed to very intense illumination then the rate of ATP synthesis by thylakoids would be at its optimum since the optimum number of ATPase would be activated. Thus the addition of DTT would not increase the rate of ATP synthesis since no more ATPase would be capable of activation.
A ratio of 0.26 mg CF 1 per mg chlorophyll for the thylakoids has been calculated from the data that the experiment generated. The limitation of the ratio lies in the fact that only one type of assay: Biorad was performed to determine the protein concentration. Proteins are complex and variable in structure and because of this not one assay technique is capable of measuring the absolute protein concentration. Numerous assay methods have been developed, each of which measures a different aspect of a protein and often they have different sensitivity ranges. Therefore different assay techniques may produce different protein estimations so the importance of using the same assay method when comparing the concentration of unknowns when they are compared is off great importance. Since only one assay was performed and it is not known whether the same assay was used to come to the literature value of 0.40 mg CF 1 per mg chlorophyll it is inaccurate to compare the two values.
The catalytic activity of CF 1 is greater in its isolated form rather than when it is membrane associated. In the membrane form the thioredoxin reducing system forms a loose complex close to a key site of peroxide production. This proximity reduces the percentage of thioredoxin capable of reducing the disulphide bonds in CF1 into the chloroplast since oxidants such as H2O2 will accepts electrons from thioredoxin. Therefore the reduced concentration of thioredoxin becomes a limiting factor in the activation of CF1. However if the membrane is disrupted then the thioredoxin will be capable of releasing a greater concentration of thioredoxin into the chloroplast without the counter acting affect of the previously high local concentration of oxidants. With a higher concentration of thioredoxin a greater proportion of CF1 complexes can be activated even at the same pH. Hence in the isolated form CF1 is not limited by the availability of thioredoxin and so has greater catalytic activity than when membrane bound.