The foremost paradigms of international relations are Realism, Liberalism and Marxism; the former being the more contemporarily prevalent. In this essay, I will attempt to analyse the merits of these theories when used in understanding the international political system. As well as this, I will advocate my own judgment on the effectiveness of the theories and come to a conclusion as to which is most successful in justifying the contemporary world order.
As mentioned previously, the dominant theory of International Relations is Realism. Perhaps this is due to its ability to justify the constant state of war that the world seems to be in. For realists, the sovereign state is the dominant actor in the anarchical world system. The theory suggests that individual states organise their actions, face the world as a unitary actor and proceed rationally to pursue state interests of power and security. Realists imply that the absence of a sovereign body from the international realm is cause for bargaining, alliances and the inevitable use of military force between states that seek to maintain security and to accumulate power. The recent behaviour of The United States in Iraq illustrates the length a state will go to in order to maintain state security.
The states' reliance on force and the threat of force results in an international struggle for power; there are two dominant theories that attempt to explain the workings of the world power-structure. Firstly, the Balance of Power Theory suggests that any action by a state will result in a counterbalancing action by the state that is being acted upon. This maintains long term peace as, so long as alliances are fluid, states will often ally against an anomalous state that has taken intolerable international actions. The theory also implies that a single state may act as a 'balancer', shifting its support to oppose whichever state is most threatening. The second, Hegemonic Stability Theory, takes this assumption further in suggesting that a single hegemonic state maintains international order through having the capability, will and commitment to enforce and uphold rules.
The paradigm is said to have been "a healthy dose of realism into the discussion of international relations following the delusions of idealism". Whereas other paradigms, in particular Liberalism, are said to look at the world as it  should be, realists pride themselves for looking at the world as it is; a world portrayed as inherently adverse, anarchical and conflicting. However, there are still flaws in the theory; primarily the lack of attention paid to the influence of economic processes and non-state actors. Also, the proclamation that humans are naturally selfish may be an improbable misjudgement, as could the assumption that the domestic power structure of states is irrelevant when concerning international organisation.
Liberalism assumes that human nature, far from being self-seeking, is generally good and allows coexistence in liberty. The theory also promotes the benefit of social improvement and claims that humans have not yet reached political perfection but that democracy is the system by which it can be achieved. In contrast with Realists, the liberal ideology assumes that states, though important, are not the soul actors on the international field. A pluralistic approach is taken, where a dense network of trans-national transactions occurs and there is a strong link between a country's domestic and international sphere. This means that domestic conflicts of opinion may affect international organisation and the country by no means faces the international arena as a single, unitary state actor.
Where Liberalism, in my opinion, exceeds Realism is in its consideration of economics when analysing the international realm. Though Liberalists suggest a laissez-faire approach to economics in respect of government intervention, they still appreciate the importance of economic variables and advocate David Ricardo's theory of comparative advantage in order to benefit from international division of labour. Key advancers in liberal thought such as Milton Friedman and Friedrich Hayek suggested that free trade, deregulation, privatisation and liberalisation were vital in order to allow Liberalism to be adopted and thrive on an international level. Therefore, the link between the political and economic aspects of the world system is not only unavoidable in Liberalist thinking but essential in order to promote its self perpetuating ideals.
The very nature of liberal thought suggests that there is no rational alternative and that in order to create a peaceful world Liberalism must be adopted as the dominant ideology. The Democratic Peace Hypothesis suggests that rarely do democracies go to war with one another; a theory that suggests the spread of liberal democracy throughout the world will result in global peace. This may justify the existence of international organisations such as the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organisation. Such organisations could be said to ensure the gradual 'education' of the world in the ways of Liberalism and the potential benefits of it to those not yet inclined to its ideologies. The paradigm is more than a way of viewing the world, but is a source of policy and behaviour for many western democratic states.
Though Marxism is said to be lacking in a theoretical analysis of international relations, the core ideologies of Karl Marx have been interpreted since his general ideology was established in Das Kapital (Marx, K. 1867). Perhaps most closely associated to the development of World-System Theory - the dominant Marxist approach to international relations - Immanuel Wallerstein suggests there are three zones of the world capitalist economy. The Core, the Semi-Periphery and the Periphery are linked in such a way as to enable the Core to drain wealth and resources from the subsequent zones. This creates a relationship of exploitation and dependency that provokes conflict between the zones.
Rather than focussing on states as the dominant actors in the international system, it is clear that international Marxist thinking is concerned namely with class. Also, there is a distinct lack of attention paid to sovereignty and those who hold it, as this is dismissed as being linked to legal and political matters. Rather, Marxists analyse the economy and view international organisations as economic representatives of the dominant class or Core. Though a pessimistic and cynical view of the world order, the World-System Theory is perhaps a paradigm one can only truly appreciate or at least understand when being exploited. It is clear that not all international organisations are motivated by money, but the theory may explain the actions of organisations such as the World Trade Organisation, whose exploitation of developing countries may be viewed as an attempt to fill the material needs of the western developed world that form it.
Perhaps more of a criticism of the aforementioned triad of international theories, Constructivism suggests that the formulation of such paradigms illustrates "the capacity and will of people to take a deliberate attitude towards the world and to lend it significance. " Thus, by defining the nature of the world system, denying it the ability to change over time, is a political act. Constructivists agree with Realists in respect of states being the dominant actors in the international realm but advocate the opinion that the world system "is a set of ideas, a body of thought, a system of norms, which has been arranged by certain people at a particular time and place. If the thoughts and ideas that enter into the existence of international relations change, then the system itself will change as well. That is because the system consists in thought and ideas."
Constructivism is, to me, incontestable as it explains and justifies the consistently changing nature of international politics and restrains from offering a long-standing theory as to how to create world organisation. The simple statement that conceptions are held only because we assume they are to be held is compelling and, rather than conflicting with the dominant theories of Liberalism, Realism and Marxism, categorises them as political tools that attempt not to explain the world system but to influence and manipulate it. This appears to me to be a distorted Gramscian Hegemonic Bloc tactic of consent, of the idea of education over coercion in order to manipulate citizens into an ideological mindset.
My support of Constructivist theory, however, is coupled with an appreciation of the Marxist consideration of an exploitative world economy, in which the periphery and semi-periphery are indoctrinated to accept the situation in which they live. There is an undeniable ever-present class struggle between those in power and those who keep them there and the Marxist paradigm can best justify the inequality seen in the world today. Liberalism as its adversaries state, is often too idealistic and assumes that everyone has the same needs and that "one size fits all". Liberalisation is not possible for all countries and would most likely not result in global harmony. Realism, too, is nave in assuming the natural state of the world system is that of conflict and power struggle. There are times of rest in the international realm and I feel that the Marxist World-System Theory allows for this as well as justifying uprisings and insurgencies that often appear throughout the world.