The resources used in small firms are influential to the success or failure of the business. Networks are resources based on the small firm's ties to individuals and other organizations, whereas finance provides the capital required for initial and on-going investments. The purpose of this essay is to evaluate the influence of networks and finance in small businesses, and to determine which is more fundamental to small enterprises.
Small firms are often classified as those prone to higher closure rates and lower probabilities of sustained growth. A 'small' firm does not necessarily refer to lower employee numbers or turnover sizes, but more to fewer employee relationships, smaller social structures and lower level of resources available compared to large firms.
A 'funding gap' occurs when small firms experience an "inability to get hold of capital to support their ventures". In order to avoid this, small firms often obtain finance from the entrepreneur's own capital and informal investors, such as family and friends. Another common source of equity finance is from a business angel, which is an individual, or a small group of individuals, who offers their own capital to new ventures. All of these sources are based on investor confidence in the company's potential. Alternatively, small firms may look at retail or 'high street' banking, which is a source of debt finance targeted at providing "investment capital to new startups and expanding small firms". However, banks are less willing to give out bank loans to small firms due to the higher risk of non-repayment. Thus, small firms may find it easier to obtain equity rather than debt finance.
Small firms use financial investment for three main purposes. Firstly, enterprises use finance as a source of investment in tangible, fixed assets, such as machinery, vehicles, fixtures and fittings. Secondly, the financing of intangible investments, such as market research and advertising, enables small firms to establish the enterprise's 'goodwill'. Lastly, financial investment is used in working capital, or "items which form part of the operating cycle of the business", which includes the money involved with stock and debtors. In the case of the small enterprise Victoria East, the entrepreneur experienced a major problem of financing the expansion of her business' manufacturing capacity. Working capital and stock became tied up as her product collection expanded from high quality Christmas stockings to include the sale of a variety of bags. In the end, the problem was solved by outsourcing production involving heavy capital expenditure. Working capital constraints were temporary relaxed by breaking down the supply of products into parts, so that the customer will be required to pay each part after receiving the product. A bank loan also increased the overall cash flow available for the company's use.
On the other hand, networks are social relationships which provide the entrepreneur with opportunities such as a greater access to resources. The networking activity allows small businesses to enter into a market by relying on support from personal ties, such as family and friends, and business-related persons, such as suppliers and bankers. Strong ties are the most reliable relationships usually in personal networks, whereas weak ties are less reliable relationships such as those with business-related persons. Inconsequential ties are contacts with complete strangers, where there is only a short duration of contact time and little emotional involvement in the relationship. Successful networking involves a balance of these social relationships with different strengths and diversity.
Networks focus on developing the two major organizational objectives of maximizing revenue and reducing costs. The increased co-operation with other firms through networking, allows small firms to ally competitors and to obtain faster market access. This enhances the small firms' competitiveness, and thus, increases the small firms' revenue. The co-ordination of activities through networking also enables firms to take advantage of economies of scale in terms production and research costs. Another critical use of networking in small firms is to ensure stability, so that "when through co-operation, organizations can better forestall, forecast, or absorb uncertainty affecting their activities". This is of critical concern to small firms, because firms must be able to respond quickly to changes, in order to survive in a market amongst large enterprises. Small internet ventures that sell services to large companies and numerous consumers, such as Milkround.com, are good examples of how firms depend heavily on networking. Milkround.com is a job recruitment company with little physical and human capital, yet it is able to successfully coordinate recruitment activities between job-finders and employee-seeking enterprises through networking activities.
The influence of networks and finance differ in the small firms' initial stage of growth and small firms' long-term sustainability. Although networks are able to establish the small firms' niche in a well-established market structure, finance is of a greater concern due to the high investments required at the initial stage of development. Small firms benefit from networks, as it is useful in helping new ventures break into existing markets. New ventures are able to target key competitors in the market, and to break their relationships with other organizations, and thus, remove competitors from their market position. Networks are also able to help new firms find niches in the existing market, which enables them to secure their market position. However, finance has a more important role in the initial start-up stage, because a financial base is required before any activities can take place in the company. Drucker's 'small firm growth strategies' model supports the view that finance has a much more influential role in the development of new businesses. It suggests that the enterprise should be able to alter its financial structure flexibly, because the growing enterprise will require many large initial financial investments. The financial structure must be established before the new venture can develop its internal and external organizational structure, including networks.
The definition of 'success' must be clarified before deciding on whether finance or networks is more crucial in the long-term sustainability of small firms. A common view is that the most successful small firm is the one with the highest growth rate and the largest size. A better approach is to include other more practical and valuable factors to small firms, such as independency in an industry. Although, in the end, each individual enterprise places emphasis on a different set of organizational goals, small firms have the common objective of ensuring survival. Survival is the underlying manipulate, because it is the key to any further development in performance. So, the question here is whether networking or finance will be able to best assist small firms' long-term survival in the market.
The '3 Ms' small firm survival strategies model identifies finance, rather than networks, as the key to long-term sustainability. This model supports that there are three overlapping influences on survival, namely management, marketing and money. While management is concerned with the proficient use of resources and marketing is involved with the firms' relationship with their clients, money enables the entire system to function. Funds obtained from finance are required because they support the management of resources and the marketing activities to take place.
However, other business models have suggested networks to be more valuable to the small firm. Unlike the '3 Ms' small firm survival strategies model, John Kay does not consider finance as an important factor in the resource-based view of the enterprises' internal aspects. Kay identified networks as one of the four capabilities to the foundations of corporate success, while the other three as reputation, innovation and strategic assets. The underlying principle supporting Kay's argument is that "firms can gain competitive advantage (through networking) because they can gain access to desired resources and capabilities", in order to ensure the small firms' survival in the long term. The 'desired resources' consist of finance, people, productive assets and information, whereas the 'capabilities' includes, for example, the ability to break into new markets. Since finance is unable to provide such a large range of assistance for a small firm's survival, it is not as fundamental to the firm as networks are. In light of this, the effect of the survival strategies model should be even easier to achieve if small firms place an emphasis on obtaining the supply of money through networking.
In sum, networks are more fundamental to the small firm in the long run because they help gain access to a large range of resources and find niches in well-established markets. Firms gain competitive advantage in the long-term, which ultimately, satisfies every organization's objective of reducing costs and increasing revenues. Yet finance is more vital to the small enterprise at the start-up stage, where high capital investments are involved. It is crucial for the financial base of the company to be established, before any networking activity can begin to take place. Therefore, it can be concluded that finance is essential to the small enterprise during the initial stage of growth, whereas networks are fundamental to the firm's long-term sustainability.