The nature of human motivation is a complex and puzzling mystery. Since it is established that performance in the workplace depends on how much and on the reason why an individual is willing to act (Gellerman 1965: 7), the question remains on what best explains human incentive. The purpose of this paper is to assess which motivation theory best explains people's willingness to work hard. The paper reflects on human motivation with relevance to different views on human nature, and examines a selection of individual needs and motivation theories.
There are two main types of motivational theories, namely content and process theories. The main difference is the assumption on individual needs at work. Content theories assume that all people have the same set of needs, and that these needs motivate behavior (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 193). In contrast, process theories assume that all humans have different needs, and focus on how cognitive processes, or "the way we take in and process information about ourselves and the world," (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 193) influences these needs. Process theories are more concerned with explaining the effect of individual differences on the level of motivation, so that motivation is a result of "social comparison processes" (Fincham & Rhodes 2005: 233). Content motivation theories are more relevant to explaining people's willingness to work hard, because underlying human needs are the core motivators affecting people's willingness to work hard.
It is vital for motivation theories to consider four influential individual needs in the work place, which are the competence, achievement, affiliation, and money motives. 'The competence motive' is the desire for job mastery and professional growth. Robert White suggests the competence motive to be based on the assumption that a person is not only "a vehicle for a set of instincts" (Gellerman 1963: 111), but is also eager on discovering and fulfilling their potential. It is assumed that humans are keen on manipulating their environment to pursue goals. Thus, competence is a key motive affecting job success, because people who have faith in their own ability to influence the environment do tend to succeed.
On the other hand, individuals with a strong achievement motive perceive accomplishment as an ends. Achievement-motivated employees search for the opportunities to obtain successes that are "hard but are not unobtainable" (Gullerman 1965: 126), and thus, tend to outperform others by constantly challenging themselves. The reasonable degree of risk involved in the goal-attainment process encourages employees to set realistic goals and to maximize their abilities.
Affiliation is another individual need, which refers to the "social drive to be associated with others in interdependent relationships, involving using others for help or support without making them responsible for problems" (MerckSource, 2006). Affiliation can be considered as a means to an end or an ends itself - people socialize with fellow workers for specific purposes, such as favors or protection, or simply for enjoyment (Gellerman, 1965). The affiliation motive considers the fact that humans are social beings, and thus, tend to create informal work groups. Employees seek motivation and support to work hard from peers in informal work groups. The artificial barrier helps the modern employee escape from the "lack of control over one's working environment" (Gellerman 1965: 120).
Last but not least is 'money's' particularly complex role as a motivator. Unlike other individual needs, money has "no intrinsic meaning on its own" (Gellerman 1965: 168), and can "therefore absorb whatever meaning people want to find in their lives" (Gellerman 1965: 168). Some people associate money with its rational economic value, while others view money as more of a representation of status, achievement and other intangible goals. The ability for money to satisfy rational and irrational individual needs ensures that it is never oversupplied, so that nobody refuses it, nobody returns it, and people who have lots of it will generally want more.
Before analyzing the various content theories, it should be noted that human incentive is intricately linked with human nature. Since humans are unique and diverse, it would be too narrow to use a single motive or a single set of assumptions to explain employee motivation. Schein (1992) proposed that the best approach to managing people is dependent on the person and context in his 'complex' model of human nature. He considers the fact that human nature is complex and malleable, and thus, concludes that human needs differ between individuals. The contingency theory of motivation confirms this view by suggesting that motivation varies on a case by case basis. So, only a customized approach to motivating employees would be able to motivate people to work hard. Yet this approach is limited in application. It would be, for example, unrealistic to have an independent rewards system designed for every employee in the organization. It would be even more impossible to devise a theory that would take account of all the possible individual differences.
Alternatively, there are two generalized ideas on human nature in motivational theories. Hobbes argues that humans are, by nature, lazy, greedy and pleasure-seeking individuals. People are not self-motivated, so they have to be controlled by incentives or rewards in order to achieve results. In contrast, Rousseau's theory on human nature depicts humans as generous and creative individuals. It is perceived that organizational constructs have denied individuals from freely expressing their creative nature. These should be removed to encourage engagement, and thus, motivate better performance and productivity. Employing two universal schools of thought on human nature suggests that people have the same set of needs and should, therefore, be treated in the same way.
Douglas McGregor took Hobbes' and Rousseau's view of human nature onto a secondary level of assumptions (Fincham & Rhodes: 202). McGregor's Theory X takes on Hobbes' perspective of control, and assumes that people are "rational economic men" (Fincham & Rhodes: 202) who require rewards or even coercion to motivate them to work. Alternatively, McGregor employs Rousseau's viewpoint of engagement in Theory Y, and deduces that people are "complex men, possessing a bundle of social and self-actualizing needs" (Fincham & Rhodes: 202). When given the appropriate stimulation, people will be able to "show high levels of responsibility and self-direction" (Fincham &. Rhodes: 202).
Nevertheless, McGregor's comment on how "humans are malleable" (Schein 1992: 126) does, again, underlie the problem of the oversimplified characterization of human nature. It is accepted that individual needs do change over time and place. Yet the assumption of having a "single strategy that will keep morale and productivity high for everyone everywhere" (Gellerman 1963: 175) must be maintained in order to conclude a 'best' theory explaining people's willingness to work hard.
Maslow's hierachy of needs is the best model explaining human motivation, as it is based on a universal prediction of individual needs and behavior, but it also considers the exceptions made for individual differences. This model is also the most persuasive one of all, because the generalization of human needs includes the most important individual motives of competence, affiliation, achievement and money. Although, in reality, socio-demographic influences such as gender and culture should be considered as well, these factors are not the determining forces affecting motivation - human nature and human needs have a much more significant impact on affecting people's willingness to work hard.