The effect of group processes on individuals and work teams directly influences the overall output and performance in a business. Through studying the interaction between individuals and groups, managers become enlightened on "the success and failure of many work groups, as well as the satisfaction of the individuals working in them". This paper assesses the extent to which group processes influence individual behaviour and group performance.
'Group processes' is "the process of interaction within groups, which refers to the manner in which group action is constructed on a continuing basis". The study of such processes involves an examination on individual involvement and on changes in the overall group structure. On the other hand, a 'group' is "a number of interdependent individuals who influence one another through social interaction". Formal groups "are created by the organization and are intentionally designed to direct members toward some important organizational goal", such as business organizations and project teams. These differ from informal groups, such as friendships, which "develop naturally among an organization's personnel without any direction from the management of the organization within which they operate". Although informal groups are essential to the social needs of employees, it is nevertheless a subsidiary concern in group processes. Thus, only the impact of group processes on the formal business team is reviewed in this essay.
To begin with, social facilitation displays the potency of group processes on individual behaviour. It is based on Zajonc's drive theory, where he argued that social facilitation occurs "because we are excited and aroused by the mere physical presence of species mates". This phenomenon sheds light, in particular, on how people perform familiar tasks better, but unfamiliar tasks worse in front of an audience. An example is when a piano player is instructed to play an unseen piece on stage. The theory of social facilitation suggests that the piano player is highly likely to perform worse than if he is given a piece he has been practicing for years.
Similarly, social loafing explains why individuals become less motivated working in groups. It is a phenomenon which predicts how a weak social identity decreases individual performance and diminishes group productivity. However, unlike social facilitation, there are factors preventing this phenomenon from occurring. One of them is the level of group cohesiveness, which is "defined as the complex of forces giving rise to the perceptions by members of a group identity". According to Karau & Williams' meta-analysis study, the level of motivation is not as affected in highly cohesive groups, because individuals believe that their group or their task holds a great importance. The surrounding social culture is another critical manipulate on individual performance. When people are encouraged to work for personal success in highly individualistic cultures like the United States, social loafing is likely to occur. The notion of working for self benefit encourages people to become more motivated, and thus, enhances individual performance. Social loafing is, however, unlikely to occur in highly collectivistic cultures such as Japan, as people are inspired by group accomplishments over personal achievements.
The concept of conformity has a significant influence on individual performance as well. Conformity refers to "cases in which individuals change their attitudes, verbal statements or behaviours to adhere more closely to some salient social norm". One of the influences in conformity is known as the normative social influence, which is when the minority conforms in order to prevent the group's potential rejection and punishment. Alternatively, the informational social influence is when the minority conforms, based on the trust of group opinion. The major difference between these two is that the normative influence can pressure people to conform despite conflicting private attitudes and contradictory group norms.
The most decisive experiments on conformity were conducted by Solomon Asch, where students were asked to estimate which of three comparison lines matched the fourth line. Asch observed that both normative and informational influences were functioning when the group members made incorrect matches, and detected as the size of the majority increased, so did the level of conformity at a diminishing rate. Stanley Milgram's electric shock experiments are another set of experiments which focuses on the power of group conformity on individuals. People were hired to be 'teachers', and were forced to shock the 'learner' (who faked the pain) by electricity every time a memory error occurred. Despite watching the learner tortured in pain, most of the teachers continued to apply higher levels of shock to the learner until the maximum level has been reached. The teachers' compliancy to set protocols reveals how the pressure of conformity overrides the ethical judgment to stop inflicting pain on another person. This demonstrates again the large influence of conformity on individual decisions and behaviour.
On the contrary, the concept of synergy relates to the effect of group processes on group performance as a whole. It is concerned with how the combined efforts in a work group are able to outperform even the best individual on the team. This phenomenon occurs because team spirit induces members to work efficiently and to specialize on tasks that would otherwise be carried out individually. The increased cohesiveness also induces creative thinking and allows the team to consider alternatives suggested by its members. The overall result is an increased number of good-quality decisions. Synergy, in practice, is found in the practice of cross-training to promote efficacy. Individuals undergo "efforts to learn the jobs performed by one's team members" (or cross-training) to develop "a common understanding regarding how their team works" (or shared mental models). A highly cohesive team spirit is generated, which increases the flexibility and coordination of the team, and benefits the overall performance and productivity in the long run.
Group polarization, or "the tendency for group decisions to be more extreme than those of individuals", is another phenomenon which shows how group processes affect group performance. Individuals generally become stronger on their beliefs when their beliefs are recognised with other like-minded people. Group polarization is observed in juries, where jurors with neutral views come to conclusions about whether the defendant is innocent or guilty based on the other jurors' opinions.
It was suggested initially that group discussion has a calming effect on extremist opinions in the group polarization phenomenon. However, studies have shown that group decisions made individuals even more extreme than before. The previously mentioned normative and informational influences contribute to the group polarization phenomenon. If, for example, there is a tendency towards a certain verdict in a jury, normative influences may encourage jurors to conform to the group's decision despite disagreement. Alternatively, informational influences may persuade jurors to agree with a certain verdict after numerous reasons favouring this verdict are given.
Nevertheless, a more extreme phenomenon than group polarization is the groupthink phenomenon. Groupthink "illustrates how an emerging group norm, often one suggested by the group leader, can bias the content of discussion by suppressing dissent", so that even those individuals who are not in agreement with the group norms suppress their own beliefs and comply with the remainder of the group. Janis suggested a number features that led to the groupthink phenomenon, which included "directive leadership style, intense group cohesion, similarity of ideology, pressure for unanimity, group insulation from critics, insecure member self-esteem and a sense of crisis." These extreme conditions lead to excessive conformity - a scenario where group synergy creates more problems than benefits. A real-life example of the groupthink phenomenon is its influence on the Kennedy administration's decision to invade Cuba, where the administration believed that they were unconquerable despite being outnumbered by Castro's army. There were many processes involved in the formation of the groupthink phenomenon in this case. Many people were fed by the administration to believe that they were doing something morally correct, while others supported the administration merely to display loyalty. The administration reveals how processes in the groupthink phenomenon influence individuals to conform to group norms and achieve a united group performance.
In conclusion, group processes hold a notable influence in shaping individual behaviour and group performance. Although the effect of group processes varies under diverse circumstances, there is no doubt that they are remarkably influential to the business' function and operation. It is vital to keep in mind that businesses are a collective operation. If managers are able to grasp the fundamental group processes affecting the working environment, the business will definitely benefit from an enhanced performance and productivity.