Society sometimes perceives overweight people as lazy, blaming them for not having enough willpower to stick to a healthy regime. However, weight control can be an uphill struggle, not only to lose weight, but then also to maintain it. It is proposed that our genes may give us a predisposition to store fat reserves, as evolution has led us to have a natural drive to eat as much as possible when food is available. However, in today's society, where food is so plentiful, it is easy to over consume. There are many biological factors that contribute to weight regulation; homeostasis, certain brain structures, neurochemicals and metabolism have all been found to influence our weight. However, despite our genetic predispositions, it may be possible to overcome these biological factors through willpower.
To understand weight loss, it is necessary to know how the body maintains weight. The regulatory systems that keep body weight constant are very efficient. This is the reason why weight loss can be very difficult and only those with exceptional willpower may be successful.
The amount of body fat carried is regulated by homeostasis, which ensures that the internal state is kept within a critical range to avoid disruption and death of cells (F.Schlaghecken, lecture, 5th March, 2004). Weight regulation is controlled by a negative feedback loop, which produces behaviour oscillating around the ideal 'set point'. We therefore eat to obtain nutrients when we are hungry, and stop when we are satiated. However, we often eat before we feel hungry and stop before we feel full. Thus, there must be other factors that influence our decisions to begin and end consumption. In the short-term, it seems that there is no single signal that is used exclusively (Rosenzweig, Breedlove & Leiman, 2002) though plasma glucose concentration, body temperature, plasma amino acids, cholecystokinin (CCK) and other hormones can all control meal patterns by feelings hunger and satiety (Friedman & Halaas, 1998).
As for long-term regulation, studies on obese rats imply that there is a hormone that may be involved in the negative feedback loop. Adipose (fat) cells produce and secrete a protein neurochemical called leptin, which travels around the body via the bloodstream. There are specific receptors for leptin on the surface of many organs such as the liver, pancreas and the brain (particularly in the choroid plexus and hypothalamic nuclei such as the lateral hypothamulus, and the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei). The brain seems to monitor the leptin levels to determine and control the amount of body fat (Rosenzweig, et al., 2002).
In the hypothalamus, leptin binds to specific receptors in the arcuate nucleus, which causes a series of events to occur. By binding with the nucleus' receptors, leptin inhibits the production and secretion of agouti-related peptide (AGRP) and neuropeptide Y (NPY). The arcuate nucleus is then stimulated to send excitatory signals to the paraventricular nucleus, causing the NPY to increase the appetite, decrease metabolism and stimulate the formation of adipose tissue. The binding of leptin also induces the release of melanocyte stimluating hormone (-MSH) that inhibits eating. As the leptin levels decrease, hunger is induced and weight may be gained (Rosenzweig, et al., 2002). However, once stimulated, the paraventricular nuclei also release corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) to the posterior pituitary. The release of CRH induces a release of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), which in turn increases the metabolic rate, and the speed of the breakdown of fat stores. ACTH stimulated the adrenal cortex to release glucocorticoids and stimulates the sympathetic nervous system. This results in suppressing hunger and an increased metabolic rate (Friedman & Halaas, 1998; Rosenzweig, et al., 2002; Schwartz & Gelling, 2002).
This explains how leptin controls weight by causing feelings of hunger and satiety. During starvation, leptin levels decrease, eliciting a behavioural, neurochemical and metabolic response. Weight gain increases leptin levels and induces a different response, leading to a state of negative energy balance. During dieting leptin levels fall, which may account for the low success rate of dieting, as low leptin is likely to stimulate weight gain (Friedman & Halaas, 1998).
If the control of body weight were exclusively attributable to biological processes then we would naturally eat a completely balanced diet and have no real preferences for foods. It appears that the hypothalamus is important in the regulation of body weight. However, it is not only associated with lower level processes in the body, it also incorporates higher-level processes such as possible cognitive influences from higher brain areas, suggesting that there may be non-homeostatic influences over eating control. There is considerable evidence that a person does not purely feel hungry as a result of the body's homeostatic function. External factors such as learned behaviour can be extremely powerful over seemingly biological drives.
Investigations into learned eating behaviour in rats appear to display this influence. After a few days of feeding at a certain time each day, the rats displayed behaviour of expecting food, even when they had just been fed (F. Schlaghecken, lecture, 5 th March, 2004). This suggests that after a relatively short period of time behaviour concerning eating can be learned and apparently override the internal drives of satiety. This evidence would strongly imply that a person has considerable control over their weight and the ability to lose weight; if behaviour regarding eating can be learned in a matter of days, forming new eating habits or reversing old habits ought to be possible.
The hypothalamus also receives important input from the amygdala, which is involved in emotional processes. We have seen in the case of learned behaviour, if pleasurable food is expected, people can experience a renewed feeling of hunger even after finishing a large meal. Similarly, if a person is given a highly monotonous diet they experience less feelings of hunger and eat less. This was supported by the fact that children eat less single coloured sweets than multicoloured ones (Rolls, Rowe & Rolls, 1982). This sensory specific satiety phenomenon contradicts the theory that external factors do not have much influence over eating behaviour. Hence, the use of motivation to control what a person eats could result in weight loss.
Motivation can influence what a person consumes, however overcoming cravings can be a fundamental problem for people trying to lose weight and is commonly where willpower fails. A substantial number of obese individuals have indicated that their inability to lose weight resulted from excessive snacking due to cravings for sweets (Schlundt, Virts, Sbrocco, Pope-Cordle & Hill, 1993). A direct link between overeating and decreased serotonin levels, (Wurtman & Wurtman, 1981) has suggested that these cravings could be due to a drop in serotonin levels in the brain.
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that regulates several vital mood processes in the body, including eating patterns. High levels of serotonin are associated with satiety, whereas reduced levels have been found to cause depression and also feelings of hunger. Therefore the body does its best to maintain a high level of serotonin. Serotonin is produced in the body via 5-Hydroxy Tryptophan (5-HTP). Its precursor, the amino acid tryptophan, can only be provided via the food we consume. As a result these foods tend to be craved by the body in order to elevate serotonin levels, and in turn improve mood. However, in order to have a significant effect on serotonin levels, the intake of these tryptophan-containing foods needs to be sufficiently high. Unfortunately, these foods tend to have a high carbohydrate and fat content. Evidence for this comes from the fact that obese individuals show low levels of serotonin and crave high carbohydrate foods to make themselves feel better (Wurtman & Wurtman, 1981).
In reference to this theory alone, if our desire to eat unhealthy foods is solely attributable to cravings, sufficient amounts of will power should be able to suppress these desires, and therefore weight may be lost. However, suppressing cravings will only have a short-term effect on body weight. If the main reason for these cravings is due to a feeling of unhappiness, caused by a lack of serotonin, methods of raising serotonin levels may be more effective in the long term. Recent research has suggested that serotonin levels can be increased through exercise (Arehart-Treichel, 2003). Therefore, with a degree of will power we should be able to suppress our cravings and exercise instead, which would not only raise serotonin levels but also help towards weight loss by burning calories and possibly even increasing metabolism.
Metabolism is an important factor in losing weight. If the basal metabolism increases, more energy is used up, leading to greater energy expenditure than energy intake, ultimately resulting in weight loss. Is our metabolic rate set or can it be wilfully controlled? Basal metabolism is a biological mechanism that may be genetically predetermined by, for example, gender. Women have been found to have lower resting metabolic rates (RMRs) than males (Arciero, Goran & Poehlman, 1993). Other factors that a person does not have wilful control over include a decreased basal metabolic rate with age (Molnar & Schutz, 1997), and during menstruation, with the lowest point occurring one week before ovulation (Solomon, Kurzer & Calloway, 1982). However the lower metabolic rate that is found with old age may be less associated with age itself and more a result of reduced physical activity (Van Pelt, Sinneno, Seals & Jones, 2001).
Exercise is believed to help increase metabolic rate. Melby, Scholl, Edwards & Bullough (1993) found post exercise metabolic rate (PEMR) to be higher than RMR following ninety minutes of strenuous resistive exercise, and remained higher than the RMR until the following morning, fifteen hours after exercising. This shows that strenuous resistive exercise can raise PEMR for a relatively long period of time. So the ideal time to eat is after exercise, when the metabolic rate is highest, resulting in a faster breakdown of food, with the maximum possible calorie expenditure. Thus by choosing an appropriate time to eat and by exercising, a person can increase their metabolic rate. A person can also control what they eat; it has been found that eating fat is linked to weight gain, whereas choosing carbohydrates and proteins not only satisfies appetite better, but also increases the metabolism (Lean, 2003). Fluids as well as food can increase metabolic rate; drinking 500ml of water can increase metabolic rate by 30% (Boschmann, Steiniger, Hille, Tank, Adams, Sharma, Klaus, Luft & Jordan, 2003). So although metabolic rate is a biological mechanism, which is genetically determined, the person can wilfully influence it, by altering their lifestyle and enable weight loss to take place.
The social aspect of eating behaviour which influences hunger and satiety levels is largely learned and therefore could theoretically be altered. In the same way, it seems that willpower could potentially suppress cravings and over-ride intrinsic metabolic rates. However, whilst the discussed biological factors do play an important role in weight regulation, the underlying mechanisms such as homeostasis give us an evolutionary predisposition to prevent weight loss, making it difficult to lose weight. Considering all these factors, though willpower contributes to weight loss, wilful changes on behaviour seem to have a relatively small impact and are difficult to sustain. It appears that eating behaviour is largely biologically driven and the notion that weight loss is exclusively a matter of willpower is too nave.