Pressure groups are "powerful instruments of action" through which citizens try to influence government policies and the actions of decision-makers; they serve as outlets for dissatisfaction and participation outside the conventional political means. While there are methodological constraints on judging the effectiveness of pressure groups, by analysing the methods used, support for the group and results of its efforts, a measure of its influence can be reached.
The internet has brought a new dimension to pressure group activities, and the online presentation can reveal much about the group's characteristics.
Fathers 4 Justice is a pressure group created in 2002, whose aim is to fight for the rights of estranged fathers to see their children. Despite having only around 12,000 members, Fathers 4 Justice has become a household name and the centre of media attention on many occasions, yet it has made little difference to government decisions. The original branch was disbanded in January 2006, which reinforces its shortcomings.
Aesthetically, the Fathers 4 Justice website has a bleak and unprofessional appearance. The font used for the website is rather small, which not only makes the writing look more dense and daunting, but can cause difficulties for people with poor eyesight; although the text can be adjusted via the internet settings. It seems that little time and thought has gone into the fashioning of the design, and it has tried to disguise this with its bold black background and purple logo. The black background, far from legitimizing the website's appearance, gives it an overbearing and intimidating tone which somewhat reflects the way people view Fathers 4 Justice and its approach to political activity. The first thing that appears when the Fathers 4 Justice website is loaded is the ever-present logo in the top left-hand corner, and the list of contents below it, giving easy to access to the different sections. The home page comprises of press articles which is not the most striking of layouts and does not help give a good first impression of the site. (Appendix I)
It is interesting to compare this to the website of the pressure group 'Families Need Fathers', which has similar objectives as Fathers for Justice, but more of an insider status. They look more towards consulting with government and giving advice to families in need rather than direct action. This is reflected in the design of the website: The layout has a more light-hearted, less forceful tone, achieved by the yellow background and a 'happy' picture of a father reading to a child.
The Fathers 4 Justice website is made up of eleven clearly labelled sections. Two of these have been made redundant since the closure of the organisation: listings of events are no longer available, and new members are not being accepted. However, application for membership was once an available option, and the sign up process appears to be fairly straightforward. But as the website is not very inviting, a person would have to be quite committed to the causes of the organisation to consider becoming a member. There was also the possibility of making an online donation to either the British faction or the American one; or of purchasing merchandise online. This not only contributes to the finances of the group, but also to the spread of publicity and support.
There are few images on the website and these are only small thumbnails which cannot be expanded to a reasonable size. The limited number of photos can only be found by clicking on the 'F4J in action' link or the section about Pierce Brosnan. This makes the website stark in comparison to those of other pressure groups. For example, when accessing the 'Greenpeace' web page, one is greeted with an outburst of colour and vivid images, making the website eye-catching. Fathers 4 Justice could perhaps benefit from this example, and make their website more appealing. Dressing up as superheroes or as Father Christmas' has provided the media with great visual tools and it is a shame that Fathers 4 Justice does not harness this to enhance the webpage.
There is also a lack of other resources such as radio extracts or videos, which could also be a useful tool for attracting and maintaining people's attention.
It is plausible, nevertheless unlikely, that the simplicity of the website may be intentional: By keeping the information short and easy to access Fathers 4 Justice are more likely to get the desired message across, and people can get an overall impression of the organisation by having a quick glance through the website. Having a cluttered website with an excess of information can be overwhelming and discouraging for the reader. Also, the website downloads almost instantaneously which is a positive feature.
However the website has a comprehensive press section which is to be commended, as it provides the reader with an expansive source of information about the organisation, and the way in which it is run. It also helps legitimise the organisation's claims and standing by providing thoughts other than those engineered by Fathers 4 Justice, trying to create a good image.
The website provides an introduction to the formation of the organisation and its aims and objectives. Using short and bold facts, and an explanation of its 'legacy', Fathers 4 Justice has tried to add credibility to its name, and gain the reader's support. This is demonstrated by the 'Pledge' signed by Matthew O'Conner, attempting to incite compassion and give the website a personal feel. Fathers 4 Justice has also tried to encourage people to take an interest in the campaign by highlighting the support Pierce Brosnan and Bob Geldorf have for the organisation. The website has various emboldened quotes by Bob Geldorf such as: "I cannot believe what is done to parents in the name of the law", trying to validate its cause.
Having been disbanded, the website does not appear to have been updated recently, although press releases since its closure in January have been put up. The quality of the web page could be improved by having more information regarding what Fathers 4 Justice has achieved, and its different campaigns, and also by expanding on how the organisation has spread to other countries. This type of information would be appreciated by someone trying to find out about the organisation, for with the current website only a limited amount of information is available. The website could also offer more visual aids, such as photographs or relevant diagrams.
During the putting together of this report, I sent an email to the person in charge of Father 4 Justice's merchandise. I received a reply after completing the write up from the man who launched the Dutch branch. I have been told that the English website is under development, and a new one will soon be launched which resembles the new Dutch one: .
There are considerable differences between this website and the current English one, and all the criticisms made so far would have become redundant had the new website been launched sooner. The Dutch website offers a comprehensive guide to the organisation, and interactive links such as the 'Campagne TV'. The black background and purple logo remain, and interestingly, the image of Pierce Brosnan from his film 'Evelyn' is also a prominent feature of this Dutch website. The website has a much more professional layout, and gives much more information about the organisation and its current affairs.
How can the effectiveness be judged? What criteria should be used? There is no way of knowing definitively whether a particular campaign has been successful, or if a government's change in policy is directly related to the actions of a particular group. This makes the evaluation of effectiveness an extremely hard task to undertake. When attempting to find out how effective a pressure group has been, consulting those who have taken part in the group, or in this case, examining the group's website is a good place to start. However, one must be aware of the bias which will dominate the information. A pressure group will attempt to give itself a favourable image, and most likely exaggerate its achievements.
For single issue groups, it is easier to judge whether or not they have succeeded with their objectives by whether or not these have been achieved. However, groups often have multiple objectives and so their effectiveness is not only related to only one thing. Fathers 4 Justice claim that there are still one hundred children a day who "lose partial or total contact with their fathers in the UK"; and court action related to the 1989 Children's Act has not changed, and so in this respect its fight for 'justice' has failed. However the issue of parents' rights has been forced up the political agenda, which is a considerable feat, further strengthened by the origin of the group in other countries.
One of the main questions regarding the effectiveness of pressure group activities is how it attempts to influence government. The methods employed relate to both the type of group in question, and the resources it has available. The approach undertaken by Fathers 4 Justice is to create publicity and awareness through high profiled stunts to try and shape government policy making.
The success of a pressure group also depends on the issue it deals with and the type of political system within which it operates. But there is often more than one pressure group with the same policy agenda. How can one be sure that a government shift in opinion is due to the actions of Fathers 4 Justice rather than the 'similar' group "Families Need Fathers"? Influence or power cannot be measured, so it proves very difficult to determine how successful a group has been.
Governments have to take many factors into consideration, and sometimes they just happen to coincide with the aims advocated by pressure groups. Wyn Grant highlights four of these factors: the salience of the issue to the electorate, the political views of the party in government, the 'scientific' opinions of experts and the balance of pressure group activity. So even if Fathers 4 Justice put forth a valid and well backed up campaign, it does not implicitly mean its objectives will be met, for there are other factors which will play a role in the decision process.
Wyn Grant identifies two types of pressure groups: those with insider status and those with outsider. Insider groups are those recognised by government as legitimate participants of the political process, and so generally have closer access to decision makers and are often considered to be the most effective. However, in return for government access, these groups must behave 'appropriately' and thus are constrained by government requirements. Being granted insider status does not necessarily imply direct contact with significant policy-makers, which detracts from its appeal.
Outsider groups by choice (as opposed to by necessity) are more relevant to this project report as Fathers 4 Justice is found in this category. Outsider groups are excluded from the governmental framework and so are less restricted by the political system. Outsider groups believe their aims cannot be achieved through conventional political means, and therefore have to make a stand in other ways, by "raising public awareness and support for their positions" rather than calmly putting forth their arguments. The method most frequently used for persuasion is direct action.
Direct action does not imply violent or illegal activity. It occurs when a group, frustrated with the lack of change, decides to "take matters into (its) own hands" and act outside the conventional realm. It can involve a mass demonstration, just as it could be an act of vandalism. The growth of technology such as the internet and mobile phones has eased the planning of campaigns and mobilisation of members, a significant advance for enforcing direct action tactics.
This leads to the question of the effectiveness of direct action. Fathers 4 Justice have certainly been successful in getting their stories into newspapers and on the news by keeping the campaign in the public eye and managing visibility. With the 'superhero stunts' and attention-seeking activities, Fathers 4 Justice captured the attention of the government and people in a position to affect its policies. This in itself is an accomplishment and helped the group to strive and survive. However the government has made no attempts to "establish a legal presumption to contact" or a "Bill of Rights for the family"; two objectives listed by Fathers 4 Justice. There are many reasons for this, and not all are directly related to Fathers 4 Justice, yet its more audacious stunts may have damaged its integrity. The scaling of public buildings, although a great inconvenience and cost to the public, were never seriously dangerous; however, infiltrating the House of Commons and 'bombing' Tony Blair with a condom filled with purple flour caused a great security alert at a time when the threat of terrorism was on everyone's minds. This kind of outlandish behaviour will have discredited the organization and made the British Government less willing to take its arguments and appeals into consideration. Even an MP who once supported Fathers 4 Justice' stated that "they have just done themselves a huge disservice," after the flour-bombing incident.
Public esteem will have suffered when people with little or nothing to do with the group were inconvenienced as a result of road blocks or the closing of the London Eye whilst 'Superman' climbed up it. Popular praise will be in most cases a result of amusement rather than active support for the aims of the organisation. In fact taking past events into consideration, it would appear public support is actually quite limited. This is based on for example, the reaction when Fathers 4 Justice 'invaded' York Minster: Matt O'Conner was "rugby tackled and dragged out of the service by church members". It is a fine line drawn between "spreading the message and alienating the public".
The media attention received has not always been positive. The impact of the media in shaping public and governmental opinion cannot be underestimated, and many times it has ridiculed Fathers 4 Justice or portrayed it as a nuisance.
With direct action it is not easy to control the extent to which people go. Fathers 4 Justice has suffered from the actions of people associated with the group, or people claiming to be acting on behalf of it. These groups are more extremist and have enhanced the negative connotations regarding Fathers 4 Justice, ultimately leading to Matthew O'Connor disbanding the original organisation in January 2006 after uncovering a 'plot' to kidnap Leo Blair.
A pressure group is nothing without resources. However extensive use of resources is not directly proportional to efficiency and its role is often exaggerated. A greater display of influence is if the government anticipates the negative reaction that would arise with certain decisions, and so tries to avoid it with the pressure group in mind. I do not feel that Fathers 4 Justice has quite this level of influence, so it is worth looking at resources such as membership, finance and expertise.
Membership is considered a considerable expression of efficiency by many, and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds is often quoted with its over one million members to prove the commitment people have to this organisation. However, it is doubtful whether the level of membership actually affects the credibility and success of an interest group. Obviously members are fundamental for providing funding and even activists for an organisation, but it must be stressed that most members do little more than pay a monthly fee and perhaps read the annual newsletter.
Fathers 4 Justice has only 12,000 members, partly because it was only set up a few years ago and never had the time to build up the repertoire other groups such as the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds have been able to. This has not prevented Fathers 4 Justice from carrying out outlandish campaigns which have caused more of a stir than certain groups with more members. In terms of actual activists, Fathers 4 Justice only uses a selection of core members, and so thousands of activists are not required to make a stand. The group may have benefited from involving a wider proportion of its members by having a more democratic structure, encouraging more people to get involved.
But membership means nothing without expertise and leadership at the top of the organisation, guiding the group and determining its course of action. In this respect Fathers for Justice has benefited from the professional skills of its founder, Matthew O'Connor, who being a "designer, marketing and public relations man by trade" has managed to create a notorious international image for Fathers 4 Justice. He studied past civil rights movements, such as the Suffragettes and the activities of Martin Luther King to help him with the act of successful campaigning. But has his expertise been put to good use? Although the emphasis on publicity may have aroused people's attentions, it is uncertain whether they have actually had a positive impact on the fulfilment of the group's aims.
The man who coordinated the Dutch movement attached a recent press release to the email he sent to me. It not only claims that Fathers 4 Justice is in the process of being re-launched, but is doing so as a result of "requests from both supporters and the public to continue the campaign". The press release also alleges that the pressure group will refrain from carrying out the more outrageous stunts, but will instead take a more respectable approach to UK politics. It seems that Fathers 4 Justice has perhaps learnt that its direct action tactics were not the most successful in implementing change, and is now attempting to negotiate with the various institutions of the state, to perhaps gain more of an insider status. It remains to be seen whether or not this method will be more successful that previous efforts.
Effectiveness is contentious subject, with little agreement on how it can be measured. Although Fathers 4 Justice has captured the attention of the media on several occasions, its portrayal has not always been positive and there is little proof that it has had a lasting effect on the shaping of government policies. The fact that the group was disbanded earlier this year is perhaps evidence of its own failure in realizing its objectives. Fathers 4 Justice exemplifies the strengths and weaknesses of direct action, and how resources play a part in the success of a group. However, the organisation has been in the headlines of both national and international newspapers, and sustained public attention over the past few years. Hopefully the new website will captivate more people and be more revealing of what the pressure group is about, as the current website leaves much to be desired.