Elite interviewing is a research technique applauded by many, especially those in the political field. There are many interpretations regarding its definition, and those which have been taken as most relevant in this essay are expressed by Burnham and Dexter. Burnham defines elite interviewing in terms of its target group and research technique, the target being 'elites' and the technique, in most cases, semi-structured interviews. The key question is how elites are classified. Dexter states that an elite can be any person given 'unstandardized' treatment for the purposes of the research, as opposed to usual assumption a person who has power or high status. People do not have the same relevance to the research project, meaning some are more important than others depending on the purposes of the research. It often arises that given the extent of their knowledge and experience, those with whom elite interviewing is most appropriate are also influential. Having established what is understood by elite interviewing, it is then possible to examine its relevance to politics and with this, its strengths and limitations in relation to political research. By taking everything into consideration a conclusion has been formed to try and assess whether elite interviewing is a worthwhile technique for political research.
Elite interviewing's relevance to politics stems from the fact that many of the appropriate target participants are decision-makers, politicians and other people who are influential in politics. Power is another core issue of politics, and is a concept addressed in various political studies that have used elite interviewing as their principle method. Bruce Headey used British Cabinet Ministers as his starting point and focus to form judgements about "classifying the roles of politicians in the executive branch of government and analysing the opportunities and constraints of office". The attempt to develop theories about the implications of "variance in executive leadership performance"; shows how elite interviewing is relevant for the study of decision-makers. Hugh Heclo and Aaron Wildavsky used elite interviewing to "describe the expenditure process" and for "illuminating the characteristic practices of British central government", another example of a practical use of elite interviewing in the study of politics.
Although different techniques can be used with elite interviewing, semi-structured interviewing is the one most often employed, and is highly appropriate for the study of decision-makers and people with expertise in a certain field. Being influential, the respondents are likely to want to lead and control the research process,  which is enabled by a greater chance to express their views and challenge those of the researcher. This gives them more prominence in the discussions, reversing the conventional power relationship between the researcher and the interviewee. By giving people the chance to demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of something, semi-structured interviews appeal to a person's vanity, which can be used for gaining access to further information. People are more likely to agree to participate in an interview where they are able to dominate the discussion, rather than for example, a survey which just requires filling out.
Elite interviewing is beneficial when seeking insight into political processes and developments which are shielded from the public eye. It reveals a great deal concerning the perceptions decision-makers have of the world and how they came to reach them. It can also lead to explanations of how decisions and policies are made. This is largely attained by allowing the respondents to develop their thoughts, encouraged perhaps by suitable amounts of probing from the interviewer. Probing involves encouraging the participant to either expand on an answer, or help produce an understandable one that is useful for the purposes of the research. It is a technique which is less easy to utilize with other research methods,  and is especially useful when discussing sensitive issues in political research such as certain government policies. Probing attempts to delve deeper into the perceptions of the respondent and may incite further discussion on the matter, leading perhaps to points of interest the researcher had not previously considered. This is one of the major advantages of an elite interview over a survey. With a survey a researcher must have a definite hypothesis and method from the start; yet with elite interviewing, thoughts developed throughout the process may improve the quality of the analysis.
'Triangulation' which involved the use of other research methods to reinforce and verify the results gained through elite interviews can be used in the research process. By supplementing the research with quantitative data such as surveys and questionnaire results the accuracy of elite interview deductions can be reinforced. All research methods have certain drawbacks, but the impact of these can be lessened through Triangulation. However, additional data is not readily accessible and so elite interviewing is the only way of achieving the information needed. An example of where this is the case, is with the British Government, whose secrecy and laws such as the Public Records Act limit the amount of data available. Also, much of what emerges is largely incomplete or bias, so elite interviews are necessary to result in up-to-date, in-depth information.
Despite the strengths of elite interviewing that have been discussed, there are various characteristics which can be interpreted as limitations to its usefulness. These are mainly concerned with the costs of interviewing; how the interview is recorded; gaining access to respondents and the ability to strike a balance with many processes.
The principle costs associated with elite interviewing are those of time and money. These are the two basic aspects which differentiate interviewing from quantitative methods such as surveys. With the preparatory work needed for the interview; travelling to and from it; the interview itself; and after-work such as the transcription and its analysis, it has been estimated that one interview can take up to twelve hours. Sufficient amount of preparation on the topic to be discussed is imperative, as the respondents need to feel that what they say is understood, and that the interview is worth their time. As Headey notes "the moment the interviewer shows unfamiliarity with the subject (...) he will begin to feel himself on the smooth slipway to the outer office". Considering the number of interviews needed to complete the research, it leads one to wonder whether the method is really worth it. Sending a standardized questionnaire and asking people to complete it and send it back would be much less time-consuming, yet it is argued, less valid. Elites are also restricted by time because of their busy schedules, and might only put aside forty-five minutes for an interview. The researcher may find that politicians need to rush off to other appointments, leaving little time to establish 'rapport' and cover everything necessary.
In terms of monetary costs, travel costs must not be underestimated for elites are not all based in the same city or town and so researchers may need to travel extensively to reach them. Also, depending on how the interview is recorded, the researcher may have to provide audio recording equipment which adds to the total costs. There is always the risk that despite all this the participant fails to turn up, or cancels the appointment, which can the make the efforts and costs appear fruitless.
How the interview is recorded raises an interesting debate which can exemplify the limitations of elite interviewing as a research method. On the one hand, by using a tape recorder one has a record of not only what the participant said, but the way in which it was said; providing a more detailed account of the actor's perceptions and interpretations. By recording the interview, the interviewer is able to focus on other aspects of the interview such as the topics being discussed; prompting the respondent at the appropriate times for more detailed information, and perceiving possible irregularities in the answers. After the interview, the researcher is able to go through the whole affair without having to rely solely on memory and possibly incomplete notes. Through repeated examinations of the recording, the interviewer is able to interpret it in different ways, and then allow the transcript to be used for secondary analysis by other researchers.
However, the use or even prospect of a tape recorder may inhibit respondents and prevent them from revealing their true thoughts. This is especially so if the topic being discussed is a sensitive or controversial one, in which case the participants may be reluctant to have their comments recorded verbatim. Politicians in particular, are very cautious with their words, and so may not want to be held accountable for a recording, as it allows less room for interpretation and cannot later be denied. This means the results may not be as profound or interesting as hoped. There are also practical problems with using a tape recorder, such as the prospects of the recording equipment malfunctioning, and thus disrupting the flow of the discussion. Transcribing from a recording takes much longer than revising notes, and results in much more paperwork. Bryman claims that one should allow about six hours for transcription for every hour of speech, and given the number of interviews needed, can the researcher afford to give up this amount of time? Mistakes can be made during the transcription from mishearing the recording or carelessness, leading to faulty research. Also, it is often found that often the most valuable comments are made once the tape-recorder has been switched off and a more relaxed atmosphere has resumed.
Gaining access to participants is one of the dominant preoccupations related to a successful research process, as with no access, there is no interview. There are various factors that can lead to a target individual being hard to reach. Prominent people in politics are very busy, and will need to be offered a very good reason and see the benefits of participation to ensure it is worthwhile. A researcher can try to help this by sending a letter or an email explaining the project and its purposes, another consideration which adds to the workload of elite interviews. In general, the higher up in the policy process a person is, the harder they are to access, and the more likely the researcher will be 'fobbed off' to someone lower down the hierarchy. This all depends greatly on the type of target being pursued, as for example, members of minority institutions or Non-Governmental Organisations may be more welcoming to researchers than members of legislatures. Getting past gatekeepers can also be an access problem, as people may surround themselves with 'protective layers' or use bureaucracy as a buffer to prevent people from getting through to them. Access issues need to be dealt with carefully and tactfully, to ensure that when possible a researcher is able to contact their target and receive a positive response.
The characteristics of elites themselves can be problematic for the research process. Because elites are generally prominent people, they will be accustomed to being charge and so will try to shape the research process. Researchers may find it is not their place to make demands, and thus find it hard to maintain a balance between allowing the elites to rule proceedings, and intervening to make sure the necessary ground is covered for the purposes of the research. This involves preventing the participant from veering off in irrelevant directions. The possibility of elites pursuing topics unrelated to the research is explained by Hertz and Imber by the fact that they are "used to having others interested in what they have to say and in having what they say make a difference in the lives of others" This makes it difficult to keep respondents on track and discussing topics significant to the research.
Interviewing solely elites can result in an unrepresentative study, so the accuracy of the generalizations made can be questioned. Bruce Heady states that "the respondents do not constitute the large statistically representative sample of contemporary politicians, which would have been ideal but which was beyond the resources of this study".
Also, an interviewer may have an effect on the behaviour and answers given by the respondent, leading to inaccurate results. Interviewer bias, an effect of an interviewer's age, sex, race or nationality among other things, can affect the way the respondent answers the question, thereby affecting validity of the interview. Participants may want to try and please the interviewer, or offer 'politically-correct' answers, which may not reflect their true feelings. The type of relationship created between the actors is also largely a result of the role the interviewer plays. Whether he or she decides to create a 'friendly' atmosphere or remain neutral will have an impact on the outcome of the proceedings.
Validity is another central concern of elite interviewing, and the accuracy of the results largely depends on how the interviewee responds to the topics discussed in the interview. There are various motives which may prevent a rich flow of information from taking place. First of all, there are practical restrictions of how valid statements can be, and these are based on the fact that people may have faulty memories and thus recall things incompletely or incorrectly. Further, how a person remembers something and states it in the present is greatly altered by their current perceptions and the results of the events for which they held opinions. In this way people may try to 're-write history' in a way they view as favourable and that shows them in the best possible light. For example, those who previously supported conservative policies but after the 1997 General Election Labour landslide began to favour Tony Blair's policies, may nowadays claim never to have really supported the actions of Margaret Thatcher or John Major, thereby albeit unintentionally, distorting the truth. This is especially so when the incident turned out to be a disaster, as people tend to tone down their association with it. Respondents will also try to highlight their role in events, perhaps exaggerating the life they led.
Headey found that there were restrictions of the topics that could be discussed with politicians and senior civil servants, such as those regarding "current cases on personalities". The professional skills acquired by politicians means that they may not disclose the true extent of their thoughts, as they learn how to "assess the impact their words have on a listener". This involves heightened caution when criticizing someone or something, and attempting to prevent antisocial relations with people; meaning they are likely to try to please the researcher rather than openly defying them. Politicians are likely to have "learned to be interviewed", meaning they know which answers people like to hear as opposed to their actual views. So people's true feelings may easily be distorted in one way or another. It can also be difficult to make sense of what they mean as people do not have straightforward thought processes, and often have conflicting views on most things.
There are many limitations involved with elite interviewing that can cause problems for political researcher. The characteristics of elites themselves and behaviour associated with them already makes the interview process more sensitive and time-consuming than other methods. There are practical as well as theoretical considerations that do not arise so frequently with quantitative methods, which could lead to one ruling out elite interviewing as a worthwhile method of research. There are so many things to take into account that a researcher may fail to properly 'listen' to what is being said or interpret it in the way that is not intended. However, the depth and richness of information that can be gathered from those who partake in the making of policy decisions means that elite interviewing is in fact extremely relevant to the study of politics. The use of elite interviewing greatly depends on the nature and purposes of the research. If a researcher is interested in how policies are formulated, or how a government views certain events, elite interviewing is likely to reap the most substantial, content-rich results, as opposed to statistical data that would not lead to much insight. The validity of the research can be backed up by other techniques, thus increasing its accuracy and turning it into a more appealing method of research.