The British General Election of 2001 resulted in Britain's lowest voter turnout since 1918. Only 59.1% of the population cast a vote, and this increased only slightly to 61.2% in 2005. Considering turnout had never dropped below 71.5% between the years 1970 and 1997, concerns have been raised regarding why turnout has declined so substantially in recent years, and has then failed to make much of a recovery in 2005. It is important to contemplate what may have caused this drop in turnout, and what attempts have been made to improve it. It is also significant to look at the behaviour of the youngest cohorts of voters, and how it compares to the oldest.
There are two main arguments that have been put forward when explaining the drop in voter turnout, the first being that the electorate has lost interest in politics and the political process, and the second being the failure of political parties to mobilize voters and encourage them to vote.
Contrary to popular belief, there is little evidence to assert that in recent years people have lost interest in politics. MORI has been carrying out regular surveys over the years, and has found that in 2005, at least 61% of the population stated that they were 'interested' or 'fairly interested' in politics, which is close to the 60% who declared the same in both 1973 and 1997. This reveals that the level of political interest has been quite stable over time. So if apathy does not explain the recent decline in turnout at British General Elections, what does? One view is that people no longer feel motivated to vote, which can be attributed to many factors such as a fall in party identification and the way people view the political scene.
Fewer people have strong attachments to political parties, and so feel less committed to voting for them and showing their support. This is due, in large part, to the fact that many people see the policies of the two major parties, Conservative and Labour, as being very similar, and so do not associate themselves with either one of them. This was especially so with the 2001 election, when only 21% of the population saw a "great deal" of difference between Labour and Conservative- a slight increase from the 17% who thought so in 1997. With a lack of strong party identification, people are not so bothered about the result of the election, and so do not see much point in voting: "What does voting achieve, and what difference does it make which politician or party wins?" In the 2001 election, only one in three people said it was personally important who won the election.
Another reason many people have been less motivated to vote, is the feeling of alienation people from the political process. This is largely due the level of 'political efficacy' people believe they possess. Political efficacy is the "belief that one can influence the outcome of political decisions", and the stronger it is, the more likely people will turn out to vote. So it is more a feeling of disengagement rather than lack of interest in the political process which discourages people from voting. This also stems from the fact that most of the population do not relate to politicians, who along with political institutions, are viewed sceptically and with distrust. Politicians are seen as putting their own interests first, and disregarding the genuine needs of the people.
The feeling of alienation and lack of political efficacy is largely related to the electoral system used in Britain, which some people argue is another discouraging factor in the British electoral process. With the 'First-past-the-post' system, people do not feel fairly represented, and think that their votes will count for nothing. For example, in the 2005 election the contest was closer in terms of Conservative versus Labour votes, however, when these were projected into seats, Labour still had a clear majority. This led people to believing that the outcome was decided, so their votes would not have made much of a difference. This is especially so in Labour 'safe seats' which leads to the next point of how types of constituencies affect turnout.
Constituencies which are considered as being 'safe seats' are more likely to have a lower turnout than those which are seen as being 'marginal seats'. This is due to the decisiveness of their respective votes. The votes cast in 'safe' constituencies are in general, unlikely to make much of a difference to the results of the election. This feeling of unimportance was accentuated in both the 1997 and the 2001 elections by the media continuously stressing that each election was a 'foregone conclusion'. Opinion polls also forecasted the outcomes long before Election Day, leading people to believe that there really was not much they could do about the outcome.
Another reason the type of constituencies has affected turnout in the more recent elections, is the different levels of attention given by the political parties to the different constituencies. Political parties tend to spend the majority of their resources and efforts trying to secure marginal seats, and pay less attention to safe ones. This leads people living in the safe constituencies to feeling 'ignored', and so makes potential voters stay at home on Election Day. This is an example of how political parties have failed to mobilise electors.
The social composition and characteristics of the people living in different constituencies also affects turnout. People living in more affluent areas or living in privately-owned accommodation are seen as being more stable and so more likely to vote. The opposite can be said for people living in wealthy areas, which have a larger number of manual or unemployed workers, or people living in rented accommodation. It happens to be the case that most of the people living in these areas tend to be disillusioned Labour supporters, and so perhaps account for the decline in voter turnout between the 1997 and 2001 elections.
The turnout of the 1997 general election, although it now seems like a relatively high percentage, 71%, is seen as marking the start of a downwards trend in terms of voting turnout rather than a one-off event. So what was specific about this election that started the decline in turnout?
One of the factors was a marked change in attitudes of long-term Labour supporters. Many of them were disillusioned with the party for abandoning the traditional ideology and stances on policies. This sentiment became more acute with the 2001 election, with Tony Blair's broken promises, for example regarding the abolishing of selection for schools.
Many Conservatives were also disappointed with their party and the scandals and splits within it and so did not turn out to vote. However, it should be noted that a considerable proportion of the Conservatives switched their loyalty to another party, rather than not voting, and so it did not really affect the turnout level.
The election itself was very long and considered by many to be tedious, characterised by some as the 'boredom factor'. People were not drawn into the issues that parties focused on at the election. This is something that can also be seen in both the 2001 and 2005 elections. The media exhausted the election, which led to people being fed up with it by the time Election Day arrived. Despite these factors, turnout declined much more seriously in 2001, the reasons for which will now be explored.
The 2001 election has already been described as having been tedious, and was seen as being a "lacklustre campaign". The political parties failed to make it interesting and appealing to voters, which lost them a lot of potential support. People who usually started off unsure of who to vote for, and came to a decision during the campaign, were not persuaded by the campaign this time, and so did not vote: "Turnout was low because the campaign failed floating voters". One motive the electorate were not drawn in by the election was the lack of information received from the parties. "Familiarity breeds favourability" and yet the political parties failed to communicate with the voters. There was an obvious drop in canvassing and leafleting- especially in safe seat constituencies. Also, fewer households received political leaflets or any other information regarding the political parties or even the election in itself. This appeared to people as being a lack of commitment from the parties, and so they were undeserving of their votes.
Postal voting, and the voting process in general has been said to have had an important impact on turnout. In 2001 postal voting had only been recently introduced, and was seen as an attempt to make voting easier for people. It was unsuccessful largely due to the poor organisation of the process and lack of information that was released. Procedural problems occurred such as people not receiving postal polling cards, meaning they couldn't vote. For the 2005 election however, the process was greatly improved, which is perhaps one of the reasons turnout increased slightly.
In 2005, postal voting was more publicised than in 2001, and there were constituencies where it had been used extensively in previous by-elections. Rationally, the ability to vote from home should increase voting participation, as it reduces the "costs of voting"- mainly time and effort. However, postal voting cost the British system some credibility due to incidences of fraud and confusion with the mailing of ballot papers and polling cards. Also, the claim has been made that the opportunity of postal voting did not actually increase turnout numbers, as those who chose to use it would have voted anyway. "Voting depends not on giving people a choice about how to vote, but rather what they are voting about".
The reform made by the Electoral Commission with the introduction of the Rolling Register is another structural aspect that helped improve turnout in the latest British General Election. This has enabled more accuracy in terms of a changing electorate. One of the problems in the past had been the outdating of the voting register as people died or moved away before a new one was drawn up. However, the extent to which the rolling register had an impact on turnout is debatable, as for example, the numbers of deceased people who remained on the register balanced out the number of people who should have been on the register but are were not. So, perhaps structural reforms do not really provide the most adequate explanation for the slight increase in turnout in 2005.
Statements have been made which reflect an increase in voter interest in the 2005 campaign. These are based on the issues which formed the core of the campaign, the increase in party competition, and the increased efforts by the parties to secure marginal seats.
The issues addressed in 2005 were more emotional than those in the two previous general elections. The situation in Iraq and immigration created more of a rift between the parties, giving more people a feeling of political identity. This also helped there be more of a contest between Labour and Conservative, meaning "...the election no longer appeared to be a walkover", giving people a stronger reason to vote. Marginality also played an important part, as the parties focused on increasing the awareness of people and obtaining the seats in the marginal constituencies by focusing heavily on them.
However, the pro-Labour bias of the electoral system, disillusioned Labour supporters, and the diluting of support through the emergence of new parties meant that turnout was unable to rise by more than 2.1%.
Another reason given for the decrease in voter turnout over the past elections is the lack of participation by the youngest age group of voters: 18 to 24 year olds, and it is interesting to look at the contrast between the youngest and oldest cohorts of voters.
The conventional view is that the young lack an active interest in politics and that they "are becoming increasingly disengaged from politics and the democratic system". However, as with the rest of the electorate, perceptions about political involvement depend greatly on how the conception of politics is viewed. In reality, many youths are quite active when it comes to political matters, but not necessarily those regarding traditional party politics. An increased number of people have participated and expressed their views through Non-Governmental Organisations, pressure groups and organised protests. Despite this, it is true that many of they youngest potential voters do feel alienated from British politics. Many justifications are given for this, ranging from lack of knowledge of the political world, to the attitudes of parties towards the youngest voters.
It is fair to say that the youngest age group able to vote will not have been as exposed to political processes as the older ones, and therefore may not have had to develop the strong voting habits older voters tend to have. Having had less political knowledge, youths may be more likely to take for granted preconceptions portrayed for example, by the media. The political participation of youths will also be quite strongly influenced by those of their parents. It is more probably that a young person growing up will become a non-voter if their parents also happen to be so. This contrasts greatly with the generation of older voters, who are more likely to have developed strong voting habits in their youth, and see it as duty rather than an option. Older voters are less likely to be shaken by short-term variables such as the level of interest of an election and so will vote anyway, regardless of the campaign.. This perhaps reflects the different values instilled in youths growing up today compared with those of older generations.
Younger voters do feel detached from the political process, and this is largely because they feel a lack of attention from politicians, who tend to focus on the "middle-age, middle-England" voters. This leads to beliefs that politicians do not 'listen' to young people, which in turn frustrates them and discourages them from voting. Also, what frequently occurs is that young people cast their votes at their first elections, but end up disappointed with the result and apparent lack of influence. This makes them feel uninvolved in the decision-making process.
The actual practical aspects of voting also affect the youngest and the oldest voters in different ways. Older votes are likely to have less to do with their everyday lives, and so have more time to accompany political events and go down to the polling station and place their votes. It has been suggested that this may be looked upon as being an opportunity of going out and meeting people, providing them with more of an incentive. Young people on the other hand, have a less stable lifestyle and feel the need to focus on issues other than politics such as start-up problems, personal relationships, and working on their careers. So, there is quite a lot that could discourage the youngest age group from voting in comparison to the oldest age group, but this does not mean that the political interest does not exist.
Perhaps what one can deduce from this, is that measures must be taken to try and improve turnout and electoral participation in the next General Elections, or Britain could be facing a Democratic Crisis where a minority of the population casts a vote on Election Day. The government may find that even those who they have taken for granted will vote may lose the motivation to do so. By looking at the causes of the decline in turnout, it is easier for one to come up with attempts of improving it, and studies have shown that electoral reforms are not necessarily the best way to do so. It is the substance of the campaigns which need to change, not the methods used to vote with.
Finally, the youngest cohorts of voters should not immediately be dismissed as being apathetic, as although it may not be apparent at first, young people are often heavily engaged in political affairs. People need to be more open-minded when analysing their involvement, as it is not always in the traditional sense, and can be very different to that of the older electors.