By examining the differing theses of power and their capacities and limitations to explain political processes in our society, I will attempt to evaluate which concept of power can most accurately depict our experience and interpretations of it today. If we consider power a quality or property then we must consider that certain actors or groups can own power and use it to their own advantage. Do we propose then that power can be established like authority? Or is power, as Arendt proposes, given by society to an individual and maintained by said society? If power is given by the people then can it be possible that where power is exerted it goes against the interests or preferred actions of other parties as Dahl's statement propagates?
Dahl's thesis works from this foundation. In a social study of an American community Dahl examines the process of decision-making; the conflicting interests and factions within the community, the differing policies these factions devise and the success of defeat of such policies. Having examined these end results in what Dahl calls 'conflicts of interest' several conclusions are drawn as to where and with whom power presides within society; primarily those able to exert influence over other factions to the extent of changing others decisions to their own advantage.
In order to assert this claim Dahl has made fundamental assumptions which carry with them certain limitations. Primarily Dahl assumes that in this diverse world of varying interests there is a common equality amongst factions and the influence they bear with each faction having similar opportunities to influence policy making and therefore to hold or exert 'power'. Secondly Dahl presupposes that all interests within a society are represented by factions and expressed within policy preferences. For such a thing to be true every limb of society would not only need to express themselves coherently but also to communicate their demands politically as policy preferences. Lukes observes that the very foundation for Dahl's theory is flawed in that Dahl necessitates both a conflict of interests and a resolution of this conflict through policy in order to ascertain who has power and what power is. This is flawed, for Lukes on two counts; the first being the idea that a conflict of interests is necessary to identify the nature of power and where it lies. Does this suggest that if there were no conflict of interests there would be no power or only one power existent in society, or that without conflict we could not understand what power is? Secondly Dahl bases his theory solely on the effects of power, (the end result of the conflict) and not on the very nature or power itself. This approach may be supported by Barnes and Polby but others feel it leaves an undisclosed, incomplete and ambiguous picture of power which can lead to more unhelpful misconceptions of the property.
The Pluralist omittance that social class could significantly contribute to our understanding of power and the way it works perhaps explains the centrality of Elitist thought to Neo Pluralism. For Schattschneider politics is about the powerful elite who wield power to exploit the masses beyond even the boundaries of politics, through the "exploitation of some forms of conflict and the suppression of others". Thus those in power shape what the majority see as a conflict of interests and what their reaction to this conflict will be. Bachrach and Baratz expand this argument to discuss how through non-decisions, for example by not promoting discussion on civil rights, those in power are able to maintain the status quo which is beneficial for themselves. This avoids any conflict of interests developing and any situation where an elite party A would have to exert pressure over the majority, parties B and C etc. The power being explained is less overt in its nature however it seems able to explain more accurately how power is often enacted within society. Through agenda management those in power dictate which issues are brought to the foreground and therefore about what interests are primarily formed. This supports Marx's idea of a false consciousness within society or merely the supposition that certain groups dictate policy and hold more influence than others.
For Lukes this theory adds a dimension to the concept of power making it two-dimensional, observable through decisions as well as present in non-actions as we have discussed. However for Lukes the argument is marred somewhat in its perspective of power in that it is too committed to the overt behaviour of parties and still shackled to the concept of power in relation to conflict of interest only in the political sphere. The theory does not acknowledge that power can exist without a conflict of interests whereas for Lukes an effective use of power renders conflict unnecessary, such discrepancies of opinion should not arise. In a similar vein of thought Lukes supposes that there is no grievance to air, no conflict of interests within a given society. Does this mean that no group holds power over the said society, neither influencing nor shaping their decisions?
For Bachrach and Baratz power (personified) has a restraining influence in that it effectively manipulates what people conceptualise as their interest and also wins in any battle of the said interests so that those with power benefit. However power (or more accurately those who wield it) is yet to actively create preferences that conform to a desired outcome, it only reacts to pre-formed preferences of other actors. To illustrate one could examine Hitler who had power over his people to the extent of entrusting many of them to exterminate over 6 million Jews. Did Hitler achieve this merely by restricting their views and shaping their interests about the rights of Jews or by forcing them to commit mass genocide? No, they passionately believed in what they did as the best thing for society in general, Hitler both created and instilled a preference into Nazi Germany which insisted upon the annihilation of an entire race.
Perhaps this explains Lukes's own conceptualisation of power labelled the 'three-dimensional' view. This sees power as thought control, the faculty to mould preferences to a desired outcome. It enables us to conceptualise power on more than one level and to recognise power in the non political sphere as well as the political. Lukes draws away from a concept of power as resting on actual conflict recognising how power can be identified in the absence of a conflict of interests where issues have been "successfully averted" and where latent conflict exists. Lukes also recognises the subjective interests of the factions, expressed through proposed policies or articulated grievances, as different from the real interests of factions which are often never disclosed. By enacting power without considering the real or potential interests of other factions Lukes considers that factions are already engaging in power on a three-dimensional level. Power is not only conceptualised by the expressed interests of different groups but by the non-expressed preferences of other groups which suggests a situation far closer to the reality of how power is enacted. Power is not constrained to politics but is located in everyday processes such as the media and finding its place in forms of "ideological indoctrination" and "psychological control".
Perhaps this broader definition can explain power more efficiently in the way in which it operates around us but it creates other questions. How can we quantify power, if we can quantify it at all, if it can be found all around us in the non-political spheres and to varying extents? Surely one cannot draw comparisons between the power of a family to install moral values in a child to the power of Hitler in his attempt at mass genocide of the Jews? So too how much can Lukes avoid grounding his own argument of power on the effect of power rather than on its substance? Here it seems Lukes falls victim to his own stern criticism of other theorists and yet it seems impossible to theorise such an obsolete and indistinct concept such as power without depending largely on the evidence of power within society.
Weber considered power to be "[T]he chance of man or a number of men to realise their own will in a communal action". For Weber power was inextricably linked to the individual who understands their interests and used power as a means to achieve this goal. Perhaps this can explain the force of power which we can easily detect in the world around us however power does not stop here at simple political struggles by factions for victory over single issues. The force of Power invades our lives whether it be by forming the interests we have or merely limiting the interests we consider. To re-iterate Lukes's concept on a closer level we see power as affecting the very fibre of society at many levels; individual, social and political. Those in power are not merely the victors of a policy struggle nor the censors of the information we receive, instead they actively create the interests which we consider our very own. For this reason I believe Dahl's conception of power as exertion over another faction to change their intended actions is valid enough as a superficial of what we conceive power to be but not as sufficient to explain what power is nor to the extent in which power, (or better stated those with it) pervades our society.