In "Street Corner Society" Whyte undertakes the relatively new and undiscovered research method of participant observation, otherwise known as Ethnography, to conduct a detailed study an Italian Street Slum in Boston's North End, America. As a book very much part of the foundation of Social Research today Whyte's thesis has been widely accepted, and with this has evolved a general acceptance of participant observation as a recognized and valid research method. However if this assumption is made too easily we risk undermining the very complexity of social research and the methods involved in it. Can the theoretically sound notions of participant observation ever be enacted without fault into societies where research is undertaken? Did Whyte achieve this? Can a society ever be fully informed as to the researcher's goal without the aims of the research becoming endangered? Is it ethically acceptable not to inform research participants of their role? We thus need to endeavour to discover the reliability and accuracy of Whyte's research so we can make observations as to the poignancy of "Street Corner Society", and also judge the effectiveness of Participant Observation as a research method attempting to uncover objective truths and structures in societies today.
Participant Observation is a longitudinal research method, that is to say data is collected on numerous occasions from a sample representing the wider majority. As such Ethnography is able to make a detailed and precise study on a particular community, then draw general observations from these findings and make judgments and predictions about similar groups of people. Participant Observation is greatly favoured methodologically for Research within communities because it allows the researcher to gain "a foothold on social reality" within the group and thus understand, even adopt, their perspective. The researcher typically has more time in the collection of data for their research so is less likely to misunderstand informants because of cultural differences or language barriers. There is less likelihood of a researcher's background altering the results of the research because, as an accepted member of that community, any withheld or less notable information would make itself apparent and the researcher would be able to make fully informed observations. In a similar vein it is felt that the researcher would benefit from having more upon which to base his/her findings than merely answers to questions. The underlying attitudes and behaviour within a society are often far more telling, especially for those conducting research where they are attempting to uncover all activities and analyse or identify social hierarchies. Indeed in situations where illegal or ambiguous activities are co-ordinated the only way of researching such deviant activity is through covert ethnography, without such a research method we would know little about the habits or motivations of drug dealers, prostitutes or criminals. The final advantage we can note in using ethnography is the flexibility involved in reference to the subject or focus of the researchers study. The researcher, having chosen a topic upon which to focus, is not shackled to this topic should they discover new evidence to suggest something else more relevant. Whyte describes how, after some time, he realized the importance of bowling to the group structure and he designated time to study its effect. In a questionnaire based research experiment the researcher would be unable to change his research so readily without huge upheaval to the whole process.
However the use of Ethnography also poses some significant doubts and questions when used so readily, with relatively little structure, as in Whyte's work. Participant Observation entails working closely with a community and thus developing not only complex relationships within that community but also gaining trust which carries with it a certain responsibility to those whom you are studying. Whyte himself acknowledged in his book that he felt indebted to his ally Doc and wondered if he should note Doc's contribution to his research. This suggests that participant observation is not as unobtrusive as researchers would have us imagine and seems to involve a certain intrusion on the lives of at least the key informants. This can be dangerous if the informants feel misrepresented and betrayed by the researcher as the research then has a negative effect on the very community the researcher intended to help. Not only does Participant Observation represent an intrusion for informants but, for feminist critics, it is tantamount to an exploitative relationship where the researcher uses key informants for their value without empowering them or acknowledging their input to the study. Many people feel that as informants play such a crucial role in any ethnographic research it is the responsibility of an ethical researcher to tell the informant that they are being researched and the object of that research. To ignore this, they argue, would be not only deceit but also an ignorance of the rights of the individual, namely the right to privacy, to not have their lives documented and studied without permission. For the researcher this could mean compromising his research, if a community knew the researchers aims would they really welcome him with open arms and would they show real honesty? Could any progress be made in social ethics at all? The researcher is faced with a decision between the ethics of conduct and the research issue in question. This idea forms part of the ethical conduct prescribed as mandatory by several key sociologists and associations. Diener and Crandall (1978) talk of the four 'cardinal sins' which they feel should be avoided in research
These basic prescriptions for any sociological study need to be considered when assessing the use of ethnography as a research method and whether it can be so loosely applied to social research.
There are other difficulties highlighted by Participant Observation and the researcher's role within its design. How far can a researcher go in the name of research, and when does it fail to make him exempt from law breaking? In theory participant observation involves observing more than acting so being able to reflect from within a society yet as an impartial onlooker with no motives and no influence on any situation. In reality it is questionable whether a researcher can ever be as invisible as he/she would like to be, whether they can so easily opt out of undesirable behaviour and avoid directly affecting their own results. On a practical note, perhaps another flaw that has arisen out of the blurred boundaries of ethnographic research, is that one cannot be sure on the accuracy of any field notes taken under such intense circumstances and, often, after hazy recollection. Whyte wrote his notes up daily from the previous twenty four hours, can we be sure that they are valid and true and can we know that what he has chosen to mention is all that was mentioned? In the selectivity of recall made by the researcher we need to question how reliable his research becomes and whether we are reading the situation as it is or as Whyte sees it through his own blinkers? This is another danger that has been highlighted by sociologists who feel participant observation allows a certain mobilization of bias to be enacted by the researcher whose own culture or understanding can shape his sociological analysis of an entirely different society.
As a research method which is so vague in prescribing an exact step by step methodology participant observation falls prey to many obstacles and the researcher in particular, who is at the helm of the research more than with other research methods, has to be sure not to become lost in the sheer depth of their research in what is often such a small and precise field. Neither should the researcher generalize broadly about a given topic nor apply their findings to other unrelated scenarios. Thus for the researcher using Ethnography several precautions need to be taken, yet they are hard both to enact and to regulate. This can lead us to ask whether using Participant Observation as a research method does not create more problems for researchers than it seeks to solve with its more open approach to research. However despite the obvious dangers involved with Ethnography it is not necessarily an unworkable research method and its results remain impressive and effective in contrast with many other modes of social research. It only highlights the importance of working with some sort of structure and implementing certain measures to ensure against ethical transgressions or flaws in research results.
In her article for the "Journal of Contemporary Ethnography" Boelen makes a fierce and specific attack on Whyte and his research method used in "Street Corner Society". Justifying her argument with her own research of the same slum and armed with methodological criticisms of Whyte Boelen's argument makes convincing claims to undermine Whyte and his research. For Boelen Whyte was too academic in his study attempting to theorise too deeply into his Cornerville experiences to establish any pattern or hierarchy which she feels never existed in the way Whyte documented. Boelen considers that Whyte was so immersed into the academic world of sociology that he was led to interpret his research around the popular framework existent in sociology, such as from a "zeal for social reform". Boelen makes many other criticisms of Whyte, she considers that he had an "implicit cultural bias" in his research which centred around viewing slums as a "sociological problem" for society, a hive of illegal activity. Therefore she accuses Whyte of interpreting his research within the parameters of viewing Cornerville culture as somewhat delinquent and malfunctioning society. For Boelen this is a danger implicit to Ethnographic Research where researchers use their own "value and belief systems" and thus "impose normative judgments on situations unknown to them" . This was only augmented for Boelen by the fact that in his long term Ethnographic research into the Italian immigrant community Whyte neither learned Italian nor studied the Italian culture in sufficient depth to understand the workings of an inherently Italian community. This, for Boelen indicates how drastically Whyte misinterpreted Cornerville and why his research is inaccurate and inherently flawed because Whyte could not attempt to understand the nature of Cornerville nor attempt to theorise about it. She dedicates much time to discussing the importance of family for Italian culture to illustrate the bias of Whyte who she claims was sensationalist, preferring to concentrate on illegal activities and their significance within the community and its structure
Many of the faults found in "Street Corner Society" are, for Boelen, centred around the research method employed by Whyte. Boelen asserts that Participant Observation was so new that no boundaries or rules challenged Whyte in his conducting of research and, later, in his findings. Boelen feels the nature of Whyte's research and the fact that it was so open ended and open to interpretation meant that he was able to make false and unsubstantiated claims which were never contested because of the very nature in which the data was collected: no-one else worked with Whyte for the whole duration of his research; he received no feedback from the community about his conclusions; and the location of Cornerville was not disclosed until many years later.
Whyte replied to Boelen's critique with a fierce defense of his work. He deconstructed the research of Boelen and found it patchy, bias and inaccurate. Whyte's defense of his research method implies how much he felt he learned from his experience in the field of research. He speaks with informed authority about Cornerville as it was and refers to notes made from the field. Perhaps this best serves to defend not only Whyte's research but the research method of participant observation as a whole when the researcher is able to defend with such accuracy and detail the findings he made. Whyte's research assistant, Orlandella who was a corner boy himself also writes in response to Boelen's thesis. He feels Boelen own research method and her failure to consult informants before printing her article highlights the inaccuracy for her work. Orlandella goes as far as to accuse Boelen of trying to "manufacture" an argument against Whyte which he feels is largely unsuccessful. Whyte illustrates how Boelen's argument lacked detailed analysis and convincing evidence to discount participant observation however he does not seek to deny the implicit and often flagrant weaknesses or risks involved with participant observation although he defends his own research from these charges. Markedly Whyte does not deny that the researcher's identity and own cultural background can largely affect their research results which are often, particularly with Participant Observation, uncontested.
In order to assess the accuracy of Whyte's research we ought to refresh ourselves with the aims of Whyte's study. Whyte sought to understand the 'slum' culture and find out about its organisation, he sought to disprove claims that slums were a "mass of confusion" which were "at odds with the rest of the community".It is generally agreed that a research hypothesis attempting to be so perceptive within society could not be enacted using simple social survey technique. Whyte sought to deconstruct a society and identify its characteristics and hierarchy not merely to gauge opinion polls on issues. Thus, for the research involved we can conclude that Whyte chose the most appropriate research method and equated the possible costs involved as acceptable for the importance for the research cause. In doing so he not only broke new ground in research but pioneered a way of research, that of Participant Observation, which was largely unexplored. We cannot claim that Whyte's research is infallible but nor too can we accurately seek to disprove it so many years on, we can only consign it to research history and build upon it foundations. What is clear is that by using Participant Observation as a research method Whyte was able to pioneer research that could get deeper beyond the opinions or actions of a society to actually attempt to understand or identify pillars which made up that community. In doing so Whyte was able to dispel myths about 'slum' communities and portray the richness of a diverse and unique community.