Gower save our sands is a pressure group initiated by Welsh communities concerned at the increased level of off-shore dredging by commercial companies. They feel this has an adverse effect on their communities who rely heavily on tourism, fishing, surfing and the natural habitat of the Welsh Gower and so have started a pressure group which campaigns on several levels to try and inform the Welsh Government of the issue and ultimately achieve a change in government policy to restrict the dredging. The group campaigns on a largely local level but is very much led, or guided, by its internet site which aims to increase awareness and concern of the issue and provide potential supporters with ideas of to support this cause.
To achieve their aims the pressure group obviously need an accessible, clear and focused web site which provokes interest, assures the credibility of its cause and sufficiently motivates others to be involved. The site presents itself well with relevant photographs and clear graphics which enhance interest and make the website easy to navigate. The design enables one to quickly discover what the pressure group are opposed to and why they feel so strongly. The informative tone of the website explains the history of off-shore dredging and provides scientific evidence to substantiate its concerns. In addition it provides references for scientific data and links to other websites for more information on the problem. This enables potential supporters to look into the problem in more depth without boring or alienating those not interested in scientific research. Other links include websites from fishing websites, surfers, and a BBC news article which all illustrate that the Welsh Gower is widely used and treasured by much of society and especially vital for Welsh tourism if not for its habitat and beauty as an AONB (Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty). The website enthusiastically encourages people to become involved in a number of ways from organising petitions or writing to their MP's to attending protests or subscribing to their email news. Central to any involvement in the group is the website and the email newsletters. Any protests, publicity campaigns, petitions or any organised protest by Gower SOS is directly coordinated and correlated by its website. This means that anyone with access to the World Wide Web is able to participate in the activities of the group and enables a localised issue to become more widespread. So too the website informs a potential supporter of when government decisions on the issue will be made and of current developments. It informs one that the issue of off-shore dredging has been recognised by the Welsh government who have noted their concern and will shortly issue a decision on the licensing of the dredging companies. In this way the website appears to cover many of the concerns of the pressure group and the battle they face against government policy which seems to favour commercial interests.
When reading the website it became increasingly obvious how localised interest in the pressure group really is. The majority of people who feel passionately about the issue are more likely to be those who use, or rely on the Gower. As such the majority of campaigning will be done on a local level and therefore I began to question how useful a website is for the pressure group. Does an internet site really make the pressure group any more effective? However when reading the Marine Aggregate Dredging policy by the Welsh Assembly about the issue I realised that the pressure group serves not only to inform supporters but also to legitimise itself to others, namely government. Any MP disregarding the interest in protecting the Welsh Gower could be referred to the website as a prime example of organised, systematic and valid concern as to the future of the Gower. So too the pressure group is accessible to all enabling people who are interested in the cause but may not be able to participate actively to participate by sending emails to their MP's and having their views and support recognised. Thus for this pressure group, despite its localised problem the internet site remains crucial to the work and objectives of Gower SOS. The website is useful because it identifies the views of many Welsh communities and not only represents these views but gains support for the campaign from other communities who would maybe not otherwise hear of such a campaign. Not only this the website acts as a tool to promote future protest campaigns and to legitimise their campaign.
Recognising the need for the pressure group to have a website however does not indicate the effectiveness of the website in helping the pressure group to achieve it aims. For some idea of how the website serves its purpose I looked at another pressure group with similar localised aims and a website central to its work. Save our Green Fields campaigns against proposed commercial housing developments in a similarly small Welsh community. It is a pressure group initiated by the community and getting involved can take various forms including email petitions as well as active volunteering. What struck me about Save our Green Fields was its simple and accessible explanation of its aims and processes which were harder to access and complicated to understand on Gower SOS. Despite its simple presentation format the website holds so much information, much of it scientific, it can be hard to read through and interpret. So too it is hard to know when things have been posted onto the website and when it was last updated. Many old articles remain making it difficult to know where the pressure group now stands. Save our Green Fields had designated links to describe its aims alongside a clear explanation of its argument with bold, highlighted parts of text. In contrast Gower SOS had less clear information on any clear goals they hoped to achieve and concentrated more on reacting defensively to the proposed policies threatening their communities than asserting any positive plan. Whereas Save our Green Fields offered an email and postal address, phone and fax number Gower SOS neglected to do so which leaves any potential supporter with questions with nowhere to address their queries and implies Gower SOS are non-accountable as a pressure group. This raises questions as to whether they are representational of public opinion as they fail to allow any potential questions from would-be supporters. There are also some minor spelling errors on the website which would possibly dissuade people of the validity and legitimacy of the pressure group. My suggestions for the website would be that there are dates of when articles have been uploaded and frequent updates as to the progress of the pressure group. I also feel it could benefit from communicating clear strategies for how the pressure group wish to proceed in their aims.
In order to assess the effectiveness of Gower SOS we also need to differentiate between what we mean by effectiveness, what sort of effect pressure groups are able to wield and how. Pressure groups, as suggested by Grant, do not have power over any other agent (namely government) and change their actions (or policies in this case) to conform to their own demands. Instead pressure groups are able to exert influence over their neighbours: enticing, encouraging, persuading and sometimes threatening them to alter their behaviour. So here we can ascertain the way in which pressure groups can be effective. However are we therefore presuming that, for pressure groups, effectiveness can be judged only so as to their success is changing policies of government or of other agents? Derthick states that effectiveness can be measured in ratio to the achievement of goals so for pressure groups achieving their aims would quite simply imply effectiveness. However this model is simplistic in that one cannot assume that policy success can be attributed to any one pressure group only (or even at all). Perhaps when Grant wrote of the influence of pressure groups in 'Pressure Groups and British Policies' he was correct in his interpretation that effective pressure groups can make an effect being influential without succeeding in changing policies. With these differing conceptions of what makes a pressure group effective let us examine Gower SOS.
The impact of Gower SOS is somewhat indefinable due to the nature of its cause. Increasingly Governments, the Welsh Assembly in particular, are taking note of environmental issues partly due to existence of growing global environmental groups such as Greenpeace and therefore any progress cannot be necessarily attributed to Gower SOS. However the existence of a new Draft Marine Aggregates Dredging Policy consultation document for South Wales indicates the salience of the issue and the fact that the cause, if only assisted by the pressure group, has been heard. The policy MADP proposes what it calls "strategic" as well as "area based" recommendations thus suggesting that it has recognised the localised character of this issue and the need to address each place separately. It directly addresses the primary concerns of Gower SOS expressing their aim to "limit any adverse environmental and other impacts of dredging for marine aggregates for example leisure and tourism". Another report from December 2002 again recognises the local character of the issue stating
This proves that Gower SOS have definitely been recognised by government and their concerns are supposedly receiving government attention and focus despite an immediate lack of policy change in the short term.
To understand how Gower SOS has influenced government policy it helps to refer to Wyn Grant's work on how pressure groups exert influence. For Grant Pressure groups work to primarily make an issue known to government placing it on 'the policy agenda' before attempting to negotiate and propose a favourable reform for both parties. The final steps for Grant are parliamentary procedures and the implementation of new policies. In this way Grant theorises how pressure groups effect the policy process and by dissecting this model we can note how Gower SOS have succeeded in making the issue known and a recognition of the need to monitor off-shore dredging. However it was hard to find specific policy changes which leads one to suspect that the pressure group are still in the process of influencing policy and negotiating policy changes. As a localised pressure group fighting a commercial, profit making company one suspects Gower SOS would have little influence in the face of economics. Indeed in comparative government and politics it is argued that the "sanctions a group can imply" are intrinsically linked to the power they wield. Following this one might also assume Gower SOS, with little bargaining power, could not achieve much policy success. However, as their relative success suggests this may not be the case and perhaps the other factors have more influence,
This does not mean Gower SOS do not have a battle on their hand. Grant also theorises as to the division between outsider and insider pressure groups and the effect this has on pressure groups effectiveness. Whereas insider groups are viewed as legitimate by government and as such given freedom and regarded in policy decision making outsider groups lack such status and as such struggle to gain access to government but stand more chance of gaining sufficient support to influence government policy. As an outsider pressure group Gower SOS is gaining support from many people within the community disillusioned with the provision made by government for the environment as well as those threatened directly by the loss of the Welsh Gower. In light of this let us look at how Gower SOS is effective and why. Gower SOS is inspired and motivated by community concern and therefore has a genuine base of support who are passionate for their cause. So too it has a justifiable cause which is supported by many recent government strategies attempting to prioritise the environment. This makes the issue salient for both the government and the electorate.
Gower SOS has had some effect however this remains true despite several limitations upon the group. I noticed a lack of organisation on the website which made the group appear less legitimate and perhaps hindered the extent of their effectiveness. Perhaps this could be accounted for due to a lack of funding, so the group are unable to hire a suitable administrator. So to the group lacks the support of any influential big players either environmentally or for other causes (the birds for example are also endangered). This helps the group to remain localised and it does not alienate itself from its supporters by 'playing too big' but again it decreases the idea of it as a legitimate and efficient organisation and makes it isolated within one community. One could suggest this leads government to under-react to the group whereas it might, under different circumstances, react differently.
In assessing how effective Gower SOS is as a pressure group we realise the many variables involved in analysing pressure groups, a diverse and diverging field of politics which does not easily adopt 'norms of behaviour' nor expected outcomes. It is impossible to make any generalisations or try to adopt rules to assess pressure group effectiveness, least of all because it only forms part of the complex political processes which contribute to policy making rigmarole. Robinson reminds us of other variables involved which also account for policy changes which align with a pressure groups campaign. The first factor is the "salience of the issue to the electorate", the popularity of the issue. A group such as Gower SOS can appeal to a diverse audience; people who rely on Welsh tourism, those who use the Gower such as fishermen and surfers, environmentalists who fear for birds and other habitats, and those who merely appreciate the beauty of the Welsh Gower. Secondly for Robinson government perspective and the importance they place on an issue dictates policy change. What some see as success for Gower SOS could have been more a concentrated and deliberate focus by government as opposed to an admission of defeat or a bowing down to external pressure. Authenticity, such as scientific evidence, is another issue which for Robinson contributes to a policy change being enacted. The scientific evidence cited by Gower SOS allows them to validate their aims and legitimise their cause.
These are some of the methodological problems involved with assessing pressure groups which make it impossible for us to generalise as to how effective any one pressure group is. On a basic level it is clear from classifying pressure groups and observing the varying domains they seek to influence and the aims they wish to fulfil that some pressure groups will inevitably succeed whilst others fight a more idealistic battle to which they continue to strive. A clear example would be the disparity between the aims of an anti-abortion group juxtaposed against Gower SOS which seeks to implement a less contentious issue with less dramatic policy changes. If people feel threatened by a pressure group, or think that a policy change could affect their life to its detriment they are less likely to support the cause. So not only does the ambition of the pressure group have an effect on its success but so too the salience of the issue can determine the response to proposed policy changes. The support of the local community is obviously vital to the survival of Gower SOS and the amount of support determines government responses to their demands. Without such a relevant, interesting and impacting issue the group would not be able to generate such support and this would reflect in their effectiveness. The Resources available to pressure groups obviously limit or enlarge the extent to which they can publicise their cause and run events and thus has a direct effect on their success. So too does association, sponsorship from a large company or even support from famous personalities gives a pressure group credibility and helps it to achieve its goals. All of these examples help us to understand the difficulties involved in assessing pressure groups and the impact they have.
The issues which Gower SOS wishes to tackle are topical in a society increasingly concerned about our environment and conserving the natural beauty of our countryside. This is reflected in the passionate tone of its website and its proportional success in making the issue the priority it has now become for government. This in no way ignores the reality that government is strongly dictated and controlled by economy, in particular commercial business and investment such as that offered by off shore dredging. This opposition, however, does not imply the group is not effective: it is listened to and makes an impact even if it is not successful in changing policy. The website succeeds in triggering an interest and provoking an opinion from its readers on the issue. Despite the obvious weaknesses of the pressure group, namely its size, funding and personnel it is obvious that they have been able to achieve several of their objectives and intend on making themselves heard. Thus perhaps the effectiveness of a pressure group does not depend so much on methodology or tactics so much as determination and a strong belief in the cause which can be translated and thus contracted by the majority.