In International relations today the concept of 'aid' exists as a major feature of discourse and around which two poles, the developed north and developing south, and their relations which each other are conceptualised and shaped. Supposedly aid conditionality is a measure to benefit both camps within the context of development. Whilst the donor states are given some sort of guarantor for their loan developing nations are supposedly, within conditionality, encouraged to instigate permanent reforms to their infrastructure (as opposed to temporary relief strategies) to help them become independent from donor nations. But is this really the case? Reality could suggest that donor states rely on the lower position of developing nations and the historically exploitative relationship with them. Whilst western nations given themselves a 'pat on the back' for their assistance of the developing south the reality often seems that it is the north who create and feed situations and conditions which give developing countries little option but to accept such loans and their often (out of place) conditions.
Firstly let us clarify aid conditionality and how we understand it today. In 'Aid and Political Conditionality' Stokke depicts aid conditionality as divided into two generations. The first originates in the 1970's with the creation of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank (WB) and the implementation of Structural Adjustment Policies (SAP's). This move came as a response to the collapse of several developing economies, primarily those of Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa, and the subsequent recall of loans by commercial corporations. In the face of the cold war more 'developed' powers rallied around to find a suitable solution and emerged with replicas of the earlier Marshall plan complete with neo liberal economic reforms. Central to this era of aid was its conditionality; countries were 'bailed out' so to speak, only when they had agreed to make certain economic reforms decided by donor institutions, in this case the IMF. However as the cold war came to a close Stokke perceives what she sees as a shift in aid conditionality towards political reform and away from economic policy. With security concerns removed Stokke sees a new emphasis on politics and a demand for the overhaul of institutions in all areas, from international trade to democratic ideals, to align more with those of the 'developed' donor countries. Stokke writes of the new emphasis in conditions on "administrative accountability democratic reform and ultimately a focus on political, rather than economic, reform.
Perhaps the newest element to aid conditionality which Stokke also introduces is the continued focus on human rights and the subsequent human rights culture within donor countries which at least recommends and at worst demands the use of sanctions and withdrawal of aid when recipients fail to adhere to the rules laid down by donor states as to what is and isn't acceptable in purely domestic affairs. In particular she studies how Belgium has reacted to Burundi, Rwanda and Zaire where ethnic violence often threatens democracy. Stokke concludes that "As regards political conditionality, the ongoing attempts to formulate and implement a more coherent policy linking development to human rights/democracy performance must be welcomed."
When we speak of development we envisage countries growing in some sense whether that that be economically, politically or socially. By implementing some form of conditionality creditors can be sure that they aspire to this aim stimulating growth and guaranteeing against a dependent relationship with a developing country. With no guarantor or capital behind loans conditions seem the alternative to constitute a loan and differentiate between what is charity and what is more a business agreement. In having this security donor countries can be sure of the recipient's commitment to reform and that, ultimately, when this is achieved their need for loans will dry up accordingly. So too economically we must consider whether the use of conditionality is advantageous. Financial capital needs to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) in order that growth in developing countries becomes sustainable and self vegetating and so that the use of aid can be justified by donor nations. Conditionality would appear the only way to ensure other developed nations to invest in a country by inferring shared and similar values to donor countries and, as such, a safe place to invest into. In our adverse and often world of international politics it seems more essential than ever to ensure investments are funding actual aid rather than lining pockets of corrupt officials or, debatably, funding terrorist operations or controversial projects.
To imagine aid without conditionality would seem to result in defeating the very objectives of such aid yet conditionality seems to create more problems than it solves. Conditionality seems to hit hardest against the notion of state sovereignty. Not only does conditionality controversially cross nation borders and dictate behaviour from outside of the state it also threatens the sovereignty of state and the notion of democracy many donor claim to ascribe to and seek to promote. These challenges make us question whether conditionality can be seen s a legitimate political process within policy formation regardless of whether donor states have benevolent intentions or not. At worst the way in which aid conditionality facilitates donor countries to dictate policy is a type of neo colonialism or neo imperialism where power relations are asymmetrical and one dictates to another in an autocratic (as opposed to democratic) fashion. At best with all their best intentions donors must recognise that "attempts to use foreign aid to build the sort of civil society that would check the power of government, without capturing it, were all but destined to fail"
Another criticism of aid conditionality is in its approach which rarely considers individual nations, their credentials, culture and necessities. Instead it seeks to impose a generic model of development onto all nations regardless which is fatal to its effectiveness as each country is at a different stage of development and has different problems causing their economic difficulties. The generic pattern used to form condition sis generally attempts to stimulate conditions which stimulated growth in post world war two Europe which is far from the situation of most developing nations today. In the Asian crisis the IMF was heavily criticised for "fiscal austerity and budget cuts" which the IMF had used in Latin America successfully and attempted to blueprint in Thailand, South Korea and Indonesia without regarding first the need for public trust in national banks and thus further augmenting the crisis.
What cannot be ignored is the self interest of many donor countries within conditionality. If conditions are created, not for the good of development but for the continued prosperity of donors then the justification for their existence within the aid process is somewhat thwarted. Donor countries are often far from benevolent and more like the rich elite pushing their own interests seeking to maintain the status quo and reinforce their own power base or hegemony. Thus despite grand claims the reality, it is often claimed, is that they seek only to further repress developing countries and keep them in poverty so as to continue to use their resources at minimal costs to themselves and maximum profit. Indeed conditions such as free trade and market liberalisation help developed countries within their commercial market. Perhaps then aid conditionality "has helped to stabilise their [donor countries] economies and strengthen their influence over developing nations"
What is increasingly seen, amidst the growing human rights culture of many developed nations, is the imposition of normative values onto the developing world who are increasingly conceptualised as less morally capable. The effectiveness of this conditionality, let alone the ethics involved for its implementation, are questionable. From Togo to Syria aid conditionality has had little impact and where it has impacted governments to change the effects, such as in Kenya, have been short lived. Perhaps aid conditionality could be more effective if it was assessed on an individual basis and if, when conditions were broken, aid was actually withdrawn. As it is aid conditionality is used to justify condemning one country meanwhile, when it suits donor countries financially, the very same conditions are waived and thrown out of the window. Despite increasingly bad human rights in the 90's Turkey is the "Third largest recipient of US assistance" and have had no human rights conditions placed made of them. This inconsistency mean that there are no universal norms of behaviour attached to aid conditionality hence its abuse by donor countries and its watered down application in actual situations. It severely limits the effectiveness of aid conditionality and presents a less than clear picture to developing countries seeking to claim aid.
Generally, development scholars conclude that aid conditionality "lacks practical justification", despite its apparent necessity, due to its ineffectiveness in achieving any of its real objectives. Simultaneously it is interesting to note that conditions, much as they are supposedly enacted to help the developing nations, are created by primarily western (that is to say developed) donor countries. Africa was denied its bid for more voting power in the IMF and interestingly the highest ranking IMF official must be American. In a recent paper DFID states "Aid conditions must support not buy reform" and states its objectives "to improve aid harmonization and limit the overall burden of 'conditionality'." Perhaps the point is that aid conditionality does not appear to be effective in part due to the self interest of donor but also because across the board conditionality seems neither coherent as a policy within development. In order to remedy this situation it seems essential that donor and donor institutions seek the counsel of those from developing countries and attempt to initiate actual reform in institutions not just using press gang techniques which bribe recipients with attractive sums of money and tie their hands even tighter.