Structural adjustment has featured at the heart of many development debates and continues to cause controversy today as contentious Poverty Reduction Strategies (PRSP's) are widely implemented in developing countries. What is perhaps most ambiguous is what structural adjustment aims for, recently it has been used as a development tool were initially it sought more to implement macroeconomic reform. In assessing the economic merits of structural adjustment alongside its drawbacks I hope to look beyond the circumstantial evidence to the theoretical frameworks which surround its creation. My argument will focus on the socio-political effects of structural adjustment in contrast to its economic advantages using the evidence from countries (Peru and Zimbabwe specifically) who have experienced structural adjustment as well as purveying the academic literature, especially that of NGO's, assessing the validity of structural adjustment as a tool of development and the different recommendations for its future. As far as possible I intend to avoid discussing the behaviour of International Financial Institutions (IFI's) who initiate structural adjustment as my primary focus will be on assessing whether structural adjustment is a worthwhile policy for developing countries to adopt.
It is important to understand structural adjustment in context. It was introduced in 1981, after the oil crisis, when many developing countries were struggling to meet their debt repayments. In the wake of the global North's acceptance of neo-liberalism, structural adjustment embodies a strong credence to neo-liberal economics; comparative advantage and the deregulation of the market to promote free trade being central themes. It claims that by converting "fundamental economic concepts" into policies for developing countries it can create a stable economy for that country and aid its progression towards development, leaving behind their cloak of poverty. However contrasting this theoretical model of structural adjustment to actual results and their effects could indicate a different story.
Structural adjustment, embodied as Structural Adjustment Facilities (SAF's), Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facilities (SAF's), Economic Recovery Programmes (ERP's), Structural Adjustment Loans (SAL's), or Structural Adjustment Policies (SAP's) and Poverty Reductions Strategies (PRSP's) normally precede any sort of loan by the IMF or World Bank and are conditional in the sense that the recipient government's policies must align to the rigid proforma of structural adjustment to receive their proposed loan. The IMF states that adjustment policies are "key to unlocking the full potential of the global economy" whilst others accuse adjustment of "ruining the economies of developing countries". More political insights charge adjustment with being a form of neo colonialism whereby developed nations exercise their control through a "regulation of poor countries" for their own gain.
Although there are claims that PRSP's are radically different there is "little substance change" in their actual content. The neo-liberal credence from which structural adjustment sprang emphasises the necessity of the market to be unregulated and the importance of free trade, essentially following Smith and Ricardo and their neo-classical economics. In the reality of adjustment this is translated into the belief that an artificial, created and sustained liberalised economy can become stable and prosperous from policy reforms and a cash injection into their economy. So too with the recent goals of the IMF and World Bank seeming increasingly focussed on development and poverty alleviation through their macro economic policies adjustment supposedly caters both for the development of a nation as well as for its economic fate. In this way it seems the meaning of development has morphed into simply being perceived as economic growth and vice versa, for example Rostow and Baran both conceptualised development and economic growth as synonymous.
Despite varying strengths of adjustment the macro economic prescriptions, generic in character, are usually initiated in two 'phases'. Phase one, otherwise known as "short term macroeconomic stabilisation" implements policies which reduce government spending, take existing price regulating controls away and allow the market to devalue. Phase two prescribes "necessary structural reforms" such as continued deregulation of banking, reforming taxes, placing Laissez Faire economics within banking and trading, privatising public or government owned land or businesses whilst simultaneously promoting good governance and poverty alleviation.
By eliminating government control on interest, exchange rates and the market trade in general structural adjustment aims to boost businesses so that the economy has more investment, domestically and internationally, and is therefore more stable. Reducing government spending through wage cuts, scrapping subsidies and reducing welfare services is intrinsic to adjustment as it takes economic strain away from the government. Meanwhile phase two privatisation gives public services over to companies who make more money to feed into the economy. The emphasis of structural adjustment on export promotion follows a strong liberal ethic as to the economic benefits of comparative advantage. By specialising in one commodity only and ceasing to compete in numerous markets a country can increase export increasing revenues and their percentage of profit whilst creating a stronger market with a growing global repute. This turns developing countries into players in the international trading market making money from exports whilst simultaneously importing for the mutual advantage of all. The move from a stronger market economy to development in terms of income and opportunity for the majority of the population is made, by adjustment economists, through their adherence to trickle down economics. Through the process of trickle down any wealth made at the top of the hierarchic structure of a country will move down and benefit the bottom tiers of society naturally and without any interference in the market. In this way neo-liberal economics has shaped and formed adjustment leading many to assume, in the early 80's, that adjustment was a 'foolproof' way to develop the underdeveloped. Structural adjustment aligns closely with Modernisation theory in the idea of progressive steps from "traditional society" to "high mass consumption" through the stages of transition and "take-off".
The IMF website proclaims that adjustment "has a strong interaction with economic growth". Generally speaking Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is used to indicate adjustment's success although it potentially represents a distorted picture as to actual economic growth of the whole country as growth is often poorly distributed within national society. However remembering that adjustment seeks to implement new macroeconomic structures GDP is a good indicator of change within the economy, and an increase in GDP would surely indicate a level of success for adjustment. In the many cases of adjustment there has been an increase in GDP and a good indication of sustained economic reform, although external variables do sometimes impede such progress. In the lower developed world the period 1990-2002 saw a 4.3% rise in GDP whilst the Middle East and North Africa saw a rise of 3.2% and South Asia a rise of 5.4%. Worldwide GDP increased by 2.7% in 12 years.
Peru's GDP has slumped by -0.1% in the Eighties but had increased by 4.1% in the Nineties and agriculture also rose by 2.3 % alongside an increase of 4.4% in industry. This rise in industry and export has accompanied adjustment polices and infers that adjustment generates growth as well as the foundations which support long term growth, creating a healthy economy which in turn attracts long term FDI for the country.
The financial benefits accrued by many countries who accepted adjustment policies did not come without certain economic, as well as socio-political, costs. The rhetoric of many IFI's around the issue of structural adjustment is that long term economic reform will inevitably bear short term 'teething' problems. This would account for immediate recession or shock but many countries seem unable to exit from this slump leaving the economic benefits of structural adjustment as ambiguous. UNCTAD perceives that whilst a "temporary sacrifice of growth" might be expected and even necessary for long term economic growth it has not been accounted for within structural adjustment which leaves countries bearing these sacrifices alone at great cost, sometimes to the detriment of the economy they initially sought to rebuild. A case in point is Zimbabwe where, after years of adjustment, the effects of adjustment were seemingly erratic. The World Bank writes that, despite a drought in 1992, reforms did succeed in liberalising trade, reducing economic controls and building "a better basis for self sustaining growth". Despite this claim Zimbabwe's statistics fail to indicate growth and despite the extremity of the political situation in Zimbabwe the failure of structural adjustment to assist neither the economy nor deal with the poverty perhaps shows some negligence. GDP only increased by 1.1% in the Nineties where in the Eighties it was at 3.6%. Essentially this indicates that adjustment had the opposite effect to its aim, minimising rather than maximising growth in GDP. Industry is perhaps the most alarming where growth was at 2.8% in manufacturing and now is at - 2%. In defence of structural adjustment these decreases could be the result of the militant government in Zimbabwe, the effects of repetitive flooding or the recent decline in tourism because of growing internal political tensions.
Another perspective from which to view the idea of adjustment having economic benefits is from a global perspective or, perhaps more relevantly, from the perspective of the global North who facilitate and create the policies of most IFI's involved in adjustment. The continuing wealth creation and growth in the economy of both America and Britain could infer not just a healthy economic growth but an extra income accrued from successful bargains within Third World trading agreements. Dependency theorists such as Frank and Baran have spoken about the "development of underdevelopment" with reference to how capitalist states monopolise the underdeveloped worked to keep them as they are; dependent on the aid of capitalist states, unable to rival capitalist power and economically beneficial to capitalism. In effect could we argue that for the global north to enjoy the economic benefits that they do from the implementation of adjustment (predominantly it's prescriptions for free trade) the global South, already poor, must pay the increasing socio-economic costs? This is supported by Bracking who concludes that adjustment "expressed continuities in both the discourse and practice of post-colonial international political economy". This perspective has some value and it is important to realise the different ways in which adjustment can be construed through theories. Now we are able to contrast some of these economic benefits with the effects they bear in other arenas of life external to economic figures.
The economic growth expected by many 'adjusting' economies has not permeated to all levels of society and in many cases it has had the opposite effect. To the contrary the overwhelming picture for many countries with extensive periods of adjustment is poverty for the majority of their population. Zimbabwe began its adjustment adventure in 1981 and today two thirds of the population live on less than two American dollars a day, 30% of children under five are malnourished and the country has had to start importing food to provide food for its citizens. In Peru, for whom adjustment began in 1977, over half of the rural population survive on less than one American dollar a day. In order to understand these effects it is necessary to unearth the adjustment policy involved, it's actual effect aside from theories surrounding adjustment and how this translates for many developing nations.
The liberalisation of trade is as central to adjustment as it is to neo-liberalism and it results in a removal of trade tariffs and opening up of the market to global competition. This ushers in cheap imports for consumers but simultaneously confronts domestic industry with a speedy influx of strong and well established competition. Without the sophisticated technology and strong economic foundations enjoyed by foreign importers small national businesses are no longer economically viable: the drastic fate of many farmers illustrates this cost. This translates not only into diminished job opportunities and increasing unemployment but to a loss of domestic security for food and other commodities. The country initiating adjustment policies becomes inherently weak and susceptible to the volatile winds of the international trading market. Instead of making the country stronger economically structural adjustment could undermine their independence. Whereas Zimbabwe used to meet all its domestic food needs, by the late 1990's it was importing one million tons of food every year. This lack of food security has led to increased malnutrition in many countries seriously threatening the health and life expectancy of future generations as well as violating fundamental human rights to food and clean water. In 1995 malnutrition in children under five globally was at 32 million whilst 10.6 million young children die every year in the developing world.
This "expansion and deepening of poverty" felt by a huge increase in unemployment is often further exaggerated by huge increases in prices of everyday commodities as price controls and subsidies are scrapped by adjustment policies. In Peru the 1990 shock treatment saw the price of bread rise by 1,150% whilst cooking oil rose as much as 3,100% from its original price leading to an outbreak of Cholera which killed 2,000.
Structural adjustment also promotes a market of exports so there is more profit, policies offer to invest into industry, dependent upon a country specialising in a small number of exports. In Zimbabwe such grants favoured large scale specialised producers willing to export in bulk and simultaneously all development banks which had previously offered credit were closed down so as to cut government expenditure. In Peru in 1991 law proscribed that a landowner must own at least ten hectares, further augmenting already existent inequalities between small scale domestic producers and commercial farmers. Where producers are encouraged by adjustment policies to focus on one product alone to maximise profit they do so often to great economical value but at a cost of their own domestic security (predominantly food security). When drought hit Zimbabwe in 1992 agriculture incurred a loss of 90% of the years maize crop and a huge majority faced famine, meanwhile foreign financed tobacco companies growing to export still had a "bumper harvest".
The deregulation of interest rates and currency leads to an unpredictable economy for which domestic business suffers more than others. Midst such economic turmoil and unrest countries are encouraged to stimulate Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and therefore, in such a fragile and volatile condition, often end up attracting Trans-National Corporations (TNC's) through the Labour Market Reform. This stimulates investment but often at the costs of workers and therefore not to the overall benefit of the nation. In Latin America structural adjustment and resulting liberalised labour laws saw wages fall by 60% or more. Bangura writes that adjustment "has eroded the seemingly democratic nature of the process of 'free exchange' embodied in classical bourgeois ideology" by reduced employment rights and social services. In effect the only benefit of such an adjustment policy is for TNC's who generate more profit by exploiting vulnerable economies.
Adjustment seems to have a disproportionate effect for women and children. In Zimbabwe adjustment seems to reinforce the exclusion of women by refusing to grant loans to female farmers because they do not hold legal property rights for the land they cultivate because traditionally men own property. In Bangladesh women contribute 26.6% to the economy whilst having a share of only 1.79%. So too the costs of adjustment are often borne by women who are forced to take jobs where they are unfairly treated not because of their emancipation or equality with men but through sheer poverty. Chossudovsky asserts this as a "degradation of the social rights of women" who are also severely affected by the abolishment of state services rendered as 'surplus expenditure' by adjustment. Lower wages, alongside the abolishment of benefits, make poverty commonplace with no cushions to break the fall of many families and units. In Zimbabwe this translated to more incidences of drug use and increased prostitution of women and children having to seek work in all areas.
Privatisation and other reductions in public expenditure within structural adjustment are, theoretically, mutually beneficial; whilst revenues increases from other reforms privatisation quickly reduces government expenditure in the short term whilst relieving it of a long term economic burden. So too the expectation is that profit from newly privatised services will further reinforce the economy. Primarily and quickly all subsidies for food, education and healthcare were cut. Secondly services such as water and electricity would be handed over to private management followed by education and healthcare. This privatisation of welfare in which business tried to make profits from healthcare and education had severe consequences for a society already suffering economic cutbacks. In Peru ever increasing poverty and a lapse in vaccination which were no longer provided by the government led to a rise in TB and a rise in malaria, dengue and leishmaniasis too. Health workers joined teachers on strike whilst child malnutrition hit 38.5% and infant mortality rose to a quarter in some areas. In Zimbabwe the reintroduction of health fees saw the cost rise by 1,000% so that only a minority could afford adequate health care despite deteriorating health due to poverty and new bouts of epidemics such as TB. The number of outbreaks of AIDS, HIV and STI's rose dramatically as did the death toll.
Finally an often unconsidered social effect of adjustment is the great cost levied on the environment. Structural adjustment often prescribes heavy industrialisation and its focus on trade and production does not entail any sort of consideration for the environment. Whilst more than 20% of the world's oxygen is produced in the rainforest every year over 19,000 square miles of the rainforest are either logged or simply disappear. Much of this corresponds to ongoing adjustment programmes which have promoted exports and thus encouraged illegal logging as well as its emphasis on the freedom of businesses meaning until recently governments had not actively pursued policies against industries showing no regard for the environment. It is clear that the whole world could not consume and produce as much as developed countries do because the earth simply does not have the resources to do so. However IMF and World Bank adjustment policies proscribe this exact path, forcing the industrialization process not just to the detriment of the society today but without foresight for the society of tomorrow. UNRISD states that "the effectiveness of policy responses to environment degradation is often curtailed by adjustment". The "rapid growth of agricultural imports" accompanied by "institutional changes"  which counteract attempts to promote localised sustainable living are all negative effects on efforts made by many environmentalists. It is estimated that by 2025 half our world will live with sparse water supply meanwhile fossil fuels are running out and the world climate is changing drastically.
There are other costs resulting from the adoption by developing countries of adjustment policies. Oxfam writes of the social costs involved by adjustment because all funding is streamlined in exports and industry and other valuable social development programmes are stopped so as to focus on adjustment at the expense of other causes and to their detriment. So too adjustment has often been charged with being culturally insensitive, failing to recognise the diversity and culture of individual countries with their prescriptions and instead streamlining countries economies and disregarding "that some individuals may not be trying to maximise their own economic self interest". The increasing migration of workers bankrupt by the adjustment's agricultural reforms led to an insurgence in coca production and the illegal drug trade in Peru became rampant and all invading. Structural adjustment "undermined the legal economy, reinforced illicit trade and contributed to the recycling of "dirty money" towards Peru's official and commercial creditors". In effect drug profits were the way Peru managed to pay off its escalating debts, the total debt had doubled as a result of adjustment and debt repayments increased from $60,000,000 to $150,000,000 a month.
Bracking charges adjustment with being a form of "political domination" in that it reduces the opportunities countries have to work within other markets and retain a sense of independence without relying on "undemocratic finance institutions". Essentially the argument is that structural adjustment undermines the sovereignty of nation states and their "sacrosanct right"  to form policy instead forcing them to follow macroeconomic models. Indeed Adedeji writes that "independent policy making and national economic management were considerably diminished and narrowed in Africa" as a direct result of structural adjustment. So the implication is that non-adjustment motivated priorities have to fall by the wayside in favour of structural adjustment reforms. There is no arena for genuinely domestic concerns and thus there is a demise of politics replaced by a mimicked version of neo-liberal economic ideals. Does the Peruvian illegal drug industry prosper because of the strict adjustment conditions that demand government monies focuses, not on internal policing, but on economic growth, national expenditure and income?
Structural adjustment reforms often spark "unrest and violence" as the UNRISD report recognises. In Peru the 'Fujishock' of the 90's left the government having to chose how to react to the inevitable social protest and general discontent which could potentially have a detrimental effect on their rule as well as an unsettling effect on the country in general. Faced with what they perceived as a potential "civil dissent" Fujimori worked closely with the army who prior to Fujishock surrounded Lima with its forces. During his reign Fujimori continued with militaristic intervention seriously undermining any concept of a democracy and the resulting "curtailment of civil liberties" had serious political ramifications. This could lead one to suggest that structural adjustment leads to a demise of proper politics and democracy. Has adjustment led Mugabe to adopt the strong, militaristic style he displays today, twenty-five years after he declared independence for Zimbabwe, became their president and formed the country's relationship with the World Bank?
Increasingly, where governments initiating structural adjustment have evolved into authoritarian states, there is an implication that this form of adjustment implies an infringement onto the basic rights of man, the freedom of speech and the liberty to hold differing political opinions. Because of the Reform of Workers Laws the right to strike and to form unions were removed and effectively workers were unable to change their working circumstances. They were exploited by long hours, low pay and unfair treatment and denied the right to protest about it. Essentially this implies that structural adjustment can lead to an infringement of human rights firstly under authoritarian regimes and here because of unfair labour laws.
Perhaps this illustrates the influence structural adjustment has upon domestic politics. Indeed whilst structural adjustment reduces the authority of the national government it introduces a "dominant importance of external influences" making the country vulnerable, not just economically, but also politically. By adhering to liberal economic adjustment policies developing countries are seen to be allying themselves, willingly or unwillingly, to liberal politics and therefore have less political manoeuvrability within international relations and trade.
In an article on adjustment Bangura suggests that politically the issue is that adjustment "seeks to further weaken the limited strength of the working class and strengthen that of the bourgeoisies by it's insistence on the market mechanism as the primary regulatory force". For this reason he perceives there are "great dangers" for any country wishing to subscribe to structural adjustment and maintain its own democracy and an economic independence.
Before evaluating the costs of structural adjustment in socio-political terms it seems imperative to differentiate between the unavoidable costs born by adjustment in return for economic benefits, in contrast to the effects that adjustment might bring but which are not necessary in order that adjustment occur. To clarify, whilst increased unemployment is a cost of adjustment because of cuts in state services, starvation is an effect because no adjustment policy directly caused its occurrence and it was not a necessary component of the adjustment process. Never the less, as we have seen, such effects can have severe consequences for individuals and institutions alike. The real question is whether these negative effects are necessary, because if they are not the validity of structural adjustment still stands and the only failure is in the formation and implementation of structural adjustment. It appears many of the effects of structural adjustment could have been avoided but a lack of resources, or perhaps more importantly an inaccurate interpretation of the problem, means this has not been the case. Essentially structural adjustment has succeeded in many cases in producing economic success, but the isolated reform of economics has had negative knock on effects for society and politics which also play a large part in economics. It appears structural adjustment addressed only part of the economic problem-developing countries, behind on their debt repayments, were left post-structural adjustment with further debt, a clear sign that both the diagnosis and prescription was lacking. Perhaps what it most alarming about the socio-political effects of structural adjustment that we have considered is that "the social impact could itself frustrate the desired economic effect".
There is, however, no way to judge how developing countries would have fared midst global economic difficulty without adjustment policies. There is no doubt in some cases adjustment lending provided, albeit invisible, a cushion against what could have been poverty at even greater depths. UNICEF states
It is also important to note that many of the so called 'effects' of adjustment are actually caused by extraneous factors for which structural adjustment is not accountable and cannot control. Developing countries are often the most vulnerable when hit by a global recession, a national drought, regional flooding, earthquakes, terrorist attacks or mere market diminutions and neither national governments nor adjustment can consider in their policies such unprecedented events which influence all areas of life. So too as George recognises IFI's administering adjustment "cannot be held responsible for the circumstances that brought indebted countries to their doorsteps in the first place". So too whilst structural adjustment proscribes polices it is national government who implements them. The fact that South Korea successfully 'adjusted' with improvements to the social welfare as opposed to 'social costs' indicates a success for structural adjustment and UNICEF concedes that "growth orientated approaches with structural adjustment have been adopted successfully" . So too, as in South Korea where society benefited from structural adjustment, policies can "combine structural adjustment, economic growth, and protection of the human dimension". This suggests not only that macroeconomic structural adjustment can be effective when it considers societies alongside economies but more significantly that the success of structural adjustment relies on how it is implemented by national government. Whilst in Zimbabwe structural adjustment had within it policies and programmes to safeguard social welfare real social costs were incurred. This however does not represent a failure for adjustment but perhaps a lack of government action in implementing the adjustment. This is the stance of the World Bank who consider the state of Zimbabwe an indication of the poor "implementation" of structural adjustment rather than structural adjustment itself.
Whilst we acknowledge that structural adjustment traditionally aims at economic reform and not development it has been recognised that increasing the BWI have reformed their mission statement so that today it says "Our dream is a world free of poverty". Working from this structure structural adjustment is, in some way, responsible for development as well as for instigating successful and productive economic policies. This leads to a growing link between structural adjustment and human development, in part a link created by IFI's. It is evident that whether it has been acknowledged or not structural adjustment has had an undeniable effect on development and the work of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO's) in many countries. For this reason it is important to acknowledge their views and contributions on the issue of structural adjustment. Despite the socio-political costs of adjustment and the criticisms of many surrounding macro economic policies, charities and NGO's have consistently acknowledged the need for structural adjustment and it's relevance in many developing countries. UNICEF states that "countries have to adjust to the changing environment" whilst UNCTAD writes that "macroeconomic stability is essential for sustained growth, without which poverty cannot be reduced". However all NGO's emphasise that whilst structural adjustment is necessary the socio-political costs incurred are not and could be avoided. UNICEF's book 'Adjustment with a Human Face' suggests "more gradual timing" for structural adjustment with more money available and the introduction of meso-policies to safeguard the vulnerable and poorer sections of society. Finally it emphasises the importance of a continual assessment of living standards. Similarly 'Our Global Government' suggests structural adjustment should be based around "low condition compensatory finance" and short term economic provision for countries struggling to pay off debts in the immediate future. Oxfam suggests adjustment could be more beneficial to developing countries if it was based around a series of "incremental steps" whereby changes are initiated over a longer period of time avoiding dramatic changes occurring within days and throwing a country into chaos which could further exacerbate any economic difficulty. Finally a report by SAPRIN gives a less satisfying or coherent conclusion for the future of structural adjustment but, arguably, the most enlightened as to the realities of the situation. It suggests that the makers of future adjustment policy need to be those involved with adjustment, "those who are close to, and who understand best, their local and national realities". So, for SAPRIN, what is needed is the "space"  for those involved to shape their own economic reform. This is suggesting a model of participatory development, defined by Rahnema as a process involving three elements; the cognitive which perceives the realities differently; the political which builds "a bridge between the Establishment and its target populations" by giving a voice to those without; and the instrumental which bring about new ideas of ways to develop. This overwhelmingly positive response from NGO's serves to illustrate that they consider structural adjustment has value within development as a theory despite the current negative effects it creates for many countries.
Ultimately structural adjustment cannot be held solely responsible for the sustained poverty in many 'adjusting' countries to which other factors contribute. There is some onus on the institutions dictating and forming the policies of structural adjustment, the national governments who implement the reforms, and unpredicted extraneous causes which cannot be accommodated for in advance. In saying this structural adjustment in practice had resulted in serious socio-political ramifications in real human terms which cannot be ignored. Politically the effects of adjustment are far reaching and imply a lack of sovereignty as well as a move towards a globalisation which makes a country vulnerable as much as it empowers. We have noted the social costs of structural adjustment ranging from physical lack of resources such as food, water, education or healthcare to a more abstract degradation of indigenous cultures and the reinforcement of discrimination within society. What is apparent from this study is that poverty alleviation and macroeconomic reform through structural adjustment do not have to be mutually exclusive terms; economic growth is not incongruous with development as has been shown in a minority of cases (South Korea being a case in point). Adjustment can, in short, exist alongside and compliment the process of development. The social effects of structural adjustment do, in the majority of cases today, outweigh or worse declare void, the economic benefits of adjustment. However there are exceptions to this case and much more evidence which leads us to suggest that the social effects of structural adjustment could be easily avoided making structural adjustment not only viable but a powerful tool for development.
Adjustment is perhaps the popular porn for attack but what needs to be tackled, in my opinion, is the underlying tradition which separates social development and poverty alleviation from instituting sound macroeconomic reforms within national economies. Thus, as Singer proposed, there needs to be more interaction and better cooperation between the UN and the Bretton Woods Institutions in order that practical realistic policies are made for developing countries acknowledging the reality of their situation as well as the centrality of economics to any lasting development.