The fair delivery of high standard health care has been the objective of the National Health Service (NHS) since its establishment in 1948. However this has proven to be a difficult task and to require a thorough understanding of the complex and variable health needs of different population groups.
Health is defined as "a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity". (1) Therefore, in order to account for the health of the nation, not only the physical maladies have to be prevented and treated, the social determinants of health must also be accounted for. This dimension poses the greatest challenge as it involves long-term approaches using profound measures designed to impact not only in lifestyles, but also in social and community networks and general socioeconomic and environmental factors such as income, housing, education, safety, access to fresh food, transport, access to health services. (2) (Figure 1) It thus implies that an equitable health service will be the one shaped to meet the needs of the populations, dynamically changing according to the changing needs of the populations. Contrastingly, a health care system which is delivered in a way that favours certain groups of people in detriment of others will systematically generate health inequalities amongst such groups. The differential exposure to socioeconomic factors influencing health prior to birth and across the lifespan will result in socioeconomic health inequalities, and are particularly important in explaining health differences related to gender and ethnicity. (2)
Several factors complicate the assessment of the populations' health status. The definition and measurement of need, availability and utilisation of health care services can present variations which influence the results obtained.
It is generally assumed that the needs of individuals integrated in a certain socio-economic group in a specific place will be similar and therefore can be revealed by a representative individual, a concept derived from statistical studies. (3) However, individuals from the same background may report their maladies in distinctive ways and require different immediate approaches. (3)
Availability of health care may also be different across population groups. If, in one hand, certain services may not be available in some places, clinicians may tend to offer different treatments to patients from distinct socio-economic groups. Additionally, the acknowledgment of specific existing health services may be different between such groups. Lastly, the heath care budget may be distributed unequally across the populations. (3)
Moreover, the measurement of utilisation of health services normally records broad categories such as GP visits or hospital admissions which can be deceiving as a measurement of quality or quantity of health care received, as some may only require administrative work. In other circumstances, groups which seem to under-utilise some health services may be choosing alternative or private services, which will fall out of most studies and bias the results. (3)
Despite the difficulty in standardising methodologies and conclusions, health inequalities exist, regardless of whether the variables measured are mortality, life expectancy or health status, and independently of falling into socioeconomic, ethnic or gender categories.(2) The general trends of health show that although mortality has decreased and life expectancy has increased in the last years, healthy life expectancy has actually decreased, which implies that the added years of life involve chronic illness and disability. (2,4) It is also important to note that even though mortality as a whole has been decreasing, the gap between mortality rates for subjects at the top and bottom of the social scale has increased. (2,4) (Figure 2)
Several theories have been formulated to explain the existence and persistence of health inequalities, three of which stand out as more encompassing explanations: behavioural and cultural, materialist and psychosocial.
The acknowledgement of the existence of health inequalities carries the responsibility to address them. Since its election, the Labour government has introduced important measures to improve understanding and reduce health inequalities. In the Tackling health inequalities: a programme for action document a series of targets were set to impact upon four main areas (supporting families, mothers and children; engaging communities and individuals; preventing illness and providing effective treatment and care; addressing the underlying determinants of health principles), based on five underlying principles (preventing inequalities worsening; working through the mainstream; targeted interventions; support from the centre; delivering at local level) as shown in figure 5.(4)
Specific national interventions were also defined concerning life expectancy and infant mortality, including: the reduction of smoking amongst manual social groups; prevention and management of risk factors (poor diet, obesity, physical inactivity and hypertension); improvement of environmental health (quality of housing and reduction of the risk of accidents); targeting over-50s. Interventions aiming to reduce infant mortality include the improvement of quality and accessibility of antenatal care and early years support in disadvantaged areas; reducing smoking and improving diet during pregnancy and early years (increase numbers of mothers breastfeeding); preventing teenage pregnancy and providing support; improving housing conditions for children in disadvantaged areas. (4)
Health professionals are expected to play a central role in the reduction of health inequalities and in the promotion of health, by lobbying against policies promoting health exclusion and through the provision of services which combat poverty and support/equip families who live in poverty. (10) Doctors are expected to hold a good understanding of the causes of poverty and its impact on health. They should also overcome any putative negative preconceptions or attitudes towards poor patients. (10) Based on these concepts, three main areas of action have been pointed out as paramount in a doctor's clinical practice: health profiling and monitoring; preventing and alleviating measures; working for social change. (10)
Doctors are expected to be involved in health profiling activities investigating the relationship between poverty and health exclusion, its nature and causes, so that adequate services can be delivered to such individuals. In addition, the health status of the population must be monitored so that services can be shaped according to need across time. (10)
Doctors have a role to play in the prevention of health exclusion due to poverty and should encourage and implement alleviating measures to reduce health inequalities at two levels: through their potentially strong lobbying influence over the government, working towards social change; in the community, through the identification of specific needs of local populations and individual patients and the mediation with relevant agencies which may be able to supply them with the resources needed.(10) In order to improve the delivery and accessibility of health care, the facilitation of transport and the introduction of extended surgery hours along with childcare services could be implemented. This would enable workers and mothers to attend consultations without compromising their professional/family commitments, and would decrease the amount of non-attended GP consultations. Additionally, some primary care trusts (PCTs) will face social and cultural challenges such as language, which can be reduced with the distribution of leaflets in different languages and the use of interpreters. Additionally, doctors could ease the financial burden of low income patients by not charging for services such as sick notes and prescribing gym membership, nicotine replacement therapy and counselling. They could also refer patients to appropriate agencies which can provide advice on how to claim for benefits and how to manage a budget.
The existence and persistence of health inequalities is undeniable in our society. The government has developed an elaborate plan to further assess, understand and tackle health exclusion and has set specific and ambitious targets. Doctors and other health care professionals are expected to play a central role in this process. However it is clear that measures beyond the efficient and adequate delivery of health care and health promotion are needed to reduce health inequalities, especially focusing in income and participation in society.