From the day a baby is born, it already appears to comprehend much about the world it has just entered into. As a newborn, it then continues to learn even more about its environment at a phenomenal rate. Research has shown that newborns are at a point in their life when they are most open to new experiences and as a result, their minds are most conducive to maximising their learning potential (Gopnik, Meltzoff & Kuhl, 1999). This essay focuses on the newborn's knowledge of the world, analysing their interactions with both people and objects, whilst also assessing whether this knowledge of the world is innate or acquired subsequent to birth, via their interaction with the world.
The ability to comprehend the minds of people around you is imperative for child development: it not only aids communication and interaction but it also influences the person the child eventually becomes. Different cultures and even the individual communities within them have their own unique and distinct way of thinking and behaving; therefore, as a child learns about other people's mannerisms they also discover elements of their own mind (Gopnik et al., 1999) and the appropriate ways of behaving in different situations. At birth babies already seem to possess a great deal of knowledge about other people and effective ways of communicating with them, through interaction they develop their skills even further.
The imitation of facial expressions has been found to be one of their innate capabilities (Meltzoff & Moore, 2002). However, for newborns, this is much more complex than merely a matter of copying. Newborns have never actually seen their own faces; consequently the only way for a neonate to know what their face looks like is by internally feeling their own body (a process called kinaesthesia). Therefore in order to imitate, newborns need to somehow understand the similarity between that internal feeling and the external face they are looking at (Gopnik et al., 1999). This understanding is thought to be innate with research showing that newborn's as young as a day old have imitated facial expressions (Meltzoff & Moore, 2002).
However, there has been much debate over whether what we are seeing is in fact true imitation and not just some form of conditioning. In previous research, examiners have been found to alter their rhythm of tongue protrusions as a function of the infant's response, thus encouraging the possibility for conditioned imitation. To rule out this factor, Meltzoff & Moore's (1977) experiment ensured that examiners were unaware that they were testing imitation and blind judges were used to label the newborns' expressions. Each newborn was shown four gestures in a random order for 15 seconds and it was found that 12-21 day old babies imitated both facial and manual gestures during a 20 second response period. Despite this, some research has proposed that imitation is merely an innate releasing mechanism (Lorenz & Tinbergen, 1938, as cited in Meltzoff & Moore, 1977) where these response gestures are just fixed action patterns released by a corresponding adult gesture. However, the evidence that newborns imitated four different gestures and that a child's imitative behaviour is not always consistent refutes this claim.
The presence of early imitation could also be taken as evidence of an innate predisposition to communicate; it has also been seen as a way of learning new behaviours (Piaget, 1962). Meltzoff & Moore (2002) concluded that imitation was simply a 'primitive means of understanding and communicating with other people'. This suggests that even from birth we are aware of other peoples' minds, which we can then use to aid our knowledge of the world. Therefore, even prior to language development, newborns have already established a direct link with other people.
Many studies have shown that newborns have a strong preference to human voices, n particular, their mothers voice (DeCasper & Fifer, 1980), and sounds that generally, fall within the same frequency range as the human voice (Alegria & Noirot, 1978). The reason for these intrinsic preferences could be attributed to the fact that even from within the womb we are exposed to auditory knowledge. DeCasper & Fifer, (1980) showed that babies establish their preferences inside the womb, implying an innate tendency to choose. Shortly after delivery, infants with very little maternal exposure were taught that by sucking on a non-nutritive nipple during a tone period their mothers voice would appear and sucking during a no-tone period would produce a non-maternal voice. It was found that the probability of sucking was significantly higher during tone periods, indicating a preference for the maternal voice. Further research has verified the significance of pre-natal exposure. Foetuses have shown a decrease in heart rate when played a tape of their mother reading a rhyme that had previously been read to them. This suggests that a foetus's exposure to specific speech sounds can affect their consecutive reactions to those sounds (DeCasper et al., 1994) and can promote language-relevant perceptual tuning even prior to birth.
Research indicating a preference to the mother's voice isn't conclusive- some has shown evidence to the contrary. This discrepancy can be explained by the findings from a study by Spence & Freeman (1996). Body tissue in the womb acts as a low pass filter, where higher frequencies are attenuated to a greater extent than lower frequencies, rendering much of the speech unintelligible. It is these low frequencies that give speech its prosodic (temporal and rhythmic) properties. It was found that neonates could discriminate between whispered voices but did not prefer the maternal whispered voice to a stranger's. They did however prefer the mother's low-pass filtered voice to a stranger's, suggesting that the prosodic qualities of the mother's voice were discriminated by the infant. These vocal properties are available pre-natally, once again suggesting that prenatal experience is crucial in shaping preferences.
Preferential looking towards humans is not present at birth, however, it is formed relatively soon after. Frantz (1961) showed infants different pictures representing, to varying degrees, a human face. It was found that up to 40% of their fixation time was on the human faces, 20% on complex non-faces and 10% on solid colour stimuli, indicating that infants tended to focus their attention on stimuli resembling the human face. While it is possible that these findings could be based on face symmetry, it nevertheless supports the fact that complex stimuli provides more stimulation for an infant (Brennan, Ames & Moore, 1966). Research has also shown that even soon after birth, infants prefer to look at their mother than at a stranger, suggesting that visual perception develops very early on. However, it is possible that their preference towards their mothers, both vocally and visually, could be due to a familiarity effect, as preferences for familiar stories that have been read pre-natally have also been found (DeCasper & Spence, 1986).
Children inherently have a great affiliation towards objects, particularly after they develop the ability to reach out and grasp things. By exploring the objects and environment around them they are able to build representations of the world they are in. Infants develop fairly complex representations of these physical objects and some of these representations are even present at birth.
By producing connections between two different types of experiences, an inborn link between the different senses can be seen in neonates. Meltzoff & Borton (1979) looked at tactile-visual cross-modal perception by giving infants a pacifier shaped either like a sphere or shaped like a sphere with nubs to suck for 90 seconds. When the infants were later shown the objects side by side it was found that neonates looked significantly longer at the shape they had felt. Neonates could therefore relate the feel of a pacifier in their mouths with its visual image, hence it was suggested that perception is already shaped by an innate capacity for cross-modal communication among sense modalities, implying that perception is not educated by experience.
It has also been proposed than newborns have an appreciation of size constancy even at birth and have been found to habituate to object size and not the retinal image size (Slator, Mattock & Brown, 1990). Hence, they are able to appreciate scale and distance. However, according to the Piagetian theory it is believed that neonates have no innate attentional biases or predispositions and are regarded as just a 'bundle of reflexes'. Thus all aspects of perception and cognition are developed only through active experiences. It may be more appropriate therefore, to consider the presence of size constancy as the foundation for the development of depth perception.
Depth perception appears to develop very quickly and can be seen in very young babies that are yet to even walk or crawl, thus supporting the fact that we don't need the sense of touch to give us direct information about distance. Gibson and Walk (1960) studied depth perception with their 'Visual Cliff' experiment. A check pattern was positioned close to the glass under one half of a glass table (the "shallow" side) and far below the glass under the other half (the "deep" side). Infants between the ages of 612 months and 12 months were placed on the shallow side of the table, and encouraged to crawl over the edge of the visual cliff on to the deep side by being offered toys or having their mothers call them. Most failed to respond to these incentives, suggesting that they possessed at least some of the elements of depth perception. Considering the ages of these infants, the likely explanation for their perceptual ability is that they were learnt through experience.
However, not all visual perception is developed so early on, object permanence the realisation that an object still exists even if it cannot be seen, displays a very gradual development. Piaget (1954, as cited in Baillargeon, Spelk, & Wasserman 1985) believed that newborns have no initial sense of object permanence, that it gradually develops during the sensorimotor period and that full object permanence must show ability to actively search for hidden objects. As a result, object permanence is not considered to develop fully until about 18-24 months.
Recent research has shown that a baby's knowledge of objects is more sophisticated than what Piaget initially assumed. Baillargeon et al (1985), proposed a very early acquisition of object permanence. 5-month-old infants were habituated to a screen that moved back and forth, in the manner of a drawbridge. The infants were then shown either a possible event where the screen reached an occluded box and stopped, or an impossible event where the screen moved straight through the space occupied by the box. It was found that these infants understood that the box continued to exist even after the screen occluded it and expected the screen to stop against the box, as they looked longer and showed surprise at the impossible event. It was therefore believed that although an infant does not have an innate knowledge of object permanence, they are born with some form of an innate knowledge of how objects behave (Baillargeon et al., 1985). Despite these findings, infants still failed to actively search for the hidden objects (Piaget's main criterion for object permanence). According to Baillargeon et al (1985), this was purely due to physical limitations, such as a lack of motor coordination. Therefore it may be more reasonable to suggest that infants have a rudimentary understanding of object permanence at a very young age, but are unable to act upon it until their motor skills are more coordinated. This idea, has in turn, been criticised by other experiments which have ruled out the possibility of a lack of motor skill (Meltzoff & Moore, 1999) and thus proposed that failure in the experiment is due to incomplete object permanence; hence, even at 14 months, we are still not seeing a fully developed notion of object permanence. In light of recent research, it is clear that object permanence is definitely not innate, especially due to evidence suggesting it can only be attained after an infant develops its knowledge of time and space (Baillargeon et al., 1985).
It is important to bear in mind that the information stated in this essay is by no means a definitive account of what newborns 'know' during their first year of life. However, they do seem to have a lot more innate capabilities that are to do with the people around them, as opposed to their knowledge of the objects around them, which seems to be limited at birth. This may due to the fact that even from within the womb, babies are in contact with the outside world via the voices they hear and thus learning may even begin from here. Conversely, their ability to experience and perceive objects whilst in the womb is impossible, which would explain their gradual development towards perceptual aspects of objects.
It is still extremely questionable whether a newborn's knowledge of the world is innate or learnt, despite evidence from various studies. A methodological flaw common in most developmental studies is that the sample sizes tend to be extremely small, thus causing issues of generalisation. In respect to the infant's ages in studies claiming innateness, it would be reasonable to assume that they are far too young to have been effected by the environment around them to learn the behaviour and therefore has strong grounds for being innate. However, it is still possible for the behaviour to have been learnt even in a very short period of time as studies have also shown that learning can start as early as the foetal years. Thus the robustness of measuring innateness come under the question of whether it is actually ever possible to measure. As research into child development has increased, it has become evident that there are very few, if any, strictly 'innate' behaviours. Most behaviour seems to be developed further by some environmental factor or another. Therefore, rigorous analysis of neonatal development will often reveal that any particular behaviour is a complex combination of both innate and learnt components.