There are both important similarities and differences between the conquest of Mexico and the landing of Europeans in North America. The Spanish and the English became the dominant powers in Mexico and North America respectively and would therefore determine the fate of the Indians in Mexico and North America in the coming years.
There was an enormous difference in the speed in which the natives of North America were subdued compared to the Aztecs in Mexico. The Spanish first conquered the Aztecs (which took only two years) and then began to settle their people; the Europeans who entered North America first settled part of the land and then instigated the conquest of the continent as they progressed westward over two hundred years. Consequently contemporaries would view the two processes in a different light; Cortez's expedition into Mexico is nearly always called by chroniclers and historians "The Conquest of Mexico." This reflects the fact that the Spanish conquest of Mexico was a definitive defeat of the most influential native power in America at the time. In comparison historians describe the arrival of Europeans in North America as a settling or planting because it was a steady but ongoing process that didn't initially involve the subduing of any significant society comparable with the Aztecs.
There are a number of factors which influenced the interaction between the Europeans and the Native Americans. The most important issue to consider is what the Europeans wanted and expected from America and the reasons they left their homelands for the "New World." Their reaction to what they found in America would influence further European actions there. The attitudes and opinions of the Europeans towards the Native Americans and the attitudes and opinions of the Native Americans towards the Europeans were also significant in determining their interactions. A number of alliances were formed between the Europeans and the natives and these also influenced the course of events. Whilst the European powers in both North America and Mexico had distinct advantages over the native populations, such as superior weaponry, the natives themselves had different advantages such as knowledge of the landscape and initial superiority in numbers. Some investigation is required to determine the balance of these strengths and how they would influence the outcome of the conflicts between natives and Europeans.
It was the aims of the Europeans, modified by what they found in America that would determine their actions in the New World. The desire for gold would be the primary drive for the Spanish conquest of Mexico, whereas other nations became interested primarily in trade and settling after they found no gold in North America.
Hernan Cortez, the leader of the Spanish conquistadores in Mexico, intended to collect more gold than the first two Spanish voyages to the Yucatan made in the 1510s. Yet Cortez's force was not equipped for a march into the centre of Mexico. Cortez drew much of his assessment of the Aztec's defensive capabilities from the first two voyages to the Yucatan made by Juan de Grijalva and Francisco Hernandez de Cordoba. These expeditions found only traces of gold and merely succeeded in angering the native Maya population. However, when Cortez landed in the Yucatan, the Maya did not produce sufficient resistance to dishearten him. Some of Cortez's men had been on one of the first two voyages and so had first hand experience. Cortez's force of about six-hundred, several horses, cannon, guns and armour landed in the Yucatan in 1519. When Cortez met the Aztec royal ambassador he exclaimed, 'We Spaniards have a disease of the heart that only gold can cure.'
The French became interested in the New World after French pirates intercepted Spanish treasure ships bringing gold back from the Aztec empire in Mexico. Additionally, the Frenchmen Verrazano and Cartier began to explore the North American coast and the St Lawrence during the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. Although the French were initially enticed to America by the prospect of finding gold, they found few traces of gold in North America at that time. Instead they found Indian populations who would trade beaver furs (a luxury in Europe) for European goods.
The very first English colonies established by Sir Walter Raleigh in 1585 and 1587 were made to challenge the domination Spain had in the Americas. However, these had disappeared when John White, an English cartographer returned to re-supply them. Many historians have speculated as to the fate of the colonists, but one of the most prominent theories is that they were wiped out by hostile Indians in the area. The more successful English settlement of Virginia (from 1607) was threatened by local tribes. Crucially, the English settlers of Virginia were often given unrealistic expectations by those who encouraged them to go and believed the New World to be a paradise.
The Dutch also visited America, following in the footsteps of other European nations. These expeditions, led first by Henry Hudson in 1609 (an Englishman in the service of the Dutch East Indian Company), were smaller in size than those of the English and French. Hudson sailed up the river later named after him and met Indians who traded tobacco for knives and beads. Trade became the main reason the Dutch would now attempt to colonize America.
Land became the most important English acquisition in America. The English came to colonize the coastal region to be used as farmland and the maintenance of livestock. When the Spanish found gold in America, they increased their efforts in the New World to find more; when the English found 'free' land in North America (as the natives there didn't claim ownership), they expanded to find more. Land became for the English in the 1600s what gold was for the Spanish in the 1500s; a primary drive for sending their people to America.
The attitudes of the European invaders towards the Native Americans varied. When Europeans came into contact with the Native Americans, taking note of their tribal dances, their more primitive weapons and agriculture and religious beliefs and practices, they often classified them as savages; strange and uncivilized people who were not as "human" as white Europeans. These opinions were reflected in literature at the time. Possibly Caliban (the "Noble Savage" in Shakespeare's 'The Tempest') is based upon a Native American. Although "uncivilized" the savage could be improved by contact with European civilization. Contrastingly, Cortez was clearly awe inspired by Aztec society as when he arrived in Tenochtitlan, he exclaimed: "what rational beings live here." When Henry Hudson sailed up the river later named after him, 'except for two tragic incidents (attacks by hostile Indians,) he found the Indians a "loving people"'
'To the Indians the newcomers seemed like magical monsters." The natives in both Mexico and North America often viewed the Europeans as gods due to their light skin complexions. ' When Cortez first arrived in Mexico, Montezuma, the Aztec emperor, believed him to be the returning god Quetzalcoatl. Chasteen even claims that 'Montezuma, the Aztec Emperor, had no earthly idea who, or what the Spaniards might be. In fact, Montezuma apparently suspected they were gods." By a fifty-two-to-one coincidence, Cortez had landed in the Yucatan in 1519, a year that coincided with "one-reed," a date on the Aztec calendar on which Quetzalcoatl was expected to return to reclaim his kingdom. Cortez's appearance also happened to match the description of Quetzalcoatl in Aztec myth and as Michael Woods points out, myth was a very important part of Aztec society. Cortez discovered Montezuma's misunderstanding of the nature of the Spanish through the gifted translator, Malinche, whom the Maya had given to him after he had defeated them when he initially arrived in the Yucatan. Whilst the Aztecs greeted the Spaniards with lavish gifts of food and golden idols, they treated them with suspicion and asked them to move their camp 'seven leagues away,' and asked the Spaniards not to come to Tenochtitlan. The Spanish could only scrape together a couple of chairs and some velvet items which the main Aztec emissary looked at in disgust. Possibly this started to undermine Montezuma's belief that the Spanish were returning gods. Montezuma also welcomed Cortez into Tenochtitlan as a guest with this cryptic message:
It seemed as if Montezuma still expected Cortez to be Quetzalcoatl. It is possible that, like the Aztecs, the Indians of North America at first believed the 'white men' to be godly creatures as their ancestral history didn't mention men of European appearance. It is uncertain whether the Powhatan tribe wished the English to leave their territory because after receiving European goods they enabled the English settlers to subsist by giving them maize and corn and showed them how to grow it. Later, after experience, Indian chiefs began to express their worries about the presence of Europeans in their homeland:
After an increasing number of disagreements in the 1620s, relations between the English and the Powhatan tribe became hostile and both sides distrusted the other. A common phrase used in the years after the 1620s by the English was 'the only good Indian is a dead Indian.'
On occasions the natives saw the Europeans in North America as people who needed their help, or people they could trade with; often only too late did they realize that they were in fact invaders coming to take their land and their earthly possessions and remain.
Cortez took many natives as servants and porters on his march to Tenochtitlan, even being forced to take many as warriors. The Europeans in North America took few natives as slaves relying on indentured servants transplanted from Europe. This may demonstrate a different attitude between the Spanish and the other Europeans towards the worth of Indians as labourers; however, Cortez was cut off from the European world so he was forced to use native porters instead of European ones. Yet the Spanish began to take Slaves in their early colonies in the Caribbean demonstrating more will than any other European powers to take the native peoples as servants or slaves.
The clash of religions between the Natives of the "New World" and the Europeans of the "Old World" were different in North America and Mexico. Later English settlers moving to North America were escaping religious persecution. Generally in the early years of the settling of North America there were few attempts by the largely Protestant Europeans to convert the natives to Christianity. In contrast, Cortez and the Spanish conquistadors seemed like Catholic evangelists. Cortez brought along one priest and often they were so shocked when they found evidence of Aztec sacrifices that they proclaimed the Christian gospel to the natives. When Montezuma showed a Cortez a room in one of their pyramids that had figures of Aztec gods but that also contained bowls of still warm human hearts, supposedly Cortez remarked:
"'I don't understand how a prince as great as you and a man as intelligent as you can call these things gods, I would like your permission to place a cross in here.'" Montezuma was greatly offended by this remark. Yet the Aztec tradition of human sacrifice made some Spanish believe that they had entered "the jaws of hell." This clearly shows the contradiction between Christianity and the Aztec religion.
Many alliances were set up between the natives and the Europeans; In Mexico they tended to be short term political and military alliances, whereas in North America, at least initially, alliances tended to be made for trading and support purposes. However, later in North America, tactical alliances formed to enable power in certain areas to be swung towards one particular European nation or another.
The Dutch were met by Indians in mid 1609, who offered them food and water on their voyage up the Hudson River. The English in 1607 were given food and showed how to grow maize by the Powhatans in a similar way to when Cortez's expedition was greeted by unarmed Aztec people offering them food in 1519. They were also all attacked sporadically by various tribes, the Spanish by the Maya and the Tlaxcaltecs; the Dutch by the Iroquois and the English by Powhatan's tribe. The only European peoples who weren't attacked when they initially arrived were the French. However, the Aztec intention was made clear as they asked Cortez to leave Mexico; the gifts were merely a sign of good intent. This was probably true for the Indians of North America who believed that the strange new people would leave if they satisfied them with gifts.
Cortez first made alliances with the Totonacs, small groups of Maya, the Quiahuiztlan and the Cemophaultecs. These alliances were absolutely necessary as 'Cortez could not hope to conquer the empire with so few men, regardless of the military superiority they had demonstrated in the past." His most powerful allies were the Tlaxcaltecs who hated the Aztecs. All these native tribes entered these alliances partially blind to the true nature and intent of the Spanish. The Tlaxcaltecs were in a dangerous situation when Cortez arrived as they were engaged in war which would have inevitably led to their defeat by the Aztecs. Without this alliance, Cortez's would have had little chance of capturing Tenochtitlan. Just as the Europeans would need assistance from the Indians in order to survive in North America, Cortez and his men needed local populations (who were willing to defy the Aztecs) to provide porters, supply food and contribute soldiers to make a sustained march into Mexico to defeat Montezuma. Some of his Indian allies would also serve as scouts and intelligence agents, similar to those the English would use in North America. Through these scouts, 'Cortez learned of the political division within Montezuma's empire, and of the extent to which the Aztecs were resented by the subject peoples and by other kingdoms." Many times Cortez was welcomed into villages under Aztec rule and even villages that were tributaries to the Aztecs gave them food and water. Despite the fact that the Tlaxcaltecs were involved in a 'flower war' with the Aztecs they initially attacked the Spanish. After several battles and the ransacking of native towns, by the Spanish (attempting to demonstrate their military might without substantial loss) the Tlaxcaltecs agreed to the treaty that Cortez had offered to them. Although they could have defeated Cortez, 'the Spanish would also be powerful allies' in the Tlaxcaltecs' war against the Aztecs, just as the Tlaxcaltecs would provide experienced warriors to aid the Spanish attack on Montezuma.
When the Europeans arrived in North America, they formed complex relationships with the local natives. The French and the Dutch built trading posts and set up alliances with local Indians, trading European goods for furs and food. The French allied themselves with the Huron and the Dutch with the Iroquois. Both sets of alliances proved to be very profitable for both parties as the Indians traded animal furs for European goods such as guns, cloth and steel weapons. When the English settlers landed in Virginia, a particularly harsh area of North America in 1607, where mosquitoes spread various diseases; they were initially ill-prepared to survive there. At first they relied on the Indian tribes to provide them with the means to live but many were confident of their own self-sufficiency as Angie Debo points out, 'the thought never occurred to even the most enlightened Englishmen that the Indians might have something to give and apparently they never suspected that the natives had lost "a scheme of life that worked"' The local Indians largely consisted of a tribe of about 10,000 Powhatan. Despite sporadic fighting, 'initially the coastal Indians helped the white settlers develop a subsistence economy. They taught the Europeans how to plant corn and use fish for fertilizer." Soon, John Smith (the leader of the English colony) decided it would be more profitable to trade than fight. Powhatan's tribe gained many European tools and commodities, such as rifles and hatchets. In return the Indians provided the English with maize, corn and hides and taught them how to cultivate these new foodstuffs.
In both North America and Mexico intermarriage resulted in strengthening political ties between powers. Despite the story of John Smith being saved by Pocahontas from execution by Powhatan possibly being untrue, it is clear that her marriage to John Rolfe, an English colonist, strengthened the alliance between the English settlers and the Powhatans. However, after Pocahontas died, relations between the English and Powhatan deteriorated rapidly. This was similar to an event in the Spanish conquest of Mexico when Cortez's men arrived to assist the Cemophualtecs in a conflict against Aztec warriors. The Cemophualtecs gave the Spanish eight women who were all daughters of nobles and kings. This strengthened the new alliance between Cemophaultecs and Spanish.
Whilst the lucrative fur trade meant that the French and the Dutch were interested in maintaining friendly alliances with the Indians for a number of years; gradually the initial trading alliances between the Europeans and the Native Americans of North America changed. Before arriving in the "New World," rivalries already existed between the European powers who were effectively competing against each other for land and wealth. The English also engaged in trade with Indian tribes but later, when their greed for land increased, they began to use their alliances to destabilize other European powers in the area. The English, jealous of the Spanish gold and the Dutch and French trade, firmly established themselves in Virginia, gaining their own powerful allies, the five nations Iroquois.
Conflict was a significant factor in European-Amerindian encounters and warfare was an important tool in determining which side would dictate terms to the other. Within these conflicts Europeans used alliances with native tribes against each other and native tribes used Europeans to finish off old feuds against other tribes. With conflicting European powers now arriving in North America in larger numbers, Indian alliances would prove very important to the stability of European presence in North America:
Often European and Indian (and European and European) were able to live side by side in relative harmony. The Dutch and the Iroquois and the French and the Hurons initially benefited from trade with each other. Yet this trade led to an Indian dependence on European goods and soon the Europeans began to take advantage of their Indian allies. The European demand for beaver fur meant that the North American Indian tribes would hunt the beaver almost to extinction. Trading relationships would now begin to break down. After the introduction of alcohol into native societies by the Europeans, the means of getting dead drunk was even more desired among many Indian tribes than the new needs of life the Europeans had come to supply them with. The Europeans gained the upper hand in their relationships with the natives in North America, just as Cortez was able to dominate his relationships with his native allies in Mexico. The tribes who allied themselves with Cortez effectively gave up their independence and now relied on his success in defeating the Aztecs. They did not realize that their efforts to assist the Spanish in defeating the Aztecs would not be reciprocated in any substantial manner. They believed the Spanish would bring them freedom from Aztec rule and give them a share of their success; yet effectively all the Spanish conquistadores did after defeating the Aztecs was to supplant Aztec nobility with themselves.
One of the most important issues to consider when studying the interactions between the natives and the Europeans in North America and in Mexico is the matter of how the Europeans were able to conquer the natives so absolutely. The native peoples of Mexico and North America had several advantages over the small and concentrated numbers of European settlers and conquerors: their superior knowledge of the terrain, understanding of the nature of the other peoples living in their homeland and their greater numbers. However, although the Europeans had fewer numbers and little knowledge of the terrain, they had modern weapons such as guns and crossbows. It is surprising that the Indians didn't kill the Europeans the moment they landed. This was probably due to their interest in these new and astounding people.
In both North America and Mexico, European weapons proved decisive in battles against Native populations. The Conquistadores took cannon, guns, crossbows and armour that would protect them from the majority of Aztec projectile weapons. The Europeans in North America brought similar weapons to the Spanish in Mexico. Obsidian (a dark, semi-translucent volcanic glass of the same composition as rhyolite) was one of the most important materials in Aztec warfare. Whilst it produced weapons and tools of unprecedented strength in the native world, they did not match those produced with Spanish steel. The Indians in North America used copper and bronze but their only sources of iron were fragments found in meteors. Therefore, they could not use local materials to make weapons as durable as European steel swords or knifes. In nearly all weapon classes of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the Europeans had the advantage over the Native Americans. This meant that the most battles between Indian and European resulted in more Indian casualties.
A difference between the Spanish and the English is the fact that the English traded guns and ammunition for Indian commodities during later periods in the settlement. With their superior weapons the Europeans brought tactics that were alien to the native population. Whilst at least some of the Indians in North America would be armed equally against the English in battle, the Aztecs would not. However, the North American Indians did not develop experience of European technology quickly enough to use them effectively against the Europeans until later, and they could not adapt their existing tactics to incorporate the gun alongside their bow and arrow and tomahawk.
The dominant power in North America, the English colonists, did not initially use horses against their Indian foes to the extent that the Spanish did in Mexico. The Spanish took several horses to Mexico, which gave them a great psychological advantage, despite the fact that they were unsuited to the terrain of Mexico. The Aztecs had never seen horses before and their only experience with quadrupeds was the Chihuahua. Consequently, they were terrified by Spaniards on horseback who looked like "godlike beasts." The Aztecs first believed that the horse and rider were one and the Spanish allowed them to believe this for as long as possible. Similarly, the first English colonists in New England wouldn't let the natives see their wounded or sick so that their enemies would think they were invulnerable.
One may say that the Aztecs had the best chance of any native culture of repelling any intrusions into their territory owing to the number of people they could call upon to defend their empire. In comparison, the natives of North America were spread out thinly over the land and few tribes had any permanent settlements which the Europeans could attack. However, the Aztec empire was not as powerful as might be thought as many tribes within their empire were disloyal enough to side with Cortez. Also, the determination of the Aztecs to conquer other people and obtain tribute from them stretched their forces to the point where they were unable to effectively resist even modest Spanish forces. Similarly, there existed divisions between the tribes of North America which existed even before the arrival of the Europeans.
It was part of their culture to go to war with each other, just as it was part of the Aztec's culture to wage war and conquer other peoples. Although certain tribes were interested in trading with Europeans, instead of fighting them, such as the Iroquois who traded with the Dutch and the Hurons who traded with the French, a number of tribes remained hostile to the Europeans and engaged in many conflicts with them. Surprisingly in some areas tribes flourished with the European settlers for long periods of time.
One of the reasons the Aztecs could not have wiped out the Spanish when they first arrived was the fact that they could not transport sufficient materials of war as 'there were no wheeled vehicles or draught animals in Mesoamerica." All supplies of food and water for a large force had to be carried by an army of porters. This inability to manoeuvre their army meant that they could not ensure that all conquered regions stayed loyal to Tenochtitlan. This enabled Cortez to drive a wedge through the Aztec empire as he was able to pick up allies who resented Aztec rule. The English in North America picked their allies well, choosing the Five Nations Iroquois who were possibly the most skilled of all native warriors in battle. The English used them to put pressure on the French and Dutch settlements In North America. Similarly, the Iroquois used the English to help them defeat their long term opponents, the Huron. 'It was not a war of subjugation; they hated the Huron intensely, like brother against brother." Both The Spanish and the English used allies to defeat their foes in the area they were interested in for gold and land respectively.
Both the Aztecs and the Powhatans were defeated by European powers because both made crucial diplomatic mistakes that both John Smith (leader of the colony in New England) and Hernan Cortez (of the Spanish conquistadors) would exploit. The royal ambassador of the Aztecs made their first mistake in allowing Cortez to discover there was more gold within their realm. The second was Montezuma's belief that Cortez was Quetzlcoatl and also to allow Cortez safe passage into Tenochtitlan. From there, Cortez captured Montezuma and used him as a puppet ruler until his own people killed him and forced the Spaniards out of Tenochtitlan. Their last mistake was to believe that the Spaniards would not return. Cortez's next move was one of the most astonishing feats in history as he built a fleet on land and transported it to lay an eighty day siege on Tenochtitlan. 'This was a new kind of warfare for the Aztecs, a siege of a city which lasted 80 days and which included women and children. It was total war, something which the people of the old world had not experienced before." This was what brought Tenochtitlan to its knees and even though the Spanish had to fight street by street, they still managed to overwhelm the Aztec warriors with their superior weapons and other Indian allies.
John Smith, the strong leader of the English colony in New England may not have accomplished as great a feat as Cortez; yet he organized his settlement so that it would function properly, setting up provisional laws and punishing those who refused to work. He also successfully negotiated with the Powhatans, which ensured that while the colony gained strength, they were kept relatively safe from the local Indians. Like Cortez he facilitated the survival of the men under his command. The Powhatans' first mistake was to continue trading food with the English whilst their colony grew in strength. After the Powhatans killed 350 colonist in 1622, John Smith's successor proceeded to exterminate the Powhatans, even poisoning Powhatan chiefs at a peace settlement.
Disease may have been the single most important European weapon deployed against the native peoples in America, despite it being unintentional. In both Mexico and North America, after the Europeans had come into contact with native tribes, the Europeans passed on diseases of the Old World. The Indians had been isolated from the rest of the world for centuries so European diseases such as smallpox, measles and scarlet fever produced devastating effects on native populations: 'According to Henry Dobyns, there were almost a hundred epidemics and pandemics of European diseases among Native Americans between the first contact and the beginning of the twentieth century." He continues, 'many Native American communities lost 75 per cent or more of their members within just a few weeks.' In the short time that it took the Conquistadores to defeat the Aztecs, the Spanish also managed to infect the Indian populations in Mexico (and Tenochtitlan) with smallpox during the winter of 1520. Although many people died, the most devastating effect was the deaths of the Aztec leaders. Those who emerged to take their place 'lacked both the experience of their predecessors and the time needed to consolidated their rule and reaffirm allegiances with tributaries." Notably, the Spanish also lost many supporting Indian allies and their leaders. However, it was far less devastating for the Spanish as the leaders who came to replace the old native leaders were more loyal to the Spaniards than their forerunners. In both Mexico in the sixteenth century and in North East America in the seventeenth century, European diseases severely weakened native populations of the ability to fight and reduced their ability to feed themselves. Some historians' estimates put total population reductions due to European diseases at ninety per cent.
Whilst the native's superior numbers when the European settlers first arrived in the New World, it is clear that after the fruitful voyages of Christopher Columbus, there would be an endless supply of Europeans willing to risk everything in order to make a profit or even a new life for themselves in America. They could also bring with them, and increasingly manufacture locally, the weapons of subjugation
'The New World was 'a land to be desired, and, once seen, never to be left." It was the initial aim of all the European powers to find gold in America. However, only the Spanish were successful. Their greed for gold predetermined their relationships with the Aztecs and the local people; the Aztecs had the gold and the Spanish would take it from them by force. The Dutch and the French, who landed in North America, found no gold. Instead they found populations of native peoples who were willing to trade furs that were expensive luxury items in Europe for European goods. The English also found people to trade with, but their primary interest was land and power.
The Europeans in North America largely saw the natives as savages. The Spanish saw the Aztecs as "rational beings" and were amazed at how developed their culture was. However, they were shocked at their religious practices and where possible sought to convert them to Catholicism. In contrast the Europeans of North America initially left the natives to their traditional beliefs.
The nature of the alliances that developed between native and European in Mexico and North America initially seem different. In Mexico, the alliances formed between the Spanish and native populations were more political and military in nature. The ones formed between the natives and the Europeans in North America appeared initially to be for trading and support purposes. However, although the time scales are different both the Spanish in Mexico and the Europeans in North America were able to manipulate their native allies so far as to dominate and subdue them. An additional factor determining the relationships in North America was the use by Europeans of native tribes to extend their rivalries to America, which did not happen in Mexico.
Although the Europeans had superior weapons, the natives initially had greater numbers and a superior knowledge of the terrain and should have been able to repel them. However, the native tribes in North America weren't unified and in Mexico the Aztecs had not succeeded in crushing all tribal resistance within their empire. Both also made many tactical errors that contributed to their defeat and were greatly weakened by the diseases that the Europeans brought from the "Old World."