From the few years preceding the American Revolution, the thirteen colonies of the United States were becoming more and more independent from their mother country, Britain. This would have several effects on the British attitude to her colonies both from the British leadership in America and her public and parliament back home. Yet the relationship between the colonies and Britain "seemed very close, both culturally and politically - and it is remarkable how this rosy picture changed so quickly." Even though there was still a great demand for British exports from the American colonies, each colony was individually was becoming more self sufficient on its own agriculture and produce. Some of the colonies also had a fairly self sustaining economy, Virginia, Georgia and Carolina relied mainly on intense levels of production of crops such as Tobacco, grains and cotton (which later became a huge export from North America, fueling the Southern economy considerably). The fact that America was such a great distance to travel in those times, taking between three to five months to travel by sailing ship, meant that contacting England in times of crisis would be delayed by a significant amount of time. This distance would also mean that during any conflict it would take time to reinforce British troops if heavy losses were to be suffered. In many respects, the British should have won the American revolutionary war. Some reasons for this include: the strength of Britain and her empire at the time, the seemingly superior combat experience of the British troops compared with the American forces, (much of which comprised of farmers and young inexperienced men looking for adventure) and the better-quality weapons that the British army carried. However, by the time the fighting actually started, there was great patriotic support for the Revolution from all leagues of American society. The British also made some rather unfortunate blunders, loosing support from well needed allies and further alienating remaining loyalist support among the colonists.
One of the first factors one should consider when examining the causes of the British defeat in the American war of independence is that of the popular support of the colonists for the patriotic movement that was taking the thirteen colonies of North America by storm. "On September 5 th 1774 the first Continental Congress assembled in Philadelphia." This was to later organize the Declaration of Independence based on the widely published pamphlet, "common sense." The strength of feeling and confidence in their own ability to survive should not be underestimated among the colonists. One tends to forget that by 1750, the older colonies such as New England and Virginia were into their seventh of eight generation of peoples, who now saw themselves not as subjects of the British Empire but as Americans. What agitated them even further was that the British issued taxes after suffering a doubling in their national debt after the Seven Years War: This huge debt lay at "122,600,000 in 1763" and "the carrying charge of approximately 4,500,000 absorbed more than half of the annual budget." Reforms of taxes included the Stamp Act of February 13 th 1765, the Revenue Act of 1764 which prevented the printing of the dollar in all colonies and the Quartering Act which forced colonists, particularly in New York to allow British soldiers to stay within their homes or inns. This lead to disasters for American-Anglo relations such as the Boston Massacre where four Americans were killed and turned into martyrs and the Boston tea party where around 350 chests of tea was destroyed by patriotic activists. These events lead the English to retaliate with force, the leading to the huge growth of the patriotic movement among the colonists.
After examining the evidence, one has to wonder how the loosely organized American army beat the might of the "greatest army in the world." The British army had the greater experience and at first the greater number of regulars than the "poorly supplied, inexperienced army." However, the Americans still managed to win the war of independence. On the one hand, it may be seen as due to a lot of luck and bad decisions by British generals that the British were to lose the war against the Americans. For example, the attack on Lexington, the Americans escaped with most of their supplies in that area intact and also managed to inflict a fair amount of damage on the British troops as "every Middlesex village and farm" rebels sniped from behind walls, trees barns and houses. The Americans were able to inflict 250 casualties on the British before they were able to return to the protection of their fleet at Boston. This initial meeting of the two sides demonstrates an integral part of the American force: The significance of guerilla warfare which was to amount to a large proportion of skirmishes upon which the Americans often suffered defeat but in the words of Nathaneal Greene: "we fight, get beat, rise and fight again." This form of warfare was to become fairly significant for the American war effort and would be a good method of splitting British forces and preventing the kind of field warfare that the British commanders desired; where two armies would line up against each other and take and return shots, the type of warfare British soldiers were best at. Thus, the Americans 'rarely played to the British Armies' strengths.' This may be seen as lucky because in some respects it wasn't really planned this way as the Americans who came to fight quickly dispersed after many of the battles, returning home to tend to children and house chores. Another factor that caused problems for the British was the lost art of winning a war largely by the presence of a strong cavalry. The terrain of many of the battles of the war was completely unsuitable for horsemen, removing the traditional advantage that the British army had previously prided herself with. "The days when cavalry achieved victory by their efforts alone had long passed and particularly in the Americas the terrain-woods and swamps and all manner of broken ground." Washington was dismayed at the lack of regular troops to form a strong militia claiming they often "leave you at last at a critical moment." Yet this ragged band of untrained hunters and farmers was to form the main force that brought down the most powerful army in the world at that time and it was due to several more reasons.
Another point one may have to make when examining the question of why the British lost the War of Independence is that of weapons and supplies. The colonists did have access to similar weapons as those used in the British army as they were needed for the colonists own protection when they first arrived in American and were greeted by a great number of hostile locals. During the war the French traded with the Americans a great deal, supplying them with many guns and munitions. Despite the illegality of the early continental congress among the British authorities, it was still able to organize the building of a supplies factory and a limited chain with which to distribute guns and ammunition to troops. The big problem for congress was that of feeding the hungry regulars which they solved by allowing soldiers to march into farms and take livestock and grains in return for a paper claiming the victim would be reimbursed by the state at later date. This showed that although there was a great lack of organization, the Americans were still able to fumble their way through providing for its small regular army. The British on the other hand did run into problems with supplies later in the war after their shipping was continuously attacked by American privateers where in "1781 there were approximately 450 privateers roving the seas and attacking British shipping." The intervention of the French, who caused "general alarm throughout the British West Indies" worried that British and threatened her naval superiority throughout the world. Later the war between the Americans and the British became a world war as in 1779 the Spanish and the Dutch entered on the American's side. This caused dismay among the British at home and the large majority of the fleet returned to back home to protect from an invasion by combined French, Spanish and Dutch troops. The British roundly defeated this fleet, mainly comprised of French ships, on the 12 th April 1782. Although Britain once again regained control of the seas, the attacks of the American privateers and the intervention of the French fleet came at a crucial time. The British army in America was neglected as supply lines were drastically reduced during the presence of French ships in the Atlantic waters. This came at a crucial time before the siege of Yorktown upon which the British fate in America was almost definitely set.
One may also attribute this great triumph of American will to the skill and innovative methods of the American commanders and in particular George Washington. The innovation of the American commanders provided some impressive victories for the colonists. One of the most prominent examples of this is Washington's crossing of the Delaware. When he initially crossed in the autumn of 1776 he was fleeing with his tattered army which was reduced from 20,000 men to 6000 because of the harsh conditions of the winter. He decided that for the moral of the troops he needed to win a quick skirmish with the British. This led to his unconventional crossing back across the Delaware on the night of Christmas day with as many troops as he could muster including artillery and 200 horses. He defeated the Hessians taking 918 prisoners and a large amount of military equipment. This was a crucial victory for the Americans as was his return across the Delaware to defeat the British on 3 rd January 1777. Although the British won the majority of battles such as those of Lexington, Concord and Bunker Hill, she also generally suffered the heaviest losses. Another example is the British victory at Guliford courthouse: "But like so many British victories it was won at disproportionate cost," just like that at bunker hill which cost the British 1,054 men compared to around 400 colonial casualties. The lack of a decisive blow that could have been taken at several opportunities was another downfall of the British war effort. In relation to this point, the French entering the war was one of the main turning points for the American cause. When the British fleet and army failed to attack the vulnerable French when the landed at Newport on 11 th July 1780, they gave the American army a great advantage. One French infantryman said "we owed our safety to his (Clinton the British commander) irresolution alone." Earlier in the war when the French weren't directly involved militarily, they donated valuable supplies to the Americans. At one point congress was able to negotiate "200 brass cannon, arms, tents and accoutrements for 30,000 men, ammunition in proportion, and 20,000 to 30,000 brass mortars." Another important factor that contributed to British defeat was that of the weakness of Loyalist allies within the colonists themselves. Part of this weakness and lack of allies was the result of British looting and pillaging of villages and towns that they came across on their marches across America. Another factor that alienated colonial support for the British was their policy that any slave who fought on the British side would be freed. All these problems added up to cause the British great grief during the years of the war and ultimately led to the loss of command of the colonies in America.
When assessing the reasons for the British defeat, one has to concern oneself with the causes of American disquiet with British rule in the first place. One of the most important factors in the American's victory over the British was that of support for the cause of independence. This had flourished after the publication of the pamphlet "common sense" upon which the declaration of independence was based. The taxes and levied issued by the British government on the American colonists caused severe discomfort. Yet not even the taxes and law which were put upon the people were enough to force people to support the American cause. When an interview of a veteran of the war was held, one may see the fuller picture of why people decided to join and fight. When asked about the Stamp Act he replied "I never paid a penny for one of them," the Tea tax: "I never drank a drop of the stuff." When directly asked why he fought the "redcoats" he replied "we always had governed ourselves and we always meant to. They didn't mean we should." So the main reason for the support of so many Americans came from the determination of self government. Even after their defeat at Yorktown, the British had a chance of destroying or paralyzing the American army as they still remained in control of the seas and therefore had the ability of constant reinforcement. Yet they chose not to. The British were defeated by the resolve of many American people who would fight for the cause in many different ways, whether fighting in the regular army, whether you were a simple farmer, only taking part in guerilla warfare or supplying the American troops with food or shelter. It may also be said that the Americans would have been at a loss if it hadn't been for the intervention of the French and other European powers to check the power of Britain on a worldwide scale. By the end of the war, the British troops had become fairly adept to fighting in the terrain of the North American continent, yet the guerilla tactics and sharp actions of American commanders such as Washington's crossings of the Delaware meant that the British were to be caught off guard and loose crucial battles. Despite wining the majority of skirmishes, the British not only failed to deliver a decisive blow equivalent to the American victory at Yorktown, they also suffered the heaviest casualties of the war. With a sporadically attended and ragged army, Washington was able to deliver the biggest blow to the greatest empire of the times.