Many historians have considered the American Civil War to be the first 'modern' war in which both sides fighting used new weapons and technology. It was also the first war in which both sides suffered exceptionally high casualty rates, the next war with casualty rates as high as this was the First World War. It has been said that more Americans have died in the American Civil War than in all of the subsequent wars America has fought in put together. From the very beginning of the war, one may say that the war was particularly one sided as the Union in the north a much greater population than the south. Due to the division between the economies of the north and the south, with the south maintaining a plantation economy based on slavery and the north developing an industrial economy, one may claim that the north had a distinct advantage over the south in the way that its economy was far more suited to maintain the production of war materials. The generals who led the armies of each side also had a decisive part in the outcome of the war, both north and south having a number of skilled and incompetent generals. However, the reasons that each side fought the war were occasionally cause for concern as the south always had a clear aim; to protect her slave economy and her independence from the north. The north however was divided on the issue of the emancipation of slaves as a reason for fighting the war. Yet the idea of a united America gave a rather more patriotic reason for the northern soldiers fighting against the rebellious south. Lincoln cleverly played up his policy of reuniting north and south as his main war aim. The defeat of the confederacy was not due to just one or two main reasons, but due to a complex combination of events and policies. In another configuration of the dynamics of the war, the south may have won and the issue of slavery may still be a problem in America today.
The politics that led to the war coming into existence played a greatly important part in the outcome of the war. The greatest use of politics in the war was to encourage soldiers to enlist for a cause that they would consider worth fighting for. However, Lincoln's inauguration caused a great deal of irritation among the southerners as in ten southern states his name did not even appear on the ballot, therefore the vast majority of his support coming from northern states. Upon his inauguration as President, Lincoln set about to consummate the most prominent of his policies at the time, that of the reunification of the United States by reversing his predecessor's claim that the secession of the southern states was legal. Despite slavery being the central issue of the war from the start, the Union was to be the greatest policies for the initial enlistment of soldiers. It would be convenient for Lincoln to play down his anti-slavery policies for now and emphasize the reunification of the United States of America. The mysterious reason for the great amount of support and enthusiasm that northern soldiers gave for the union has not been debated much by historians. Yet Hugh Brogan argues that the Union underpinned and represented the way of life for all American people:
It was upon this notion that Lincoln stood firm and in his famous inaugural address he said 'we must not be enemies, though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds of affection, the mystic chords of memory stretching from every battle field and patriot grave." This concept of all American lives and freedom being intertwined within their great United States is important in an attempt to explain why northerners decided to fight against their fellow Americans with such zeal. As Brogan says 'Everything they valued in life seemed to be at risk with the Union.' This is the reason for so many willing volunteers appearing for the northern cause when Lincoln called for enlistment for the Federal Army after the northern defeat at Fort Sumter. Yet the cause of reunion would not be enough to base a major conflict on.
The cause that Jefferson Davis (the provisional President of the Confederacy) gave for southern hostility towards the north was 'the right of a state to secede and the right of a minority to protect itself against a tyrannous majority." However, this bold statement and other demands were not enough to conceal the similarities between the provisional constitution of the South and the constitution of the United States, (that outlawed the Atlantic slave trade but encouraged slave trading between states) or the link between Davis' political doctrines and the southern desire to preserve slavery. Not only did Davis and Lincoln share a similarity in appearance, they also shared a wish to play down the issue of slavery. Davis wished to do this because Europe looked at the American south with worried eyes; slavery was forbidden in almost all modern countries but America. Lincoln minimized his wish to destroy slavery because it seemed like there was a distinct lack of support against it in the north. Yet when the war began to take a bad turn for the north in 1862, it became necessary for Lincoln to address the issue of slavery. Northern casualties and deserters were mounting. Support for the war was faltering and several peace movements began to affect northern popular opinion. However, conveniently for Lincoln, the abolitionist movement was steadily gaining ground within congress, the Republican Party and the country. Now not only would Lincoln bring forward anti-slavery policies that would regenerate support for the war, he could allow the great numbers of freed black slaves who were attempting to enlist for the northern cause but were turned away due to racial prejudice to actually join the Federal army. With this new policy, Lincoln not only allowed former slaves to fight directly for their freedom (the most ideologically committed soldiers to grace the northern army) he also managed to solve the manpower problems he faced in late 1862 and 1863. Runaways now flooded into safety behind Federal lines and behind the argument that prevented southern slave owners from reclaiming their slaves; that slaves were now considered as property and therefore contraband of war. Besides using escaped slaves as labourers for the army and later as soldiers, the north benefited from the crippling effect that escaping slaves had upon the southern economy. This economy was dependent upon slave labour to prosper and therefore to maintain the war effort effectively.
To understand the defeat of the south fully, one has to examine a series of material factors. The difference between the northern economy and the southern economy was hugely important in explaining why the south lost the war. From the very beginning the north had the advantage of its industrial might which would outweigh the southern ability to produce weapons, clothing and food for the soldiers:
Mass production techniques adopted by northern industries meant that the northern soldiers were fed, clothed and armed far more readily than their southern counterparts. The northern soldiers may have complained that their boots were made like paper and often fell apart; the southern soldiers often didn't have any state provided boots. If the north could not meet the industrial demand of the army, then they almost always had the capital to buy from sources abroad or had the diplomatic ability to borrow money to purchase abroad. The American Civil War was a modern war and the north prepared economically prepared to win a modern war with its advances in industrialization. Not only was the north able to spend more on the war than the south, it was also able to do this spending less per capita than the south:
This table clearly shows how the northern spending power was far greater than the south's. The industrial revolution of the north was one of the most decisive factors in their victory. This was accentuated by the south's continuation of the archaic institution of slavery and their attempts to reject the industrial revolution which hindered their production of the essential materials for war. Slavery and the south's determination to preserve it had effectively prevented the south from becoming an industrialized society.
When attempting to determine why the winner of a war did win that war, an obvious area of study would be the comparative strength of each side's military, their commanders and the men who actually fought the war. However, in the case of the American Civil War, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish between the strengths of each side's military. The southern military may have been limited by the position of its economy, yet it still had the huge numbers of men signing up to fight for its army, initially comparative to the numbers signed up for the north. As a percentage of the population, the south donated more of her men to the north did than did the north giving 1,064,200, which was 13.7 per cent of the southern population. Even though a total of 2,803,300 men enlisted for the north in the four years of the war, this was only 10.7 per cent of the northern population. This shows that the north had a decisive advantage in numbers, which towards the end of the war were used to great effect.
In addition to superior numbers, the north had almost complete control of the Atlantic Ocean. The only real threats to northern dominance of the waters around North America were the first 'iron-clad' ship built by the south, called the Merrimac and the possibility that Britain would enter the war on the southern side if her supply of cotton were seriously diminished. However, the British Navy didn't threaten the Union navy as the shortage of cotton did little to harm their economy as they were also experiencing the profitable effects of the British industrial revolution. The British had probably learned their lesson from the American War of Independence. The Merrimac proved to be very successful until the north caught up with the first and last major technological advancement the south would make. The European world looked on in horror as the northern economy allowed meant that the north could build several 'iron-clads' forcing the south to scuttle the Merrimac, despite being undefeated in several naval battles. Again, despite the ingenuity and valor of the southern forces, the north's industrial might would once again prove too much for the south to overcome.
The generals who lead the men in the epic battles that took place across American farms, fields and towns were also influential in determining the outcome of the American Civil War. Initially it seemed as if the south had the stronger leadership after the embarrassing defeat of Union forces in 'Bull Run' with great generals like General Robert. E. Lee and 'Stonewall Jackson' who got his name from 'Bull Run' after a commander motioned to his worried troops: 'Look at Jackson's men, standing like a stone wall.' Lincoln's first couple of commanders were of a poor quality and had exceptionally bad luck. The infamous Union General George McClellan was exceptional at training, organizing and inspiring his troops, but notorious for his stalling due to the nave belief that the southern army was of a far greater capacity than his own. Yet Union command improved as generals such as Ulysses. S. Grant and William. T. Sherman began to gain great victories for the union cause. Grant, despite suffering heavy losses, pushed Lee back past Richmond. Grant had nearly double Lee's forces and was supplied by the rivers around and above Cold Harbor. Lee's men became cold, hungry and despondent, reflecting the feelings of the southern public by this point; becoming increasingly unhappy with the war. Sherman faced first the skillful tactician Johnson on his 'march to the sea,' who was replaced by the reckless John. B. Hood. Sherman's fierce 'total war,' destroying homesteads and land that he captured in order to prevent the south from reclaiming it if they were to counter attack led to the demoralization of the remainder of the confederate army in the east. Ultimately the union generals were of a higher quality at the end of the war than at the beginning; but the union commanders had and always had the advantage of numbers and supplies that even great southern generals like Lee and Johnson could not overcome.
Historians have explained the south's defeat in a variety of ways. These have included the South's weaker economic resources, the decline in moral as Grant and Sherman pushed their way into Southern territory, the deficient strategies employed towards the end of the war and the weakness that the South faced in its political leadership. Yet when one examines the Southern leadership, their actual army and ingenious measures such as Lee's maneuvering around first McClellan, managing to deceive him into thinking that his army was larger than McClellan when in fact it was resolutely smaller; then Grant giving him a bloody nose and a tarnishing his good name in the battle of Cold Harbor where the federals lost 7000 men. Even Sherman had to resort to destroying millions of dollars worth of property to make sure the Southern forces couldn't put it to use if the land were recaptured. It was Lincoln's strong head and sense of what the public opinion would allow him to use as policies that helped keep the people of the North in favour of the war. Most impressive on the Southern war effort was the strength of the Northern economy, which was actually able to prosper and develop feeding the war effort instead of hindering it. Even farmers, rising to meet the demand of the increased need for food, didn't suffer economic plight in the North as is common twentieth century economics during wartime. It was a combination of the many deficits of the south such as a small population, an archaic economy and a fraught and inexperienced political leadership, and the strengths of the north such as its mighty economy, large population and strong moral support for the war that worked together against the South.