Both the Aztecs and the Incas have been considered to be among the most developed of all native societies populating the vast lands of the Americas. They had a complex hierarchy with an emperor at the top, various types of men who one may compare to English lords near the top along with priests who carried out the religious sacrifices to supply what they believed their Gods needs were. Natives such as the Tupi, from Peru's neighboring country Brazil were savage by comparison; some were cannibalistic, many were simply hunter gatherers or very basic agriculturalists; a "nonsedentary" people who had no interest in producing surplus food or goods to sell on to others to make profit. The Aztecs on the other hand had a centralized trading city, Tenochtitlan and by 1519 there were about 60,000 people in the city every day. In comparison to the natives that the Portuguese met in Brazil the Aztecs and Incas (who had developed a great system of stone roads and causeways) were far more akin to European societies of the time. By the time of the arrival of the Spanish conquerors, another great civilization of South America was already in sharp decline. This civilization was known collectively as the Maya and would have created another challenge for the Spanish conquistadores of the time. These two societies would cause possibly the greatest challenge to the Spanish conquest of South America during the 16 th century. However, the European invaders were aided by several factors that would enable their small bands of adventurers to defeat huge civilizations. Only two years after Cortez's landing, the Aztec Empire crumbled and the capital was burned to the ground. Some of the factors for the fall of these great empires included dissident natives under the rule of the Aztecs and Incas; others included the huge gap in technological might between the Spanish and the Incas and Aztecs. Overall though the Spanish conquest of South America was by no means guaranteed.
Although the Aztecs and Incas had similarities in the complexities of their art, politics, culture and even religion, (the Aztec creation story is very similar to that of the Christian religion) one of the most noticeable differences between the Aztecs and Incas and the Spanish was the difference in technology. Despite the South American native's ability to construct huge temples with little technological aid obvious to archaeologists, the Spaniards brought weapons, armor and horses to Mexico and Peru that would dazzle the massive armies of the two great cultures. Both the Aztecs and the Incas had a large amount of experience in warfare. For the Aztecs, the purpose of war was "not to destroy the enemy and ransack their village but to capture the community and integrate them into the Aztec society." Prescot also gives a possible reason for the Spanish conquerors surviving their incursion into Mexico: "Indeed, the great object of war , with the Aztecs, was quite as much to gather victims for their sacrifices, as to extend their empire. Hence it was, that an enemy was never slain in battle, if there were a chance of taking him alive. To this circumstance the Spaniards repeatedly owed their preservation. " Battles were also fought to capture victims for "Ceremonial use." They also went to war to "capture victims for ceremonial use." This would cause another problem which Hernan Cortez, the Spanish Conqueror of Mexico would be able to exploit fully. The Aztecs also used obsidian in battle, a strong stone which was a far more durable material than Spanish steel. Yet their armor was a 'cotton bodice' called "ichcahuipilli" that would prevent arrows from piercing the body, yet would be no match for Spanish muskets and canon fire which, more often than not, would prevent them from getting close enough to use their obsidian weapons.
When the Spanish first arrived, the Aztecs were mesmerized by their use of horses and fierce attack dogs. The Aztecs who had never seen horses before and whose only experience with dogs was the Chihuahua were terrified by the Spanish mounted on horses who looked like "godlike beasts." They first believed that the horse and rider were one and the Spanish let them believe this for as long as possible, in a similar vain to the first English colonists in New England who wouldn't let the natives see their wounded or sick to gain a psychological advantage over their enemies. However, this advantage was not to last long and the horse proved not to be practical in Mexico due to the nature of the landscape being more mountainous and containing thick forests. One great advantage that Cortez gained over the Aztecs was that he seemed to be able to pick up native allies relatively easily along his route to Tenochtitlan. The enormous distances and rudimentary forms of communication even when compared to the Inca Empire with its complex road system built of stone, and its messengers who could cover over 400 kilometers in relay, also served to impair the Aztec Empire's defense against the invading Spanish. Another reason that Cortez found allies in some of the native populations was that they often "despised the Aztecs and wanted freedom from their rule." The Aztecs also left "no garrison behind [in these far regions], not even an Aztec governor." These were greatly needed after Cortez attempted to negotiate with Montezuma and failed severely; losing many men and much of the gold he had collected.
The Incas had similar dissidents within their empire. Compared to the Aztecs though, the Incas had a far tighter grip on the territories and the people within them. Their vast lands that covered 300,000 square kilometers were divided into eight provinces and then into four parts, each having a governor and local elites with broad responsibility. Yet some who were subjugated by the Incas, again mostly on the fringes of the Empire, "welcomed the Spaniards as deliverers from oppression." Again, the Spanish leader was able to utilize the divisions between the peoples in Peru and the native dissidents, mobilizing them against the Inca leadership. Despite the Incas having more control over their empire than the Aztecs did, Pizarro's band of 180 men came at the perfect moment. Just preceding and even during the arrival of Pizarro the Inca Empire was overcome with internal turmoil. The early death of Huayna Capac in 1525, before he could name his successor caused a civil war between his two sons, Huascar and Atahualpa who both wanted to take the throne. The war weakened the Inca Empire, leaving it vulnerable to the nave band of adventurers from Spain.
A common trait among the Spanish conquistadores was their determination to succeed. Cortez was a Hidalgo, was well educated and already had fighting experience in Italy. He became poorer after moving to Cuba but had the experience and audacity to lead the exhibition into Mexico. Pizarro on the other hand was always poor and uneducated. Many of his men were from a similar background: "most of the men.... were in their early twenties and had never had any conventional military experience or training" Yet what he and his band of "diehard adventurers," lacked in experience, they made up for in determination as they were each promised a share of the booty. Both leaders had the advantage of some knowledge of the area and people they were about to face. On the other hand, Montezuma "had no earthly idea of who, or what the Spaniards might be" Montezuma thought that Cortez was the returning god Quetzalcoatl. "The Aztecs may have been unsure, at the beginning, whether the bearded strangers with their guns and horses were people like them, or agents of a higher power." This scared him and probably caused him to delay an early attack on the Spanish, which probably would have destroyed the small band of followers. The Incas knew full well of their invaders: "The knowledge was mutual, of course, for the Spanish pillaging and murder along the coast had been angrily noted in the highlands." Yet their Civil wars had distracted them from the presence of the small group of invaders, probably Atahualpa didn't even realize how they were merely a "wedge of vast colonizing forces" coming from across the Atlantic.
Both Pizarro and Cortez had the aid of interpreters. Cortez had the famed Maliche, who had astounding linguistic abilities. She has been accused of being the traitor of Mexico because of her involvement in the struggle between Cortez and Montezuma. Both conquistadores managed to capture the Emperors of the Inca and Aztec empires. While Cortez had Montezuma had captive an epidemic spread through Tenochtitlan bringing the capital to its knees. Pizarro, after a battle where "7000 Andeans may have been killed at the loss of not a single Spaniard," captured Atahualpa. He held him for ransom whereby a room was filled twice with silver and half full with gold. During this time, Pizarro was able to gather a great deal of knowledge of internal disputes through a number of interpreters who translated the conversations between Atahualpa and messengers about the state of affairs in the country. He was also able to organize reinforcements from Panama.
Each conquest of the greatest civilizations of the Americas came at a great price for the Natives and a far less cost for the Spanish. "That each of the conquistadores of the new world was tainted with the blood and brutality of their conquest is without dispute." It has been often wondered how it was possible for so few to conquer so many. There were millions within the Aztec capital city of Tenochtitlan. It has been put down to the advanced technology of the Spanish such as the cannon and shot used by the couple of hundred Spanish at the main plaza in Cajamarca against Atahaulpa's force of around 20,000 without a single loss to the Spaniards. Another was the sheer size of the empires. At that time, without the use of faster forms of communication it would have been near impossible to keep all territories under such a huge are under control. The Incas were better than the Aztecs with the use of roads, but the Spanish used the roads against them to navigate to the central city of Peru. Even after the occupation of the empires and the murder of both Emperors, the Aztecs and the Incas were still unable to reclaim what was once theirs. Manco, the brother of Huascar took up the claim to the throne but was defeated in battle and later assassinated by fellow refugees. By now, Spanish adventurers looking for a quick fortune by Aztec and Inca gold were pouring into South America. The original Spanish conquistadores had now slotted into the hierarchy that existed in both empires. The belief by both cultures that the Spanish were only a small and insignificant force, even if they may be have been gods, may not seem so nave as they both had many thousands of men under their command, compared with only several hundred Spanish. Through many reasons, some luck, some skillful manipulation of circumstances and others the Incas and Aztecs may argue was fate, the Spanish fortune-hunters were able to succeed in the two most awe inspiring feats of conquest in history.