A good example of a portrayal of femininity comes from the short story "The Joy Luck Club," written by Amy Tan. Tan's character June is a member of the second generation of a Chinese family who immigrated to America from China during the Second World War. Her mother is a particularly prominent character in the story, despite the fact that she passed away two months before the present time the story is set in. The strength of her character is contrasted with several aspects of the short story; firstly it is contrasted with the terrible conditions of the inhabitants and refugees of Kweilin, which Tan describes as "a city of leftovers." Secondly, June's mother's strength of character can be contrasted with the lack of a convincingly powerful male presence. June's mother's authority is dominant throughout the story and there are few references to any patriarchal values; only when the text is examined between the lines can one notice a couple of stereotypes of male and female roles within society and within the household.Thirdly her strength of character is contrasted with irresolute aspects of June's own character. The time this story was written, in the year 1989, also has some significance on the views that are expressed in the book: One can draw comparisons between Tan's writing and that of Author's such as Sara Paretsky, whose detective fiction novels bear great emphasis on strong female characters. There are several other examples of female authors rising to success through their depiction of strong female characters during this time period and one may even claim that Amy Tan is an author who may fall into this category.
An important focal point for the development of June's mother's femininity and indeed, June's identity, is the origin of the origin of the Joy Luck Club. The story begins in the first person with June telling us that her mother has been dead for two months and that her father has asked her to "be the fourth corner at the Joy Luck Club." This begins an instant curiosity in the reader's mind as to what the Joy Luck Club actually - as it is also the title of the story. Compared with "The Monkey House," the words are used to end the story instead of begin it. We soon learn that the Joy Luck Club was the creation of June's mother during her awful experience of Kweilin during the invasion of China by the Japanese in the Second World War. Normally in China, the people regard Kweilin as a place of great natural beauty. June's mother describes this in Chinese:
June's mother describes Kweilin very poetically, as if it is a fairly tale land, describing the hills as "like giant fried fish heads trying to jump out of a vat of oil." At first this may seem to the English or American reader as a rather strange image to use to describe hills. However, Chinese mothers, like their English or American counterparts, often prepare meals for the family more frequently when compared to the father or male figure in the family. One explanation of this peculiar image is: generally, dishes containing fried fish are more common among Chinese families than among English. Yet Tan is to contrast the beauty of Kweilin with the harsh conditions that Suyuan is to experience there. As a mother of twins she has to live amongst the "thousands of people" pouring into the city each day. People from all different backgrounds come into the city and Suyuan expresses strong views about them through her story to June. Her strength of character is shown by her attempts to separate herself and her children off from the nasty reality of life in Kweilin during the invasion of the Japanese. At first she tries to ignore the "screaming sounds" coming from the streets where peasants are being beaten by American air force officers for "lying in his way on the sidewalk" Yet after a while, her feminine resolve forces her to realize that "I needed something to do to help me move." With her first husband (not June's father) being away in Chungking due to his duties as an officer in the Kuomintang, Suyuan was left to fend for herself and her children. This was when she came up with the idea for the Joy Luck Club:
Suyuan organized similar minded women, "all young like me, with wishful faces" into this small group that managed to enjoy a feast compared with the trash that others were eating off the street. "We didn't notice that the dumplings were stuffed mostly with stringy squash and that the oranges were spotted with wormy holes," Tan has her exclaim. Suyuan's strength of will allows this all to take place. Suyuan's Joy Luck Club provides a stark contrast to the conditions of life in Kweilin and the perfect escape for her and her friends. This feminine strength also allows her to leave Kweilin on her own with her two children during the Japanese invasion of the city. Yet she is not physically strong enough to carry all her belongings and soon beings to drop things in her desperation to escape. June is shocked by the fact that she didn't have the strength continue carrying everything, including the babies: "What happened to the babies?" June exclaims in a stunned and horrified tone. One may argue that she didn't have the strength of character to care for the life of her children when she left them there on her escape from Kweilin. Yet some would argue that she does have a different strength, interested in her own personal survival, realizing that neither she nor her children would have survived if she had continued carrying them.
Another place to look for the portrayal of femininity is that of Tan's character June. June's life runs almost in complete contrast to that of her mothers. She doesn't have the resolve her mother does as she "started half a degree in biology, then half a degree in art, and then finishing neither." Compared to her mother, who not only escaped the terrors of Kweilin in the Second World War, then managed to move her life over to San-Francisco, she also managed to set up another Joy Luck club in America with similar Chinese immigrants that she meets in church. "All of the mothers came to America to escape the horrors of war. They hoped for the prosperity and ease that living in the United States would afford them." Tan seems to show June as a weaker character than her mother. She manages to do this despite her June's mother's name is only mentioned once in the story when the remaining members of the Joy Luck club are saying their short remembrances to her upon June's first experience of a club meeting. Again a reader may read this as being disrespectful to Suyuan; on a closer reading of the text, linking the traditions of the club such as to "forget past wrongs done" and telling "stories about good times in the past and good times to come." To focus of Suyuan's death would be against the traditions of the Joy Luck club and what Suyuan set it up for. While Suyuan is a dominant female character in Tan's story, June is a slightly more reserved and more Americanized female. It is difficult to tell why June has a slightly more stereotypically female characteristics compared with her mother. It may because June has been more assimilated by American society than her mother or other reasons such as her mother's more dominating personality that cause her to be a slightly more subdued character. Yet they June is described as having "the same girlish laugh and sideways look," as her mother. Yet they share few similarities. Jane's mother is by far the more passionate female character as Tan has Suyuan exclaim at one point "You don't even know little percent of me! How can you be me?" Suyuan's confidence in her own abilities and the lack of those of her own daughter's seems to be a more male attribute than that of a mother. The relationship between June and her mother seems to be autobiographical of Tan's own life as when Tan and her mother moved to Switzerland after her father and brother had both died of brain tumors (similar to what Suyuan dies of in The Joy Luck Club). " By this time mother and daughter were in constant conflict. Mother and daughter did not speak for six months and Tan further defied her mother by abandoning the pre-med course her mother had urged to pursue the study of English and linguistics." June explains that "My mother and I never really understood one another."
The conflicting personalities of June and her mother starkly contrast to the huge vacuum that the lack of a dominant male presence presents in the story. June's father is pushed to the background in the story and there is mention of only one other man by name. He appears in the beginning introducing June to her place on the mah jong table, appearing later in the story at the first meeting of the Joy Luck club with June as a member. Although one may see this concentration on female characters as a slightly feminist novel, there are still sexual stereotypes presents, particularly regarding domestic roles. For example, Suyuan has to pack the bag for both her and her husband when the leave for San Francisco; however, all she packs are her silk dresses leaving out his cotton shirts and wool pants. This shows that she is more worried about bringing her own luxury items than the bare essentials for her husband, claiming "there was no time to pack anything else." Another example of domestic stereotyping in the story is that of the end of the June's first Joy Luck club meetings. The men leave the table "almost as quickly as they started," whereas the women are left to clear the table and probably to wash up afterwards. The women also prepared the meal in the first place. Tan doesn't so much as challenge sexual stereotypes and patriarchy as other prominent women authors do; she just sets it aside, neglecting the inclusion of men in her story because it wouldn't have been beneficial for her to focus on them. Unlike Sara Paretski, who's hard hitting detective V.I. Warshawski is just as potent as any other famous male private eyes and usually far more dominant than any of Paretski's male characters, Tan's main female characters do not shake off the stereotypical roles that women have filled for the past several hundred years in American society. This is even despite their moving away from communist China to begin a new life in the land of opportunity. Tan shares and expresses the opinion that in this land of opportunity that their daughters have to work hard at making an opportunity into a better life than that of their parents or grandparents: "If she doesn't try, she can lose her chance forever." This is the powerful feeling of most immigrant mothers driving their children to excel in their studies and pursuits.
There are only a few significant female characters that Amy Tan uses in her short story. All of their significance is slightly offset by the presence of Suyuan. Suyuan's friend The only woman in the story who comes close to being her equal is Auntie Lin. She is her best friend, yet also "arch enemies" at the same time. They compared their children when Suyuan was alive and this was one of the only places where Suyuan's character is slightly reduced. She is slightly wounded by the lack of direction of her daughter which she decided was due to June having too much of the natural element of water. The fact that Tan's character Suyuan manages to set up a club that celebrated Joy during the horrors that she experienced during her time in Kweilin. The fact that she was able to begin a new Joy Luck club in San Francisco and allow it to adapt to include buying stock market shares and continues telling good luck stories in her name is a testament to her character. The problems that June has with her "broken English" and her Chinese traditions are made to seem petty compared to the life that June lives being thrown out of her flat and not finishing two university degrees. This is all despite June is the first person narrator in the story. By the end June is asked by her "aunties" to go and see her step - sisters in China and tell them about "her kindness, her smartness, and her dutiful nature to family." This, in a way is continuing her mother's great feminine personality as she is looked upon to develop the personality her mother' Joy Luck club.