In many aspects it is Marquez's ability to weave fantasy into reality that makes him and his novel 'One Hundred Years of Solitude' stand out so vividly in the minds of critics and readers from all over the world. His talent for seamlessly intertwining the magical events that take place in the fictional town of Macondo with realistic events, forces the reader to scrutinize everything he says in order to ascertain whether it contains any supernatural elements. However, as prominent as these magical events may be, one has to ask the question as to whether there is any meaning to them; or if there is any point for them to be included, other than as artistic devices. On the one hand, Marquez may use them to allude to certain types of characters such as the strong, outgoing Jose Arcadios or the solitary and studious Aurelianos. On the other hand, he may use the magical elements in his novel to accentuate a certain theme he is exploring. There are many events in the novel that cause debates over whether magic is present or not. The reason for confusions such as this is that Marquez plays with the reader's expectations of time, reality and history. Interestingly one can claim that this may be seen as an example of magic; as Marquez has utilized the basic style of modernist literature and cultivated it to the extent that he even places himself in the novel as an active character. His novel has since been placed in the magical realism category and this itself is a 'narrative style which consistently blurs the traditional realist distinction between fantasy and reality." Marquez clearly uses magic to mark a point at certain times in the novel. By simply being completely extraordinary in nature, the magic he uses marks events he describes even more vividly than the simple narrative of more traditional novel.
One of the most vivid, shocking and important magical images in the novel is that of the 'pig's tail.' It is mentioned early on in the novel by Ursula, the wife of the founder of the town, Jose Arcadio Buendia. This image of a Buendia child being born with a pig's tail seems to haunt Ursula all the way through the novel, despite the fact that it is only mentioned about four or five times. It appears early in the novel when Ursula expresses her worries about having a child with a pig's tail when she marries her cousin Jose Arcadio Buendia (Macondo's founder.) She is worried about this because when her aunt married to an uncle of Jose Arcadio Buendia's they had a son who was born with the tail of a pig: 'for he had been born and had grown up with a cartilaginous tail in the shape of s corkscrew and with a small tuft of hair on the tip." This image is particularly exceptional as it refers directly to another of the book's main themes; the theme of incest. Marquez makes this image particularly repulsive by the comparison of the tail to a corkscrew and the inclusion of hair on it. This clearly shows that incest is a taboo as it is in reality. In many societies, there still exists myths that claim that a child from sex between family members can cause physical defects in that child. An example is said to be that the child may be born with six toes or fingers. Marquez takes this one step further, making this claim seem rather ridiculous. However, this image appears again later in the novel when Ursula is 'convinced that the wild behavior of her children was something as fearful as a pig's tail." Clearly Ursula does believe in the misfortunes of having a child through incest. This magical image, very alike to the punishment of a naughty child in a fairytale is used by Marquez possibly to show how ingrained the myth of incest is in the minds of the population of Latin America and even the rest of the world. It may also be used to punish the characters for their defiance of social traditions as the very last Buendia to be born through sex between brother and sister, Aureliano and Amarata Ursula, is also the one to be born with the tail of a pig. Due to its proximity to the end of the novel, this image suggests that the Buendia line is doomed and that it always has been.
Another interesting magical image in the text is that of the butterflies that appear when Mauricio Babilonia is present. It is difficult to decipher what this image means, but it has been suggested that it represents the love between Renata Remedios and Mauricio Babilonia. These butterflies are only present during one chapter which demonstrates that this supernatural idea is not as important as that of the pig's tail. However, they do serve a significant purpose and are a beautiful example of how creative Marquez's writing can be:
In these sentences, the appearance of the butterflies leads Meme to experience a sudden feeling of passion. This is because by this point she has already linked the emergence of 'yellow butterflies' to the coming of Babilonia whom by that time she has fallen passionately in love with. Marquez's use of the butterflies serves as a link between the couple, and a demonstration of their love. We are also given no indication that the butterflies were present around Babilonia before meeting Meme. When Meme's mother, Fernanda breaks up their relationship by sending Meme away; 'The yellow butterflies would invade the house at dusk,' causing Fernanda great dismay. This may be interpreted as Fernanda's passive punishment from Meme for ending their relationship as she says nothing after the incident. Also supporting the argument that the butterflies represent the love between the couple is the fact that the butterflies 'did not give him (Babilonia) a moment's peace,' when he was lying on his back paralyzed for the rest of his life. Clearly the butterflies represent the burden of his love for Meme that he carries until his death.
One magical event that seems to have little meaning is the ascension of 'Remedios the beauty' to the skies. Up until this point she was a very mysterious character, one of great beauty that called to men like a siren. The more she deviated from fashions and normal womanly behavior, the more she became attractive to men. For example, when she shaved her hair off, 'did away with fashion,' and 'passed over conventions,' 'the more provocative she became to men.' One has to ask oneself if this is indeed magical. The answer lies with the opinion of the vast majority of men that would probably conclude that a women shaving her hair off and wearing unusual clothing wouldn't appear as attractive as a similar woman complying with fashion. This is debatable. However, one thing that is clearly out of the ordinary is the effect her beauty has on men when she is present:
The first thing that is striking is that Marques says that the foreigners sitting around the table 'suffered.' This shows that her presence has an extraordinary effect on men, unlike that of any other woman. From this point on, it is clear that she is no ordinary human being. Remedios also 'possessed the powers of death' over men and even other creatures. Marquez has her 'killing scorpions as she came out of her dense and prolonged sleep.' She also causes the death of three men and plunged another into desperation. One cannot blame her for these deaths because of her innocence. One climbed up on the roof of the Buendia's house to peak at her naked in the bathroom. She warned him to: 'Be careful, you'll fall.' He ignored her warnings and infatuated by her beauty he moved two more tiles and fell to his death. His dead body contained 'the suffocating odor' of Remedios the Beauty. The characters in Macondo now realize how remarkably different she is from other people. Another man who attacks her later is struck down and killed by a horse. The simple and beautiful passage where Remedios is described as 'waving goodbye in the midst of the flapping sheets that rose up with her,' may merely just be a striking device to appeal to ease the reader's feelings after depressing them with the rising deaths within the Buendia family. However, Remedios' up to this point has been characterized as unearthly. This event of her rising towards the heavens seems to be an appropriate way for her to leave the novel; instead of expiring like all the other more earthly Buendia's.
'One Hundred Years of Solitude' also contains some very humorous passages where Marquez makes jokes to relieve tension, or to mock some of the more ridiculous characters. Within one passage, he mixes humor with magic to ridicule a Texan, Mr. Brown. Mr. Brown joins one of Aureliano Segundo and Petra Cotes's wild Champaign parties and gets drunk forcing his dogs to dance to the music:
Marquez probably uses this image of fierce dancing dogs and the mumbling Texan to ridicule eccentric American foreigners who travel to South America in search of a profitable investment. The Americans that appear in Macondo are a source of embarrassment and discomfort for the town's people. Mr. Brown arrives in his own silver plated carriage that is decorated distastefully 'with seats of episcopal velvet, and a roof of blue glass." This leads the reader to believe that Mr. Brown is a character to be mocked. In reality Mr. Brown sets up a banana plantation that exploits the workers in the area meaning that the villagers have to take his character seriously. This magical image of his fierce dancing dogs either works as a relief from the tension that is created by the fight between Fernanda and Aureliano in the previous couple of pages, or it reminds us that although Mr. Brown may be a ridiculous character, he is also one with sinister motives who later causes the massacre of all of his workers.
It has been said that 'Modernism was built on a sense of lost community and civilization." This is very true for the community of Macondo, as they are cut off from the world for many years before a clear path out of the town is found. Yet by including magical events, people and places, Marquez develops his town and community to be expressive of a number of themes that he uses in the novel. The theme of incest is clearly represented and distinguished by the image of a child being born a deformity in the shape of a pig's tail. Marquez clearly emphasizes the love between Babilonia and Meme with the emphatic image of the yellow butterflies. He includes a supernatural character whose life is filled with solitude due to her incompatibility with the rest of society and who leaves earth in a 'flurry of sheets.' He also uses hand in conjunction with humor not only to mock, but to warn the reader of a dangerous character in the form of Mr. Brown. By using magic he effectively draws the reader's attention to important events, themes and characters in the book. In addition, it is a fresh device that aids Marquez in his narrative, adding curiosity that causes the reader to reflect more on the significance of events and of the meaning of the novel as a whole.