Esteban Trueba can be considered to be one of the main characters in 'The House of the Spirits'. This is because he is one of the few dominant male characters that are written about in the novel. Esteban is obsessive, violent, and materialistic. He devotes his life to his business and political careers, determined first to become rich and then to become powerful. His granddaughter, Alba suggests he is tied up in the fate of the whole family and events as a whole, also suggesting that all the characters are linked in a 'terrible chain." Therefore his place in the novel is decisive in determining the chain of events that take place. Additionally, Trueba has an important job in the narration of the novel as Allende gives him short passages of first person narration that no other character is allowed. Even Alba who writes out Clara's notes and tells the rest of the story from her perspective talks about herself in the third person. In Esteban's first person passages he expresses his feelings on a certain event, or excuses himself from his outbursts of rage. To ascertain whether Esteban is indispensable, one has to examine his function in the novel and compare it to the function of other characters. Of course there are other characters that are just as important as Esteban, if not more so. However he creates the world that the majority of the characters are to live in; the house in the city, the estate in
Country, he even effects the politics of the time they are living in as he becomes a senator. However, as the women begin to take over the house in the city, the estate in the country is left to a minder and new political regimes begin to take hold in Chile, Esteban is pushed in to the background. Clara, Alba and even to a certain extent Blanca play a greater role in the novel than Esteban as they provide the main narrative and they in themselves are strong central characters. Yet even in the background Esteban provides a contrast between the new political ideology, Marxism and the old values he holds within the politics of conservatism.
It is at the end of the novel when one of the most pressing but also more practical reasons that Esteban Trueba is an indispensable character. Alba suggests that the whole sequence of events that has been described in the novel can be explained by the idea of fate.
After spending time in prison being tortured and then spending time writing about the events of the past Alba comes to the conclusion that everything was predetermined. Alba feels that events have come full circle because as her grandfather raped Esteban Garcia's grandmother (her torturer) and then Esteban Garcia raped her. She believes that 'perhaps forty years from now, my grandson will knock Garcia's granddaughter down among the rushes.' With the idea that a fate had been laid down before her birth, one may see that it was in fact Esteban in his wild youth, raping many young peasant girls that began the tragic chain of events that Alba is talking about. Without Esteban raping Garcia's grandmother, Garcia would not have even been born to rape Alba. Consequently, if Esteban Trueba had not been a part of the novel, events could have turned out very differently. Alba also suggests that writing the story of the Trueba family was like 'assembling a jigsaw puzzle in which each piece had a specific place.' This shows that in Alba's eyes, Esteban's place in the novel is undisputed as everything fits into place perfectly when she is constructing her story.
Esteban plays another particularly striking role in the novel in his first person passages that appear incorporated into the chapter. Allende clearly highlights these passages by setting them aside with a space at the beginning and end of them. It is clear that this does have an impact on the novel as Esteban is the only character whom we directly see the thoughts of. In this passage Esteban describes his feelings on the news of the death of Rosa the Beautiful, his bride to be:
This kind of description of a character's feelings is rarely seen elsewhere in the novel meaning that the reader may find it possible to relate to Esteban more than other characters. It is important to note that Allende gives Esteban the most intimate narrative role in the book. These passages appear in nearly every chapter; so they appear regularly do contribute to the reader understanding of his character. He fills in the gaps that are present in both Clara's notebooks and Alba's narrations. For example, he tells us about when he attacked Pedro Tercero Garcia:
This is one of his longer passages and without passages like this we would not know what actually happened at certain points in the novel. It also shows how much of an influence he has on the plot. He chops off the fingers of Pedro Garcia which, using Alba's theory of the chain of events started before her birth; one can link the loss of Alba's fingers as a punishment to Esteban for chopping off the fingers of Pedro. Another issue that is brought to light in this passage is that of the sinister nature of Esteban Garcia because he was the one who gave away Pedro's location and who picked up his sliced off fingers 'holding them like a bouquet of bloody asparagus." This gives Esteban an important part in the novel, filling in the gaps that the other narrators have in their narratives. However, one could say that the roles of Clara's notebooks, Blanca's letters and Alba's actual narration are far more important than Esteban's first person narrative. He only contributes a small amount to the narrative as a whole as Allende places the emphasis on the females in the family who provide the bulk of the narrative. Alba's narration using Clara's notebooks begins and ends the novel with the words 'Barrabas came to us by sea.' Yet it is clear that not only did Esteban play a small but decisive part in the narrative, he also caused it to be written down. In a clever play on narrative technique Allende has Alba say 'It was my grandfather who had the idea that we should write this story." Not only was it his idea, it is clear that by using the pronoun we Allende has made it seem as if both of them played a part in the writing of their tale. It was also crucial that 'his memory 'remained intact down to the last second of his ninety years.' This may seem as if he is aiding the narrative; however, if you read into it more, one may see that the gaps that he does fill in may be altered to make his own character look better wherever possible. Therefore one may see that his character is possibly far more influential on the narrative than one may first believe.
Yet directly one may see Esteban's importance in relation to the other characters in the novel such as Clara who appears to float around the house for much of the time is a crucial part to the novel. It seems as though both Esteban and Clara are at odds with each other, but both need to be present for it to work in the way that their family does. Crucially, after the death of Rosa, Esteban rebuilds the estate in the country which had fallen into disrepair without the overseeing eyes of a 'patron'. It was his long hard work at the estate that brought it back into a respectable state, going to bed 'thoroughly exhausted and woke at dawn.' It was this that gained him the fortune that he had wanted when working in the mines in order to gain riches for his marriage to Rosa. After becoming dissatisfied with life he went into the city in order to see his dying mother and to take a wife in order to have a son to continue his lineage. However his chauvinistic authority is completely overridden by Clara's subtle authority. When she is pregnant with her first child, Esteban expresses his wish for a son. Clara merely predicts (correctly) that it will be a girl 'and her name will be Blanca,' 'And it was so." Instead of having a son and continuing his heritage, Clara has a daughter and continues her heritage of women with names related to light. It is in this way that Esteban is sidelined and reduced in importance as a character.
He may have been the one to refresh life for the peasants in the country, but it was due to Rosa's death that he went there and to his wife Clara that he built a large house in the city and merely used the country as a holiday spot. One critic even goes so far as to say that the women in his life, Clara, Blanca and Alba are the main protagonists in the novel, not including Esteban. Allende chooses to name her chapters and interestingly no name of a chapter is devoted to Esteban Trueba. There is one devoted to both of the loves in his life, 'Clara the Clairvoyant' and 'Rosa the Beautiful.' This may give an indication that Allende intended to place less focus on Trueba as his name does not appear in bold as a heading on any of the chapters. Even his two sons who appear to be far more minor characters than Trueba get a chapter devoted to them. As do the Three Marias who appear as more minor characters but whom the estate in the country is named after. Esteban is also not part of magic in the novel. Magic is an important part of the novel and of Latin American society as a whole. The only magic that does affect him is where he begins to see Clara returning to him as a ghost late in his life and his shrinking where 'he was the only one to notice that he was shrinking.' Metaphorically one may see him as not only shrinking physically but also shrinking in size as a character. He appears less and less in the later stages of the novel, despite gaining the title of senator and the growth of his businesses. This is probably due to the development of politics and ultimately his wealth puts him in conflict with rise of Marxism in his country. Towards the end of the novel we hear little of his large estate in the country. However, one may still claim he is still effective even towards the end, as a character as he provides a stark contrast to the new politics and the old conservative way of life.
Esteban's temper makes him a prominent character as he is forever banging his cane on the furniture, lashing out at people, and having fits of rage where he foams at the mouth. He smashed his wife's teeth in and chopped Pedro Garcia's fingers off. These acts of violence bring a very austere quality to the novel which would be lacking without. He is the main male chauvinist in the novel and it would probably be hard to write a novel quite like the one that Allende chose to write without a male character of his stature. Also, as Alba suggests, Esteban began the chain of events that resulted in the culmination of the novel as a whole. He may not contribute to the narration in large quantities but what he does contribute is important to the progression of the plot. In addition, he actually created the world in which events take place. Yet his place in this world is reduced by Clara, Blanca and events outside his control like the rise of Marxism or the military coup that brings the 'modest general' into power. However, during Esteban's reduced state he still remains a functional character, despite the fact that he has shrunk so much that his clothes don't fit him anymore. He still provides a contrast between the new world and the old world. When it comes to the end of the novel it is him who suggests that Alba should write things down as a story and this is what Allende presents as the finished work. It is made to seem as though without Esteban there would be no novel written down, just some notebooks that were saved from a fire by some helpful spirits.