A good pair of leaders to compare is Rafael Carrera and Dr Francia. Carrera was the most powerful of the Central American leaders and Dr Francia may be said to be the one who controlled his country with the most rigor. After the demise of Spanish authority in South America, several problems arose for the Countries that were left in the aftermath of independence. One problem for these countries was the discontented lower classes and indigenous populations, who were becoming annoyed at their way of living in Guatemala, and who were fighting amongst themselves in Paraguay. Another was the rise of Creole elites, who challenged the continuing presence of conservative. Independence meant that these land owning elites were now legitimized in ruling without the interference of the Spanish. One may question the problems that a government would face by having to rule with the liberalistic policies of the revolution, with the conservative institutions left by the Spanish, yet a dictator such as Carrera or Francia could rule how they wanted to. They would have to choose how best to deal with economic, political and social issues that may cause instability in their Country.
One of the first areas to look at is endurance of the regimes of both men. This is a indication as to how well the people felt their leaders were running their country. However, one may argue that because the forms of government employed by Francia and Carrera were by nature dictatorial, the people would be forced to accept the government and the policies that were put in place. Francia's regime outlasted him for three decades and could possibly have been longer if it had not been for the tragic events that one of Francia's successors forced Paraguay into; war with Argentina, Brazil and the liberal Colorado party of Uruguay that has subsequently been called 'the tragedy of Paraguay' by several critics. Carrera himself was named "president for life" after the success of his first three year term agreed by Guatemala's congress. In Paraguay, however, the congress that Dr Francia had summoned, met in 1814. First of all it 'voted him absolute power for three years' and then, two years later, he was 'appointed dictator for life." He also shaped his public image as El Supremo, many of his supporters believing him to be a majestic godly figure before he had even come to power. This intense image from supporters was not shared by Carrera, which highlights an important distinction between the two countries; Guatemala was officially ruled by someone who in theory could be voted out of power and that Paraguay let herself be ruled by someone who could not be removed by power by a simple vote. In practice, however, this may be inaccurate, as even though Carrera was given the title of president, one may claim that he did have all the powers of a dictator such as Dr Francia. Both leaders lived their positions through until their death which were surprisingly, a similar length. Dr Francia's was twenty six years long from 1814 to 1840, and Carrera's was twenty five years long from 1840 to 1865. The fact that both regimes survived for a quarter of a century each suggests that they were in essence stable regimes that dealt with matters either contributing to the preservation of previous stability or dealt with issues that caused problems for stability.
In the case of Guatemala from 1840 onwards, Raphael Carrera would have to deal with problems that caused potential instability in the country and begin to change the institutions that were being set up or altered by the liberal regime that preceded him. On the other hand, in Paraguay, Dr Francia went about preserving the social and political situation that existed before and during his rise to power. Even from the invasion of South America by the conquistadores in the 16 th century, Paraguay was fairly isolated, Edwin Williamson describes it as a 'remote backwater, sparsely settled by Spaniards and yielding no commodities of great value to the wider imperial economy." So in effect, the majority of Paraguay's population was indigenous; the few Spanish that had penetrated the country's borders were most likely to have mixed into families of the Indian populations that inhabited the vast and frequently desolate (but often fertile) lands of Paraguay. When Dr Francia came to power, he realized the problems that Paraguay faced following the revolution of South American countries against Spanish rule. He also understood the people of Paraguay as being content with their menial life, appreciating that they would not rebel if they lacked the leadership of a few Creole who may be able to lead them into rebellion. This was very important because if he could eliminate the Creole elite then rebellion would be less likely. He was also aware that a large proportion of the population was illiterate and lacked the political maturity to understand or make the best use of the liberalism.
The issue of public order was one that he approached with the most energy; Paraguay was riddled with armed bands of looters and individual ruffians who made life difficult for peaceful citizens. Dr Francia has been described as 'cold calculating and vindictive' with regards to his actions on dealing with outlaws. 'Francia reorganized the government, removed dozens of incompetent officers and punished outlaws with unaccustomed vigor." One may say that Francia's efforts to reduce lawlessness in Paraguay had great effect, filling prisons with outlaws. In other ways, people have pointed out that his system of espionage and his network of spies was rather more sinister in nature. This network of secret police was used by Francia to root out potential enemies and opponents to his regime, but maybe it went too far. The Robertson's, British adventurers commented that 'Distrust and terror pervaded every habitation' the nearest relations and dearest friends looked as if afraid of each other.' This tense atmosphere, where arrests of the seemingly innocent took place on a regular basis, and where higher classes were sternly oppressed, is analogous to the denunciations of the Jews in Nazi Germany. So, one may claim that although Francia brought order to the society, he did it through stifling the people's political rights, and freedom of speech. People have commented that because of his oppressive policing, Francia worried for his life never sleeping the in the same bed two nights in a row. Many hated him because he had thrown them out of office or locked up their relatives. When a Creole plot to take his life was discovered, he used it as an excuse to liquefy the Creole elite in his country. This earned him the name of one of the most cruel and ruthless caudillios in South America. Even in the Supreme Court, El Supremo had the last word. To make it easier for Francia to rule, Paraguay was split into twenty departments, presided over by commanders who were in turn supported by police agents. Anything resembling disorder would not go unnoticed in this tight system.
Similarly one of Carrera's most important decisions was the restoration of the office of gobernator; a local governor, who was given a huge variety of tasks and responsibilities within his area. This was a skillful deployment of communal authority that would mean a great amount of power was placed in local hands. Responsibilities included managing work and workers, managing communal planting 'in case of hunger, disease of other such crisis,' looking after education, the elderly and the sick and collecting taxes and other profits made from the community. Although this was an easy way to govern, the position was rife with corruption. Many gobernadors, despite laws preventing vice in the position, did take much prosperity out of their community for themselves that displeased many local towns folk and other officials. For Guatemala, the greatest potential for civil unrest came from the conflicts between classes. One of the biggest problems came not between the elites and indigenous populations but from the conflict between the Indian K'iches and the Ladinos. In one instance he had to personally step into resolve a conflict between these two groups to prevent a small civil war. Since the vast majority of Carrera's support came from the indigenous population of Guatemala, it was in his best interests to please this group of Guatemalan society. 'Throughout his long tenure, Carrera would skillfully take advantage of his repute as a defender of indigenous interests to consolidate his power." Carrera himself was also born a 'disadvantaged ladino in Guatemalan society.' He had also married an Indian woman and had adapted himself to a more indigenous way of life. He showed his commitment to the lower classes by sidelining the elites and returning Guatemala to what liberal thinkers saw as 'archaic catholic institutions.'
Other things he did for the people of Guatemala was restore the corporate protections that were in place before the liberals came into power after the South American revolution. Although liberal taxes were suspended, Carrera didn't return all the land that was taken away from the indigenous populations but did 'personally intervene to grant land to aggrieved Indians. At first sight this may seem like he was neglecting the needs of the Indian communities, but on the other hand, if he confiscated all the land that the white elites and the creoles had acquired, he may have had a large popular rebellion on his hands, considering that in 1810 around 40% of Guatemala's population was white. He also 'promoted private property, industry, and technological improvement, albeit at a much slower pace than the liberals had previously attempted.' This would mean that the lives of the people would be improved by Carrera's regime, by allowing people more control over their land, giving them the means to provide more comforts of life with improved industry and technology, easing more menial tasks of life. However, the fact that he slowed down this process after defeating the liberals showed that in some areas he did stunt growth. The areas that Carrera did improve may not have been the best for the people in the long run but they were the most popular with the people, often because they were the exact opposite of what the unpopular liberals had done. As John Charles Chasteen points out, Carrera was 'Morazan's (the liberal leader of Guatemala before Carrera) social and ideological opposite." Carrera had an easy time imposing policies that he knew were going to be popular, many being a reversal of liberal institutions such as 'corporate protection afforded to the Catholic Church...legalized divorce and civil marriage and the removal of education from church control." Carrera effectively heightened the status of the indigenous population and the lower classes which annoyed liberals and some of his conservative supporters he had picked up from the restoration of some of the policies in place before the arrival of the liberals. This may potentially have been a cause for concern.
The biggest concern to Francia was threats from neighbouring countries and foreign powers. However, after his experiences traveling from Asuncin to Buenos Aires, a British adventurer, Robertson, tried to persuade Francia that domestic unrest should be Francia's focal concern. Interestingly Francia chose to completely isolate Paraguay from the outside world. Some critics claim that this prevented Paraguay from gaining income from external trade and attracted verbal and physical assaults from outsiders. Yet this was perhaps the best option as Paraguay was positioned between the might of Argentina and Brazil, both with territorial interests in the smaller country. Another reason this wasn't so damaging to Paraguay is that only a small proportion of the country's total income came from trade (set at around '1,125,000 pesos annually') with other countries and any revenue that was lost, Francia made up with heavy fines, confiscated church revenues and heavy taxes. At the same time he diversified agriculture and industry, essentially making Paraguay a country of peace, order and prosperity, no thanks to European trade. He also reformed the army, turning it into a small, but efficient force that could suppress rebellion and revolts and also repel incursions by Brazil and Argentina. Guatemala's army mainly consisted of the original band of Indians that Carrera first used to gain power, a motley band of men which had limited training was insufficiently small to face a significant foe in a proper battle. Yet an army wasn't as important in Guatemala than in Paraguay, due to the absence of hostile neighbouring countries.
Both leaders faced rebellion, Carrera in 1850 when angered liberals took over and forced him into exile. Francia faced an attempt on his life by Creole elites but this was dealt with quickly and effectively, but one may say rather violently. Francia may have seemed like a despotic leader, not interested in education, obsessed with his own security and leaving the people no power or foreign trade links; but in essence he was a leader who cared for his people. He began his dictatorship a poor man, taking only one third of the annual salary voted by the subservient congress during it, and ended it with earnings and estate valued at 35,000 pesos. He had a long working day and dealt with every aspect of Paraguayan life. He did cripple international trade, and made Paraguay vulnerable to foreign intervention, but as Carrera did, he made more land arable, improved industry and agriculture and ruled the people through a more local level. He is still 'today reserved as one of the great national heroes' Carrera ruled with the indigenous population in mind. An attempt to show that wealth acquired during his reign, distanced him from his peasant concerns and made him 'a tool of conservative forces,' is unfounded. Moreover, many Conservatives saw him as a 'cannibal, thirsty for blood' Carrera left the local economies alone and didn't force plantations or any other harmful industries on his people. He didn't remove foreign trade but he didn't encourage it. Yet one may point out that although life was improved for the people and that stability was achieved in both countries, both suffered greatly afterwards. Paraguay was destroyed by a war with Brazil and Argentina due to her continued isolationism from Francia's time and Carrera ended the alliance of the United Provinces, weakening Guatemala's position within Central America.