To answer this question it is useful to study a confined area of the Caribbean. Furthermore it is more practical to study a time period of three or four decades. Therefore to demonstrate that sugar brought about a social revolution in addition to an agricultural revolution, this essay will focus on the islands of Jamaica and Barbados from around the years 1630 to 1690. This is because by 1700, both Jamaica and Barbados became significant producers of sugar. Moreover, the English had found few traces of precious metals in the parts of America which they initially colonized. This meant that the islands (or inland settlements) that they did set up tended to be far more focused around agricultural activities. By the mid 1600s England was in possession of both Jamaica and Barbados. As a result, sugar would become the defining feature of the islands; shaping their future and acting as a precedent for the development of other Caribbean islands in later years.
In order to show that society and agriculture in the Caribbean experienced change after the introduction of sugar into its economy, it is useful to make a brief summary of the condition of both areas before continuing.
Jamaica was originally a Spanish colony before the English seized it in 1655 and gained formal possession in 1670 through the Treaty of Madrid. Barbados was initially settled in 1627 by the English so remained a British colony until its independence. Spain didn't truly realize the potential economic wealth that could be generated from producing and harvesting the sugar cane in large quantities until after silver and gold mines began to dry up in South America. By then the Spanish had lost some of their territories in the Caribbean to other powers vying for control in the area. In Cuba, sugar became the predominant force in the economy only by in the late 16 th century. The early forms of agriculture in these areas consisted of a number of small planters growing either crops to feed themselves along with a little surplus to sell on to others, a intermediate amount of people with a few indentured servants or slaves who grew their own crops in addition to other more economically productive crops such as tobacco, coffee and sugar, and a minority of larger plantation owners who owned larger numbers of indentured servants and/or slaves who grew large amounts of sugar, coffee or tobacco. When the Brazilian Civil War caused a crisis in sugar production in Brazil, Dutch traders and Barbadian planters saw a chance to open up the sugar market in the Caribbean. By the 1630s there was also a small crisis in tobacco and cotton production within some of the islands of the Caribbean and mainland America which created an even greater opportunity for the success of sugar.
As sugar became more profitable for planters in the Caribbean, the demand for labour greatly increased. Before the introduction of large numbers of Africans into the Caribbean, a large amount of work on plantations was carried out by indentured servants. However, as V.T Harlow states "The money which procured a white man's service for ten years could buy a negro for life." As the prices of slaves decreased, planters found it more profitable to buy slaves rather than employ indentured servants who would have a limited term of service at the end of which they would leave to take land valuable to the cultivation of sugar cane. It was also becoming increasingly expensive to supply indentured servants to the Caribbean. The latter half of the 17 th century experienced great demographic changes which would result in a revolution in both the agriculture and society of the Caribbean.
As the number of enslaved Africans soared in the Caribbean, the number of white settlers fell. "The enterprising social class left voluntarily to the escape hunger and lower standard of living that was brought about by the lack of work." As small farmers and artisans left to other parts of the Caribbean and the American mainland they were replaced by great numbers of imported slaves. This would have great effects for the social structure that was in place. Before there was the elite class who were defined economically by owning large farms and plantations, the majority of whom would own at least fifteen slaves or servants. Next in rank came the merchants, officials and professionals who were just below the planters. Next came the "poor whites" who were described pejoratively in Barbados as "red legs." The "poor whites" consisted of servants, servicemen such as policemen and militiamen and small independent farmers. In 1645 there were 11,200 landed proprietors in Barbados; by 1667 there were only 745. The independent whites working the land for themselves were now being displaced by large farms with large numbers of enslaved Africans. This would mean that the general trend of the population shifted towards a more concentrated, elite white population and a vastly increasing number of enslaved peoples. Instead of three basic social divisions existing in a largely white population, from the 1650s onwards three different basic social divisions could be made: "free white persons, free non-white persons, and slaves."
The basic three divisions within the white population still existed during the increasing demand for sugar in the mid 1600s, yet the elite class was becoming concentrated and the lowest white class was becoming smaller. As the number of whites decreased, they needed to impose laws to restrict the movement and activities of slaves in order to control them. One such law stipulated that any slave leaving their plantation for any period of time had to be issued with a slip of paper from their master allowing them to do so. Others issued concerning punishments for disobedient and rebellious slaves were released throughout the 1600s. Due to English attitudes, the white planters did not allow slaves to practise religion the Caribbean. The Christian faith was a great social rallying point for slaves in the southern States in North America and black communities built tight societies around their churches which were segregated from the white population. They were controlled by militia who were made up of the poorer whites and in turn were controlled by the plantation owners. One report of Cuban commissioners even claimed that: "A country's agriculture is not the result of caprice or prejudice. It rests on the society which produced it, and develops according to the institutions which govern that society." This shows that society (or control of the masses by the elites) is not merely loosely interlinked with agriculture, but that it was produced as a result of it.
However, despite the black population rising and developing within the confines of slavery, distinctions could be made that at least approximated social distinctions. At the bottom of the black "social class" there were the basic labourers who worked long back breaking days on the sugar plantations. As you moved up to the next division one found the domestic servants who were often allowed to sleep within the houses of their master. On the top level of the black social class were the scouts, watchmen and rangers. Outside the enslaved population there existed a free coloured population, particularly in the urban areas. They could be considered to have been on the same social level as the lowest white populations. However, they were discriminated against by the more powerful white population, being barred from certain professions and given a lower wage. They also had to compete with slaves who would work zealously in an attempt to buy their freedom from their master. The majority of the free colours were women in urban areas. These women were the most likely to be able to start a family. There were also cases of complex inter-racial relations in the Caribbean. Free black women and those in domestic service often had relationships with their masters. It was the vast disparity between the number of whites and the number of Africans that made complex social relationships like this possible in a world that abhorred the thought of it.
It may be suggested that society did not experience a revolution, but merely shifted in weight towards the elite during the intensification of the Caribbean's sugar production and her slave intake. Planters have been used to having large numbers of indentured servants whom may well have been considered as slaves by the way they were treated. Slaves were often worth more to their masters (35 a head per slave compared to 10-12 for an indentured servant) than indentured servants as servants would only serve a term of several years, a slave would serve a term of his whole life. One may say that the slave merely replaced the indentured servant in society leaving little change but an increase in the black population.
However, this is an oversimplification of the problem and not only was there a social revolution; there was also an agricultural revolution. The numbers of the incoming Africans were just too great to deny that any social revolution could not take place. All of these people had to be controlled and the land they worked on had to be taken from other sources (smaller farms.) This resulted in the condensing of white society in the Caribbean and the development of black society; developed far enough that 1649, 1675 and 1692 saw large scale slave revolts brewing. Plantation owners controlled the society but slaves were becoming organized enough to rebel against their authority.
Agriculture saw great changes during the rise of sugar. Large sugar plantations often took in the lands of smaller farmers who were forced out of the islands by economic hardship. These smaller farmers would often grow several different crops and different farmers grew different crops. This did mean that the Caribbean economy had no real great driving force behind it, but it was far more agriculturally diverse and self-sufficient than the sugar grinding machine it became during the mid to late 1600s. Imports rose greatly as sugar cane replaced other more basic foodstuffs such as wheat. As agriculture centred on sugar and became far less varied, society became far more diverse and complex as a whole new race of people were introduced in to the Caribbean. This would have a profound and efficacious effect on the future years of the Caribbean.