The number of people affected by dementia does not end with the patients. Current research is increasingly showing that these numbers are severe underestimates, as dementia affects almost all people a patient interacts with (Gilliard, 2001). In fact, the sheer amount of literature on caregiver well-being aptly demonstrates the profound psychological effects on the caregiver as well. The psychological effects on both patients and caregivers appear to be causal and heavily overlap, that is to say, the psychological effects on the patient tend also to have corresponding psychological effects on the caregiver and vice versa. Therefore, I propose that in order to extend our understanding of dementia, we should work towards a more integrated focus, exploring the links between the effects on the patient and the carer. This essay will discuss the psychological effects of dementia on the patient and the caregiver and the impact of these effects on one another, using Alzheimer's disease (AD) as my primary example.
A decrease in short-term memory and psychomotor skills is a common facet of normal ageing. Problems however tend to arise when there is a dramatic loss in cognitive function which interferes with a persons everyday life and it is this that constitutes as dementia (Seligman, 2001). The psychological effects of dementia vary from person to person, however Riesberg's stage model (1983, as cited in Stokes and Holden, 1990) is generally accepted and describes its broad characteristics.
Adapted from Stokes & Holden (1990).
The progression of AD begins with an initial amnesic stage, which continues on into attentional deficits followed by impairments in language and then visuospatial functions (Hodges and Patterson, 1995), each of these cognitive effects are discussed below.
The most common psychological effect on the patient is deterioration in memory, with each subtype differentially impaired. In dementia, memory impairment is manifested in difficulties with learning new information and/or recalling previously learned information and in the case of AD, tends to deteriorate as the disease progresses. AD patients have difficulty in adding new information to their LTM and any new information that is stored is generally lost rapidly. Consequently, episodic memory is also impaired (Morris & McKieran, 1994, as cited in Maciejewski, 2001), as AD affects the medial temporal structures, including the hippocampus, which is crucial in encoding new memories (Squires, 1992, as cited in Perry & Hodges, 1999). In addition, episodic memory impairment appears to underlie the temporal and spatial disorientation experienced by many dementia patients and hence is almost always tested in cases of dementia (Morris, 1999).
Prospective memory loss (i.e. remembering to do something in the future) can also be seen early in dementia (Craik, 1986, as cited in Maylor et al., 2002). An inability to remember to do things at the right time, not only results in a range of potentially serious and disruptive consequences for the patient, but can also cause frustration and stress in the caregiver (Smithal. 2000). Even though, a study into AD patients has shown that retrospective memory tasks are more impaired than prospective memory tasks (Maylor et al, 2002), a patient's prospective memory failures are found to be more frustrating to caregivers (although no more prevalent) than are their retrospective memory failures (Smithal. 2000). Due to this greater impact on the lives of the caregivers, prospective memory failures are alsomore likely to be reported as early indicants of the disease.
It has been proposed that 'pure' memory impairment may not actually be the cause of unregistered new information and may in fact a result of difficulties in attention and concentration (Maciejewski, 2001), which are also extremely prominent in dementia. Attentional dysfunction in cases of dementia however, does not mean a loss of alertness. In fact, research has shown that attentional impairment in dementia only occurs when more than one stimulus or mental activity is being manipulated and sequenced during cognitive activity (Morris, 1999). Although AD patients have been found to perform perfectly well on vigilance tasks (Lines et al, 1991, as cited in Morris, 1999), there are other areas of attentional dysfunction. Extremely significant impairments of visual attentional shift were found by Parasuramanal. (1992). This experiment manipulated the idea that if a visual arrow points towards an area in which a letter will subsequently be displayed, a persons response times when identifying the letter is facilitated and hence quicker. Consequently, if the arrow points away from the area, the response time is inhibited. It was found that AD patients had a normal facilitation effect but presented a much larger inhibitory effect with 'away arrows' as they were less able to disengage their attention from the incorrect area and redirect it. This is supported by similar findings reported by Okenal. (1994, as cited in Hodges & Paterson, 1995) and also evidence showing that shifting attention is controlled by the posterior parietal regions of the brain (La Berge, 1990, as cited in Morris, 1999), as those who show an attentional shift deficit also show reduced metabolism in this area (Parasuraman et al., 1992). In addition, dichotic listening tasks conducted on AD patients also show difficulty in switching attention (Grady at al., 1989, as cited in Morris, 1999). It is important to bear in mind that although the tasks used in these studies require attentional capacities, they often rely heavily on working memory and even low-level visuospatial abilities, hence dementia may be a product of these areas and not an attentional deficit.
Attentional deficits have detrimental effects upon the daily living of not just the patient but also upon the caregiver. In terms of the patient, these deficits cause an inability to concentrate, and results in patients being easily distracted and perplexed by tasks that were previously easily performed (Perry and Hodges, 1999). Their interaction with the environment is subsequently severely hindered, as attention interacts with many aspects of sensory input, perception and cognition, which consequently can result in an insufficient interpretation of the environment. Being able to shift attention is extremely important in day-to-day social interactions. An inability to fixate individual faces in a crowd or to tune into a particular conversation would not only be frustrating but would also induce a feeling of loneliness and even isolation. It is possible that this could be a factor leading to the high rates of depression associated with dementia, as those who live alone are also significantly more prone to depression (Cohen et al., 1993). Loneliness and depression may also cause the patient to become distant thus causing difficulties for the caregiver, especially if their relationship was once close.
Subtle changes in language and semantics, including word-finding difficulties, naming deficits and impaired comprehension, are present in early stages of AD, whereas receptive problems are more likely later on in life (Maciejewski, 2001). Language in AD patients has been described as only really lacking comprehension and content (Goodglass and Kaplan, 1983 as cited in Morris, 1999), demonstrated by a gross impairment in learning abstract simple concepts and in tests of verbal fluency (Morris, 1999) and resulting also in the reduction of semantic memory. It has also been found that AD patients are more unlikely to comprehend the meaning of words relating to particular objects if they have difficulty in naming them (Morris, 1999), once more suggesting a semantic memory impairment, rather than merely retrieval difficulties. The implications of a loss of semantic memory reach further than just the loss of a meaning of words; it also more importantly affects the patients's social interactions and the rules that govern them. For example, an AD patient will have difficulty in describing the most crucial aspects of a series of events in an everyday situation; hence, it may be particularly difficult for the caregiver to interact with the patient.
Non-cognitive features of dementia are believed to contribute more to caregiver strain than any of the aforementioned cognitive deficits (Donaldson, Tarner & Burns, 1998, as cited in Woods, 1999). These features include, depression, anxiety, hallucinations, delusions and challenging behaviour. In a comprehensive study of AD patients, Burns et al (1990, as cited in Woods, 1999) illustrated a number of cases of hallucinations and delusions. 30% of patients had manifestation syndromes (e.g. mistaking mirror images for real people) and 10% showed visual and auditory hallucinations, which increased to 80% in cases of Lewy body dementia. 24% of elderly patients with dementia also suffer from depression (Lyketsos et al, 2001). Despite suggestions that depression actually contributes to the cognitive deficits (Benedict, Dobraski & Goldstein, 1999), patients with the most symptoms of depression are also those who are the most accurate when it comes to describing their cognitive and physical limitations, hence suggesting that depression is in fact a consequence of their symptoms (Seltzer, Vasterling and Buswell, 1995, as cited in Seligman et al., 2001). These non-cognitive features have profound effects on the caregiver, for example challenging behaviours are found to be important contributors to caregiver depression, with the impact of these behaviours increasing over time (Schultz and Williamson, 1991).
The psychological effect on caregivers is believed to be greater with dementia patients than for patients of any other illness (Levesque, Ducharme & Lachance, 1999), which I believe this is primarily due to the stress caused by the nature of dementia. In particular, the patient is rarely able to give adequate feedback and although the patient will require constant care and attention, they may not even recognise their caregiver. Understandably, this could be extremely stressful for the caregiver, particularly if the patient were a spouse or a parent, as the situation would be deeply upsetting and could be the cause of major psychological effects. In fact, caring for a dementia patient results in a higher risk of depression, suicide and other health related problems (Morrissey et al, 1990). Both the emotional and physical strain placed upon the caregiver and the patient is not helped by the fact that many caregivers are reluctant to ask for help, possibly due to feeling guilty about being an inadequate caregiver (Goudie, 1990).
Due to the immense pressure the caregiver is under, elder abuse is not uncommon; in fact physical abuse by trusted caregivers is among the most common type of violent offense experienced by older adults (Payne, 2002). Poor premorbid relationships in particular, have been found to be a key factor in predicting abuse and challenging behaviors are also heavily correlated with abuse (Compton et al, 1997). The psychological strain placed upon the carer could not only lead to violence but also to neglect (Pritchard, 1995). However, neglect may purely be down to an unawareness of appropriate ways to provide care (Johnson, 1995, as cited in Payne, 2002), hence highlighting the need for training for caregivers. For example, anger is very common in caregivers, hence it is imperative to identify and treat these negative thoughts in order prevent harm to the patient. Devries and Gallagher-Thompson (1993, as cited in Maciejewski, 2001) proposed a group treatment using a cognitive approach that challenges and replaces the negative thoughts with more adaptive cognitions accompanied by relaxation and assertion training strategies.
The wear and tear model of care giving proposes that caregiver's physical and psychological stamina are depleted over time (Townsend et al, 1989 as cited in Schultz and Williamson, 1991). In terms of the depression experienced by the caregiver, challenging behaviour exhibited by the patient and the lack of perceived social support were the most likely causes (Schultz and Williamson, 1991). However, it should be noted that not all blame should be placed on the patient regarding the psychological effects on the caregiver. The social role of the caregiver is also a key determinant of the level of adverse effects (Morrissey et al, 1990). It was found that large numbers of friends and relatives alleviated homemakers' depression, but made depression worse for paid workers. Morrisseyal. (1990) proposed that work colleagues might have inadvertently added stress by offering social interaction but not practical help. Gender may also be important in whether caregivers seek out help and support. Men tend to see caring as an occupational role (Fisher, 1994), presumably as this re-establishes their role as a provider. This view is beneficial as it suggests that men would be more willing to ask for help or 'time-off' in the same way they would at work. However, women are more likely to adopt a carer role as they are socialised to care (Fisher, 1994). This would help women in the transition into the role of caregiver, though it may also mean they are more reluctant to ask for help, believing they should be able to cope alone. In fact, Schultz and Williamson (1991) found that male caregivers got more depressed as time went on, consistent with the wear and tear hypothesises, whereas depression in females tended to remain at a constant level, presumably because the are less likely to admit to an increase in depression as this would once again suggest they are unable to cope. However, it is important to bear in mind that in this study prior levels of depression were unknown in the sample, hence we cannot reliably conclude that depression was attributable to care giving.
The actual relationship between the caregiver and the patient can also impose psychological effects on both parties. Tension often arises when there is a discrepancy between what the patient feels they need and what the caregiver wants (e.g. if they need a break). The nature of this can have a big effect on the caregiver's ability to cope, for example a close and intimate relationship can induce feelings of depression in the caregiver as well as an inability to communicate (Morris et al, 1988). This is further supported by the fact that if the relationship is close then the strain placed upon the caregiver is greater (Goudie, 1990)
It is important to bear on mind that what has been presented here is by no means a definitive list of the psychological effects present and is essentially a discussion of some of the most common aspects of dementia. In reviewing the literature, it appears that in the same way that the patient's illness develops and worsens with time, the same is paralleled in the caregiver's experience of the disease. In fact, there is often evidence for the characteristics of the patient being mirrored by the caregiver (Gilliard, 2001). Despite the alternative causes for the effects on caregivers offered in this essay (e.g. social role and gender), research has found that there are no significant differences in coping strategies between caregivers of dementia patients and of other illnesses (LeVesque, Ducharme and Lachance, 1999). Therefore it must be the nature of dementia, more specifically, its effects on the patient, that causes the increase in stress experienced by caregivers. However, there is very little current research on how these psychological effects on the patient directly effect the caregiver's well being. This is particularly important as not only do the effects on the patient have profound effects on the caregiver but as we have seen, these negative effects can also promote the caregiver to harm the patient, hence creating a vicious cycle. Therefore, we need further research to focus on how the psychological effects of dementia on the patient affect the caregiver's mental health, resulting in an integrative approach that would help improve the welfare of both the patient and the caregiver.