When I first heard that a British citizen does not have anything like an Identity Card (ID) I thought it was a joke. Much to my bewilderment, I then found out it was true - at least for the time being. Having spent most of my life in Germany, it didn't even come to my mind that there could still be countries that haven't thought of giving out those handy little cards to their citizens. Well, maybe apart from countries like the Philippines. On the continent, although you're not going to be stopped by the police every day, it is taken for granted that the police have the right to check identity.
The way this debate is lead and the strong opposition against their introduction seems even stranger for the foreign observer. When the German government announced the rollout of new biometric IDs and passports there was merely some moaning about the price of over 130. The Brits are known to be conservative to the extent that they have a weakness for overhauled traditions (you've still got that monarchy thing going on, right?), but then again, that doesn't mean they don't have a point. So what is all the fuss about?
The occasion for proposing compulsory IDs for everyone was, as for many other measures, the terrorist threat that has become apparent in terrorist attacks on American and European soil. In their aftermath, governments all over the world seem to have engaged in a race to come out with more comprehensive "security packages", many of which are directly or indirectly impairing civil liberties. It is clear that convinced liberals will fundamentally oppose them, just like people who do not cherish liberty that much will embrace them for their promise of additional safety. Both viewpoints shall be examined here and although civil liberties have to be protected, it will become clear why identity cards are accordable with them.
Opponents describe the recent bill proposed by the Labour government as a "well-intentioned but misguided attempt to counter terrorism", thus rebuting what the government claims to be the motivation behind the initiative. There is arguably no evidence for the effectiveness of IDs in tackling terrorism. A striking example may be the 9/11 attackers who were in possession of legal documents. Although some plastic cards may not be the ultimate solution to crime and terror, the negative implications of them are greatly exaggerated.
It is accepted there already exist some means of identification like passports or driving licences, so the real novelty would be that you would be required to produce some ID if the police stops you in the street. This won't, however, lead to a dramatic increase in street controls, nor to unjustified detainments or discrimination of certain "suspect" groups, as some suggest. This kind of harassment may have been one of the reasons wartime IDs were abolished in 1953, but experience in other countries shows that such fears are not justified. One of the benefits that comes to mind would be curbing underage drinking and smoking in public. And it will also be less tedious to open a bank account. Here's an excerpt from the Oxford Brooke's University's website on how to open a bank account for international students:
I can tell from my own experience that it is even more difficult if you're not a student.
Forging or stealing is not a problem, either, since the state-of-the-art protection mechanisms included in modern IDs render this infeasible. Although this has been a concern in the past, the possibility of storing biometric information on RFID chips is a great leap compared to the outdated smartcards used in France, for example. If anyone is worried about security, please stop using those credit cards - and paper money as well.
On the other hand, there is no conclusive answer to the question whether the billion pound investment is really worth it. In addition to the actual "hardware" that has to be shipped, it is a considerable administrative burden to maintain databases. In order to access all the features of the new IDs, police has to be equipped with suitable devices, so consequential costs are likely to be higher than the initial investment.
Fighting illegal immigration would be greatly simplified by IDs. Basically, the police or border guards could send everyone away who doesn't have a valid ID. So the debate comes down to whether or not we think immigration is a good thing. It is not uncommon that the most affluent countries take the strictest precautions to deter poor asylum seekers from getting a piece of the cake - while Pakistan was ready to accept 2 million Afghan refugees. Either way, being able to demand a form of ID at any time can be used for tighter controls and if this is what the government wants, it is a way to draw a line to immigration. But the UK should remember that it needs some immigrants and should avoid alienating them like the U.S. did with their visa regulations and border controls.
A somewhat more convincing train of thought is the idea that by undermining our European tradition of freedom and democracy through state control we actually "let the terrorists win", i.e. if we decide to give up some of our freedom for the sake of temporary security, we will finally lose both. The ideal of the "freeborn Englishman" seems at risk. Though this certainly applies to things like freedom of speech, it is hard to see how carrying a card that states who you are can constitute such a threat.
This would only be the case if government agencies started to collect and centralise more and more of the electronically stored data about individuals. Chris Lawrence-Pietroni ([1]) makes a point in saying that the right to privacy is not recognised in the UK - as opposed to countries like Germany who practice a more responsible handling of personal data. The buzzwords here are the existence of a legitimate aim and the principle of proportionality. A survey quoted in The Register a year ago found that only 10% of the population are very confident that the government would be able to hold personal information securely. Perhaps this should be considered as a more rewarding field of activity for the Blair government should they win a third term.
This leads to the conclusion that this is just the beginning. Much more has to be done to ameliorate problems like poverty (which leads to immigration) and the rift between the Western and the Islamic world as well as domestic crime.
To sum up, identity cards would not inconvenience the public, but they wouldn't have the promised impact on crime and terrorism, either. But they will arrive, sooner or later (on 10 February 2005 the UK ID Cards Bill passed its third reading in the House of Commons), and the hype will fade into practical irrelevance.