First of all, the question "Should digital property be given the same protections as physical property?" is a bit misleading. It suggests that we are at a point at which we have to decide this issue. In fact, it has already been decided by governments all over the world. Digital property enjoys a variable amount of protection. This introduction touches on the existing legal frameworks and the way in which they are put into practice. The EU and the US are about to pass or have recently passed corresponding reformed laws.
As the German computer magazine PC Welt reported on its website on 23.11.2004, the Senate of the United States of America has passed a new copyright law that is considered stricter than the old one. For example, videotaping films in cinemas is threatened with up to three years imprisonment. In spite of their poor quality, these so-called "cams" have become popular because of their small size. If they like the film, people may also download a near-DVD quality version (DVD-rip) that become available on file-sharing platforms soon after the DVD version is released. On the other hand, some passages were not implemented, especially on ad blockers and content blockers, although the film industry would have liked to see them passed.
The discrepancy between the stances of consumerism groups and industry also becomes evident in the debate over a copyright reform in Germany. The news magazine Der Spiegel reports in its online edition on 27.11.2004 that the bill proposed by minister of justice Brigitte Zypries does in fact abolish the right to make private copies, a move harshly critisized by consumer protection.
The EU is working on a directive to allow software patents that is facing opposition from the EuroLinux Alliance (). Their petition has been signed by almost 375,000 people (on 21.12.2004) among these are personalities like Linus Torvalds, Michael Widenius and Rasmus Lerdorf, who have all gained a reputation in the Open Source community and beyond. They claim that software patents are dangerous for the entire economy, especially for the European one.
The following screenshot of  taken on 21.12.2004 demonstrates that the list of signatures is ever-growing ...
A striking example of how patents can prove counter-productive and lead to absurd situations is given by 3D-patents. The online edition of the German science and culture magazine Telepolis published a report about Tektronix, a company now producing high-performance oscilloscopes. In former times, Tektronix used to be active in the printer and display sector. Consequently, they applied for a number of related patents, for instance for projection of foreshortened objects on two-dimensional displays, dithering, fast caching and online games. Tektronix never charged license fees, but was protected against other's claims. Since the patents were due to expire, they were sold to Texan solicitors McKool Smith, who had other plans. Although the techniques may have been in use for more than twenty years now and are at the basis of all current games and many applications, McKool Smith sued virtually all big names in the gaming industry: Electronic Arts, Activision, Lucas Arts, Take Two and Ubi Soft to name but the biggest.
Acacia Research, who got rich by buying patents on streaming media, seems to be the role model for this scheme. The American judiciary has to decide in favour of the right holders' morally questionable practice, despite the fact that, as the article points out, laws which were initially intended to protect the inventor serve to finance combines and lawyers.
The media is full of other stories where the laws as they are produce less than satisfactory results. It is arguable whether they ever will, but I will show why the stance of the free software fraction is the winning one when compared to proprietary software and how digital data differs from houses, cars or the works of Goethe.
Literature based on US, EU, European national laws and international law widely recognises that the ultimate purpose of granting ownership is to provide an incentive for economic activity and to foster progress and innovation (Dykes 1995, Davis 2001, Wikipedia 2004, Gaita and Christie 2004, Dutfield and Suthersanen 2004). Opinions diverge on how this can be best achieved. There is unanimous support for physical property (except perhaps from hard-core communists) and intellectual property rights seem quite perfected as well after more than 500 years of development.
There is a lack of consensus, however, when the law has to respond to new developments like electronic circuits (hardware), new forms of information (documents and media stored digitally, software) and new channels of distribution (internet file sharing). Recent reform attempts in the US, EU and Germany show that the law is in flux and a new compromise in accordance with the maxim stated before has to be found.
The two opposing schools of thought are represented by the Open Source or Free Software movement of independent programmers and users on the one hand and a movement led by corporations promoting maximum protection and prosecution.
I support the view that "classical" laws should not and cannot be applied to all forms of digital data and that a distinction between digital property and intellectual property should be maintained.