Socrates offers, at first glance, two contrasting accounts of pleasure in the Protagoras and the Gorgias. In the Protagoras, Socrates seems to advocate pleasure as the supreme good, perplexing the sophist with the notion that hedonism can be seriously considered as an acceptable way of life. Conversely, in the Gorgias, he passionately argues against Callicles' proposal that the ultimate good is achieved by one who creates and satisfies large and intense appetites. This controversy appears to make Socrates out to be a holder of opposing ideologies, offering contradictory accounts of the proper way one should live his life.
The reasons for dispute are easy to determine. At Gorgias 495a-d Callicles equates pleasure with the good. At Protagoras 351e Socrates makes the very same claim. However, in the Gorgias at 500d, Socrates refutes Callicles' position, the very one he seemed to agree with in the Protagoras. Moreover, at Protagoras 351c Socrates argues that the good life is one of pleasure while Protagoras suggests that some pleasures are good and others bad; but at Gorgias 492c, 494c, 494e and 497a, Callicles maintains his position that the meaning of life is one of unrestrained pleasure, a notion that Socrates disagrees with and attempts to refute. Additionally, at Protagoras 354a-d Socrates claims that pleasure is the goal that makes good things worthy of pursuits, but at Gorgias 506c-d Socrates asserts that pleasure is to be pursued for the sake of good, not vice versa. On the basis of these statements, it is a straightforward matter to conclude that the Gorgias is an attack on hedonism and to see the Protagoras as a defence of it.
In order to compare the two opinions of Socrates regarding his views on pleasure, it is necessary to examine in detail his descriptions and arguments in both the Protagoras and Gorgias. We will first analyse the portion of the Protagoras where Socrates offers his opinion. After being asked by Socrates if it is good to live pleasurably, Protagoras approves and states a further condition: that if the pleasures one experiences while alive are honourable (351c). Protagoras asserts that there exists pleasures which are harmful, pains which are good and some that are neither evil nor good. Here Protagoras is implicitly saying that even if we are able to live according to our wishes, we may not be living a good life, for we may wish for pleasures that are evil. Therefore, he is asserting that experiencing pleasure is not a sufficient condition for an act to be good. To sum up Protagoras' position at this point is to say that a man who devotes his life to worthwhile pursuits lives well.
Socrates investigates this claim by contrasting his proposition that something which is pleasant (hdu) is qua pleasant, good (agathon), with the more generally held view that some pleasures are bad (kaka) just as some pains are good. Here Socrates wishes to determine if the pleasure itself, devoid of anything else, is good, and that if this is so, then it would cast doubt on the widely accepted view that pleasure and pain are interchangeable among good and evil. Here it is worthwhile to note that the word Socrates uses to denote pleasure (hdu), has wider connotations than simply the gratification of material wants. As noted by B.A.F. Hubbard and E.S. Karnofsky, a Greek would describe as hdu anything which he would be glad to have. As a consequence, this would not only include sensory pleasures but also success in the political arena and victory at the Olympic games. In contemporary English we might equate such achievements as admirable but probably not apply the word 'pleasant' to them. Thus, it would be more appropriate to apply the term 'choice-worthiness' to describe the 'pleasures' being discussed in the Protagoras. Describing this component as such allows for the interpretation that long-term successes that require sacrifice would still be considered 'pleasures' in the usage of the Protagoras. It now seems that here Socrates' is deviating from the superficial interpretation we previously attributed to him. He is not in fact subscribing to the view that we must fulfil each and every appetite as it presents itself to us. Now he appears to be granting that what a good life entails is the striving for pleasures that are desirable and worthwhile, and forsaking the short-term pleasures that cause one to deviate from acquiring them.
At 352c Socrates shifts the focus of the dialogue to the subject of knowledge (epistm). He asserts that knowledge is not something that is subjected to the caprices of emotion and sensations, but is instead a noble quality that governs a person. Through knowledge, a man can distinguish good from evil and nothing will sway him from the path knowledge and wisdom prescribes. Protagoras agrees with Socrates that these two qualities are the most powerful elements in human life. Socrates uses this concurrence to show that upon extrapolation, knowledge will lead to the most pleasurable life. He offers the thesis of the common folk that he will now direct his reasoning against. The public believes that there are many who are acquainted with the good and wish to pursue a life of righteousness but act otherwise because they are overcome by the temptations of distracting emotions and sensations. This is a crucial point for Socrates to refute because by doing so, he will identify knowledge with the good. Socrates commences his argument by stating that the pleasures the common man designate as evil are evil only due to the painful consequences they will lead to, and not because of the pleasure itself. As Socrates asserts in 353d, 'they are not evil on account of the actual momentary pleasure which they produce, but on account of their consequences, disease and the rest'. Socrates then applies the same reasoning towards pains that are thought to be good. Such suffering as medical treatment and physical training are not good because they hurt, but excellent because of the pleasurable benefits they grant in the future. Thus, when considered in the long term sense, pain greater than the momentary pleasures that leads to it is evil and pleasures which are derived from smaller pains are the authentic good. Here Socrates is very much taking up a consequentialist interpretation of acts of pain and pleasure. By equating pleasure with the good, he renders unfeasible the statement that when one intends to do good but instead does evil because he is overcome by pleasure upon substituting the word good for pleasure.
Socrates proposes an analogy between the quantification of pleasure and the science of measurement. In 356c-e he says that the bane of the art measurement is trust in appearances. He draws a parallel between this and short-sightedness in evaluating long term pleasures and pains. By doing so, he compares the study of right and wrong as the quantification of pleasures that follows the principles of the science of measurement. This can be best illustrated in 356b where he uses the metaphor of scales to weigh the separate sum totals of pleasure and pain in order to discern the best course of action.
We now come to the Gorgias, where Callicles throws down the challenge to Socrates to refute the proposition that pleasure is the chief end of man. In Gorgias 491d to 492e, Callicles asserts that the satisfaction of one's appetite is the purpose of life. On a superficial reading of the Protagoras, Socrates seems to be contradicting himself by arguing against this proposition. However, as we have seen, Socrates' defence of pleasure in the Protagoras differs from his assault on the assertion of Callicles for reasons we shall see.
Callicles advocates an unyielding version of hedonism. He states that a man should encourage his appetites to be as strong as possible instead of repressing them and fulfil them without hesitation or moderation. He equates this unrestrained pursuit of pleasure as the good and maintains that even if a man continually itches and by scratching he will be happy, he will live a good life by continually scratching. Socrates proceeds to demolish Callicles' position by contrasting good and evil with pleasure and pain. In 495c3 to 497d8 Socrates states that pleasure and pain can be felt in the same thing at the same time at the same place whereas good and evil cannot be. From 497d8 to 499b3 he leads Callicles to alter his original proposition, this time asserting that there are different degrees of pleasure and pain. Socrates accomplishes this by showing that since good and bad men feel pleasure and pain to similar extent, they are both equally good and bad. In all of these accounts, it is important to note that pleasure and pain are treated as temporary events, and is usually related to bodily sensations. There is no discussion of pursuits which involve long-term commitment to a certain pleasure that requires painstaking work such as exercise or academia. Chris Emlyn-Jones has noted that Socrates' arguments against Callicles are not entirely valid but the untenability of Callicles' position is independent of the strength of Socrates' logic. Callicles' incoherence lies in his advocacy of courage and intelligent in conjunction with his dream of unlimited satisfaction.
After forcing Callicles to acquiesce to his point of view regarding the difference of bodily pleasure and good, Socrates proposes his own view that only pleasures that lead towards good ends should be pursued. At 507a Socrates asserts that a disciplined soul is good; a statement perfectly in tune with his views in the Protagoras. A disciplined soul, by definition, exercises restraint so that it may achieve its goals which are valued above momentary and fleeting pleasures. Furthermore, in 507e, he disparages the licentious man, saying that he is incapable of social life. He loses community life and friendship, whose bonds hold heaven and earth and gods and men.
We can see that Socrates' views on pleasure in the Protagoras and Gorgias are perfectly compatible. The key is the definition of pleasure in the context of each of the dialogues. In the Protagoras pleasure is defined in terms of excellence and in the Gorgias discipline and restraint are indispensable for a good life. Both theories overlap one another. One cannot achieve excellence without dedication and often painstaking training. Thus, Socrates' consistency is vindicated.