Hobbes' claim that it is possible that something that thinks should be something corporeal doesn't carry itself with the same gravitas as Descartes' arguments for the dualism between mind and body. Hobbes' assertion does not imply that the notion of thinking being dependent on a corporeal object should be granted the same amount of acceptance by the common sense of Descartes' day. Instead, Hobbes merely puts forward the possibility that Descartes' arguments in the Second Meditation do not render the position self-contradictory.
We will now examine Descartes' arguments in the Second Meditation to see if they hold up to scrutiny. In the third paragraph (J. Cottingham 1996: p.16), while using the method of doubt, Descartes wonders if his existence was bound up with his body and senses. He states that after he has convinced himself that there is absolutely nothing in the world, he still exists because he has convinced himself of something, and in order to convince, one must exist. Although he did not explicitly state it, Descartes has subtly suggested that his existence does not depend on corporeal entities.
Moving on, Descartes reiterates his determination to prohibit superfluous properties from being assigned to his identity. He maintains that he will subtract anything capable of being weakened from his impression of his identity so that 'what is left at the end may be exactly and only what is certain and unshakable' (p.17). This is Descartes' mission statement for the next portion of the Second Meditation, and how firmly he abides by it will be tested, to determine if there are logical gaps which Hobbes might exploit.
Descartes starts to ponder on what he may describe himself to be. He disregards abstract notions such as man or rational animal in favour of more certain first-person experiences. He assumes that he had all the features and mechanical structure of limbs which can be seen in a corpse, which he calls the body. Next, quite questionably, he attributes the properties of nourishment, locomotion, sense perception and thinking to the soul, which he imagined to be something tenuous, like ether, which permeated his body. He goes on to affirm once more, at the end of the paragraph, that 'the power of self-movement, like the power of sensation or of thought, was quite foreign to the nature of the body' (p.17). If these were Descartes' premises, it would be easy to deduce his conclusion that should he not possess a body, that which the faculties of the soul that are nourishment, locomotion and sense perception are bound up with, he would simply be a thinking thing. However, such apparent certainty is arrived at by the dubious premise that thought is exclusive to the soul. This question was brought up by Descartes' contemporaries in the Objections and Replies. When asked if it was self-contradictory to assert that thought is merely corporeal motion, Descartes goes into an exposition that he believes draws a parallel between the different associations of thought and extension, revealing it to be a matter of convention that thought and body are inseparable. He claims that those who reckon that thought and body are one regard them as inseparable as shape and potential for motion, or understanding and volition, by which to say that an object that possesses one of the properties necessarily has the other. He labels such a relationship as the unity of nature. He contrasts this with the unity of composition, which he regards as the proper way of interpreting the union of thought and body. He likens the relationship as that between flesh and bone, in that flesh and bone are united so long as they are present within, say, the same animal, but nevertheless are capable of being separated. Descartes admits that he 'cannot guarantee that others can be convinced of it', and this can be very readily understood because he later says that 'the only way of understanding the distinction (between thought and extension) is to realise that the notions of a thinking thing and an extended thing are completely different, and independent of each other' (p72-74). Granted, we may assign different properties to the mind and body, but to state that they are independent of each other is to draw an invalid conclusion. Who is to say that the relationship of thought and extension is one of unity of composition and not of nature? As a result, Descartes' premise that mind and body are separate and distinct is dubious.
Already weakened, we shall analyse the rest of the Second Meditation to see if Descartes manages to salvage his position from Hobbes. He doubts away all notions of his being a corporeal entity or even tenuous ether. After this, he states that he is still something. Here Descartes makes another illogical move. It is one thing to doubt away all the features you attribute to yourself and quite another to have them actually stripped away. In a paradoxical section of the passage, he doubts the integrity of his method of doubt, asking himself if the properties he supposes as non-existent are actually part of his identity. He then convinces himself that if a person's identity is something that thinks, 'knowledge of it does not depend on things of whose existence I am as yet unaware' (p18-19). This conclusion relies on the implicit premise that if someone is a thinking thing, separate from corporeal extensions, then his identity is not reliant on anything else, because everything else falls into the same category as 'things which I invent in my imagination', which is 'simply contemplating the shape of image of a corporeal thing'(p19). Notice that this premise relies on the earlier assumption that thought and extension are separate and distinct, which has been undermined. Also, Descartes repeats the error of believing his own conjectures. In this case, he supposes that he may discard all physical objects because he believes that there is a malicious demon that renders them chimeras. However, it may just be the case that there is no demon and that should he be stripped away of his physical features, he wouldn't exist.
For the rest of the Second Meditation, Descartes doesn't do much to add credibility to his notion that thought is independent from corporeal substances. Hobbes has the upper hand in this argument, because if the intellect cannot be proven to be liberated from the body, then there is the possibility that thinking is a corporeal faculty.