In Descartes' version of the ontological argument, the idea of God has necessary existence as a quality of his being. Descartes justified this claim by asserting that by definition, God was a supremely perfect being, and that existence was a quality that was necessary of such a perfect being. According to Descartes, all the infinite perfections formed a coherent and undeniable unity in any notion of God.
However, one of the objections to the Ontological argument was that 'exist' is not a predicate. Since Immanuel Kant, proponents of this notion have argued that existence is not a property of objects and could not be regarded as a feature they can possess. If this belief is true, it would have to be conceded that existence can no longer be ascribed to any notion of God as part of the description of him because existence would cease to be a perfection to be unified necessarily with the other perfections in the idea of God.
Defenders of the ontological argument were now challenged by this objection to put forward contrary arguments. One such response focused upon a statement that the proponents of the ontological argument would exploit for its seemingly undeniable contradiction of the notion that existence was not a predicate. The sentence 'I exist' would become a bastion that the advocates of the ontological argument could rely on should their belief in the predication of existence to individuals come under scrutiny. Therefore, let us investigate how far the influence of this two-word combination reaches within the defence of the ontological argument, and see if there are any blind spots where the objection may secure ground.
The effectiveness the simple statement 'I exist' wields in sustaining the conviction that existence is a predicate will become apparent once we have observed how it has endured some of the criticisms it has been called upon to challenge. One such example is the existential quantifier, constructed by Gottlob Frege to supplement the objection against the predication of existence. What the existential quantifier does is that it removes all the connotations of predication from the concept of existence and presents it anew as a linguistic pathway by which claims of the realisation of qualities or descriptions of an object can be expressed coherently. Simply put, 'exists' is translated into 'there is'. For example, when called upon to translate assertions of the existence of general objects such as 'trees exist', the existential quantifier does so effortlessly, yielding the statement 'there are objects which are x, where x is the description of trees', nullifying the need to use any form of the word 'exist' in the traditional predicate sense.
However, the existential quantification of predicate expressions encounters difficulty when applied to statements such as 'this tree exists' and even more so, 'I exist'. The complication arises when attempts are made to translate claims of the existence of specifics, such as 'this tree exists'. Such a claim, when subjected to the existential quantifier translation, becomes, 'there is an object which is x, where x is the description of the object and it's relation to the maker of the claim'. What is of note is that to accommodate the translation of claims of the existence of referred objects, the existential quantifier has to shoulder the burden of subjective experience. Furthermore, upon attempting to translate the statement 'I exist', an extra complication is introduced into the integrity of the existential quantifier. Along with the aforementioned quandary of the necessity of subjective interpretation, the resultant translation 'there is an object which is x, where x is the description of the individual making the claim' raises another obstacle: a first-person statement is now a third-person one. Thus it is not a faithful translation of the statement. Additionally, as J.L. Mackie has indicated, when the concept of existence is applied to individuals, existing seems to be something that they do to ensure the realization of whatever descriptions apply to them, or the instantiation of whatever general features they possess.1 So existence appears to be a predicate after all, at least in the existential claims of specific objects, because there is the common-sense notion that general objects do not possess existence as a quality since they may not even exist. However, from the simple statement of 'I exist' three obstacles for the existential quantifier have been erected, namely, that subjective experience needs to be taken into account, the inability to translate first-person existential claims, and the use of existence as a predicate of individuals.
The objection against the ontological argument that declares that existence is not a predicate is now at risk. With the tenability of the existential quantifier diminishing following it's inability to satisfactorily translate the sentence 'I exist', other theories must be obtained that at least identify properties in the concept of existence that are not shared by the category of predicates, with the hope that enough evidence can be derived to contradict and possibly refute associations of predication with the concept of existence. And if it is able to tip-toe around the hornet's nest of 'I exist', so much the better. In other words, the predication of existence to the concept of God in the ontological argument must be made a separate case from the ones complicated by 'I exist' and the existential claims of other specifics. One such argument is the inference analysis of predicate claims. This theory claims that statements that contain a subject and a predicate can be analysed in general as follows: 'A is F' can be translated into 'there is an object A which is F'. So the statement 'lemons are sour' is converted into 'there are objects called lemons which are sour'. Conversely the opposing claim, 'lemons are not sour' is interpreted as 'there are objects called lemons which are not sour'. So far this exposition seems to translate statements of predication faithfully, retaining its meaning while adapting to claims of negative predication. However, when this analysis is applied to existential statements such as 'trees exist', we derive the sentence 'there are objects called trees which exist'. The latent ambiguity is this examination of existence as a predicate is made apparent once we direct the inference analysis towards negative existential claims. The analysis of the claim 'trees do not exist' would yield the statement 'there are objects called trees which do not exist'. This is a contradiction, because the statement 'there are' already postulates the availability, and hence the existence, of trees. Now we seem to have arrived at the proof that existence does indeed possess features that other predicates do not. It appears that for something to acquire predicates other than existence, it must possess existence first. Thus, what this discussion has entailed so far is that existence is a rudimentary predicate, but a predicate nonetheless. This is because it hasn't refuted the claim that existence possesses the essence of predication, namely the attribution of features to an object, at least in the existential claims of specific objects. However, let us challenge this theory to see if it holds up to scrutiny. The inference analysis attains its strength from indicating the distinctiveness of existence from other predicates with respect to negative predications. But just for the sake of being thorough, let us dissect existence into distinct and successive tiers. Let us regard the existence of conceptual objects as 'conceptual existence', while the existence of objects scientifically proven to exist gets referred to as 'physical existence'. So now when we apply this linguistic dissection of existence to the statement 'trees do not exist', we obtain the translation, 'there are conceptual objects called trees, which are not in possession of physical existence'. This is a perfectly sound sentence. What is of note is that when making existential claims, the speaker must ensure that the first half of the statement uses either an equal or more fundamental existence than the second half. Of the four possible combinations, namely: idea-idea, idea-physical, physical-physical, physical-idea, it is only idea-physical that doesn't encounter contradiction or unsoundness when attempting to reproduce negative existential claims using the inference analysis method. This argument not only rebuts the notion that the use of existence as a predicate contradicts itself, it also upholds the idea that existence is a predicate of general objects, as they can now be predicated by conceptual existence.
So far, the objection to the ontological argument that professes that existence is not a predicate has not gained a foothold even with regard to the existential claims of general objects. We have tried to investigate what other avenues the argument may travel in order to prove that the opposition need not surrender simply on account of the statement 'I exist', but have met no success. Therefore, we can conclude from this discussion that if 'I exist' is a sound claim, it does refute the criticism against the ontological argument that disagrees with the notion that 'exists' is a predicate simply because, as we have seen, there are no options left for the objection to consider.