Descartes' Meditations on First Philosophy is renowned in philosophical circles as one of the most influential contributions towards the study of philosophy. Through argument and rhetoric, Descartes sets out on a quest to prove to his readers that mind and body are separate and distinct, God exists and that what we clearly and distinctly perceive is true. The seed of all of these grand proofs is Descartes' famous Method of Doubt.
Descartes used this technique the starting point of his philosophy. The question of this enquiry however, is to determine whether or not said method is beneficial to those who aspire to embark on philosophical thought. We will need to assess Descartes' approach towards rudimentary philosophy with a strict criterion of validity and plausibility, identifying its faults and weaknesses in order that one will not be led astray if he should subscribe to the Method of Doubt.
It is essential to elucidate exactly what Descartes wished to accomplish with the Method of Doubt. In the 'Synopsis' to the Meditations, he states that:
Descartes indicates that the method of doubt enables us to access concrete truth by stripping away all illusions that deceive us on our path of enquiry. The first phase of Descartes' plan is to specify precisely what should be doubted. According to him, it would 'not be necessary...to show that all my opinions are false' He claims that to demolish all of his opinions, 'it will be enough if I find in each of them at least some reason for doubt'2. He compares his knowledge to that of a building in which 'once the foundations of a building are undermined, anything built on them collapses of its own'2. And now we have here the first gripe with the Method of Doubt. Descartes asserts that he need not examine all of his opinions because it will be sufficient to analyse the foundations on which all of his opinions are built on instead. He proposes that such a procedure will produce a knock-on effect on all of this other opinions, enabling doubt to seep from the roots of his epistemology to its peak. This is an epistemological claim that Descartes does not regard as controversial. To him, it is common sense that knowledge is based on rudimentary principles which provide justification for beliefs. However, since he has committed himself to rigorous doubt, such an admission must be brought under the sceptic's scrutiny. Michael Williams sums up this objection when he wrote that it seems Descartes 'excludes (an endless undertaking) by projecting into common sense a theoretical conception of justification disguised as a matter of practical convenience'. The issue at stake now is whether or not Descartes really is guilty of evading a thorough and painstaking examination of his beliefs without sufficient justification. In order for Descartes to support this claim, he needs to demonstrate that knowledge is indeed structured in tiers, with each higher level depending on knowledge from below. Descartes accomplishes this later in the First Meditation when he presents his opinions in the order of ascending credibility. He starts off with the senses, which 'occasionally deceive us with respect to objects which are very small or in the distance'. However, this still leaves opinions of objects close by and in plain view intact. Next, he proposes the dreaming argument, which states that 'there are never any sure signs by means of which being awake can be distinguished from being asleep'. Still, there are some beliefs that survive this category of doubt, namely general things and universal things such as 'arithmetic, geometry and other subjects of this kind'. And finally, Descartes deploys his last doubt, the malicious demon who 'employs all his energies in order to deceive me'. This last doubt ensnares all of his previous certainties, rendering them dubitable to the utmost degree. As we can see, Descartes has demonstrated a stratification of knowledge that is 'context- and subject-matter-independent', placing his opinions into 'broad epistemological classes, ordered according to how difficult it is to doubt them'. By classifying his beliefs as such, Descartes demonstrates that knowledge is linked to and justified by fundamental principles. Thus Descartes has given plausibility to his method of doubt that only addresses rudimentary precepts. But despite this supporting argument, Margaret Wilson argues that Descartes sometimes seems to 'regard his system as springing forth from the bedrock of Truth, independently of any preconception or historically conditioned commitment'. This is a valid argument because despite being subject- and context-matter-independent, Descartes does regard his metaphor that beliefs are structured like a building to assert itself as self-evident. This is very much a criticism on logical grounds as noted by Wilson who poses the rhetorical question: 'how could one ever get started philosophically, if he seriously resolved to accept no uncriticised assumptions?'8 This suspension of judgement was practiced by the classical sceptics, and we shall compare this scepticism of knowledge with that of Descartes'.
Classical scepticism relies on no epistemological basis for its system. This is because a practitioner of its method only has to extend his ordinary doubts to enshroud all of his beliefs. The classical sceptic's task is to resolve disputes by the 'marshalling of conflicting opinions' to counter the anti-sceptic who believes that there is a criterion for truth so that all views have equal plausibility. John Cottingham notes that for the classical sceptic, 'any attempt to justify anything can be made to lead either to circular reasoning or infinite regress'. However, it must be considered that the classical sceptic's opinion of beliefs is 'flat', meaning that all beliefs are of equal difficulty to doubt and contest. In contrast, the Method of Doubt asserts that knowledge is stratified and differentiated. Since we have established that Descartes' stratification of knowledge is context- and subject-matter-independent, Cottingham thinks it is better to favour it. He writes that 'there is no argument for accepting the foundational conception, even for the purposes of a philosophical reconstruction of knowledge, still less for projecting it into reconstructed common sense'. The Method of Doubt is beyond the reach of classical scepticism because it is thoroughly distinct from the realm of common-sense doubting. Its epistemological basis is independent of subject and context, which allows it to transcend the classical sceptic's practice.
Another objection to the Method of Doubt lies in its purpose to demolish all of its user's general beliefs. The criticism is that:
As Wilson notes, this objection is misguided from the start. Descartes does not intend to bring odds and ends of his system of knowledge into the realm of certainty. The sciences would advocate such a procedure; striving for truth is a trial and error affair of experiments to determine which hypotheses conform to a wider-spectrum theory. Descartes, on the other hand, 'wishes to overthrow prevailing conceptions and opinions', for the theory or concept he might base justification for a particular enquiry may be as dubitable as his subject of interrogation. In the same vein, it would be nonsense to suggest that Descartes merely keeps the beliefs that he finds pragmatic to accord the distinction of truth and examine the rest. This is because the gravitas and scope of the Descartes' project is too transcendent to afford the slightest misstep produced by accepting a commonly agreed system of beliefs that bears even a single corrupting falsity. Therefore Wilson justifiably asserts that 'a concerted onslaught is the only justifiable approach for the sort of intellectual revolution Descartes intends to bring about'.
An additional scepticism raised against the Method of Doubt is that posed against the problem of the criterion concerning the dreaming argument. Put simply, it challenges the notion that there is no decisive factor that allows us to distinguish when we are awake from when we are dreaming. Norman Malcolm in his essay Dreaming and Skepticism, presents us with the criteria of present-tense description of events. He says that when we are awake it would make sense for us to assert that we are awake, but should we be sound asleep it would be absurd for us to claim the proposition 'I am sound asleep'. This is a claim in the sense that it is asserted by the person sound asleep as an expression of his belief, not just a random saying of sounds from his mouth. From this, Malcolm derives that it is impossible that one could have any thoughts while sound asleep. He writes that: 'if a person is in any state of consciousness it logically follows that he is not sound asleep', and he concludes that if we are not able to have any thoughts, sensations or feelings while sound asleep, we are not able to be deceived while sound asleep. Anticipating the objection that we are able to dream while sound asleep and that we have thoughts while dreaming, Malcolm makes the distinction between the content of dreams and waking life. He writes that it is a fallacy to conclude "He was frightened" from "He dreamt that he was frightened" because 'when a person is sound asleep he cannot have any sensations, thoughts, and feelings at all; sleep cannot, in this sense, have any "content of experience."'14 Thus, the content of experience in dreams in distinct from the experience we have in waking life. Thus, according to Malcolm, looking at a house in waking life is different than dreaming that one is looking at a house. He writes that 'one might as well assert that a house and the mental image of a house could have the same weight'. And this is where Malcolm goes wrong. Descartes has already provided us with the argument that the experiences we have in our sleep are indistinguishable from those when we are awake and Malcolm has failed to show why. We can have the same sensations of lifting a rock in real life when we are dreaming. In our dream can feel its weight, perceive its colour and shape and it may even be the case that in the dream we are convinced of its obedience to the laws of physics. The faculties of the mind that recognise reality are the same in dreams and in waking life. Thus the problem with Malcolm's argument lies in his interpretation of the conclusion. It is true that experiences in dreams differ from those in waking life but they differ only in tiers. When one is dreaming, one is not aware of his actual physical state and does not have access to his physical sense organs. However, the content of experiences is equal in all respects and this is what Descartes holds and what Malcolm has failed to discredit.
As shown, the Method of Doubt possesses substantial credentials as a means of beginning philosophy. It is an improvement on classical scepticism and is able to act on the entire scope of beliefs. In addition few, if any, have brought forward significant objections to its system.