There are three fundamental questions about efficient allocation of resources:
What commodities will be produced and in what quantity?
How are goods produced?
For whom are goods produced?
Economists have rather consistently argued that monopoly is undesirable and accused it of being straining competition and worsening resource allocation. In this assay, I am going to make a thorough discussion on the factors that may affect the extent of monopoly economic inefficiency.
The first factor is price discrimination. A monopoly is recognized as inefficient to production as it produced at a relatively low level of output in order to charge a higher price than the marginal cost. But if the monopolist engages in price discrimination, then it is another situation.
First-degree-price discrimination involves prefect segmentation of the market where the individuals is charged by the amount he is willing to pay. Consequently the monopolist will able to extract all consumers' surplus and all the surplus transfer to the monopolist (diagram 7). This outcome would be Pareto efficient: the producer already maximized its profit, and the consumers' surplus will not increase without decreasing the benefit of the producer. There is no deadweight loss, thus efficiency is achieved by resource allocation mechanism other than a competitive market. One common example of it includes the car sales at most dealership and roadside sellers of fruit. Nevertheless, whether a price discrimination strategy is feasible depends on the inability of buyer to practice arbitrage and the sellers' ability to identify every customer's willingness.
Secondly, in general equilibrium analysis, a monopoly is possible to have close substitutes. Assuming the UK tea market is a monopoly, but the decisions of price and output in the UK coffee market may have significant impact on demand and supply of tea markets. It's because they are close substitutions for many consumers. Consequently, the interaction in different market may put pressure upon the monopolist and force them to improve its competitiveness. .
In reality, in attempting to control economic activity, governments will use laws or rules to regulate large corporations as well. Take Antitrust law for instance. It is designed for making companies act in a competitive manner by breaking up companies those are monopolies and prohibiting mergers that would increase market power. In June 2000, soft ware giant Microsoft was ordered to broken up in two for "antitrust violations", because it had forced customers to adopt its own browser by discounting and putting pressure to the detriment of rival software maker Netscape.
Price ceiling is an alternative approach if the authorities consider it is too inefficient to break the monopoly into smaller firms due to loss of economies of scale. In 1979 the US government fixed the price of gasoline at about1.0 per gallon. In diagram 8, the effective demand curve becomes horizontal at the ceiling price P', and the firm will adjust quantity at Q', which increases output by (Q*-Q'). In this case, the monopolist is forced to behave as a price-taking firm under government regulation, and it has reduced the inefficiency caused by too higher monopoly price..
Thirdly, if the regulatory situation is to allow monopoly to charge a price greater than what would occur in a competitive market, then monopoly power may stimulate innovative activities. Some large firms and some highly concentrated market (e.g. computers and telecommunications) proved to be among the industries with the highest performance with respect to innovation and productivity growth. Whereas economics theory held that monopoly keeps price high, history experience indicated that highly concentrated industries often had rapidly declining prices relative to less concentrated industries. So why?
Huge corporations enjoying super profit are well allocating some of it to fund high cost of capital investment and research and development projects. The Solow growth model and the neoclassical model of capital accumulation predict that, in stationary equilibrium, the rate of economic growth is equal to the exogenous rate of technological progress. In this sense, monopoly firms may be able to increase the pace of innovation and push the PPF outward through integrated technology in the comparison with perfect competitive firms, who will be incapable with zero profit in the long term.
The other argument in support of business with monopoly is economies of scale as I mentioned before. Falls in long run average cost provide gains in welfare for both customers and producer, thus satisfy Pareto efficiency improvement condition.
In my opinion, some of the characteristics described as monopoly are not valid anymore since the economic globalization and free trade becomes an inevitable trend. Many national monopolists have realized the threat from the whole world. Even a domestic monopoly has to make great effort to improve its productivity and efficiency in order to keep one step ahead of potential competitors from overseas.
Furthermore, externality is present whenever there is spillover effect to groups rather than the decision maker, and it is the forth factor here associating with the extent of monopoly inefficiency. If the producer of externalities doesn't have the incentives to take into account the effect of their actions on the others, the outcome might cause the deviation from present Pareto efficiency. In fact, the excess profit implies a monopoly may be able to be benevolent and internalize the negative externality e.g. pay the cost of pollution. Consequently, the efficiency of resource allocation can be improved since perfectly competitive firm would have no choice but to overproduce according to the private cost.
The theory of contestable market suggests that even there is only one seller; the seller may be force to act as if there were many more and eventually the market will become effectively competitive. Market contestability measures the ease in which suppliers can enter or invade another competitor's market thus few sunk cost is required. In the UK, for example, retail commercial banking is undergoing a revolution with dramatic implications for the ways we experience banking and related financial service:
Many former building societies including Halifax plc have de-mutualised and become fully-fledged commercial banks.
National food retailers such as Tesco and Sainsbury have launched hugely successful banking operations with millions of customers.
European and North American mortgage lenders are entering the UK market in increasing numbers.
In such a market, competitiveness supplied by the potential threat of entry, as well as by the presence of the actual current rivals, can prevent monopoly inefficiency caused by higher price and restrict output, thus entails resource allocative efficiency.