The CAPM is a cornerstone of mordent financial economics published in 1964 by Stanford University professor William Sharpe, who shared the Nobel Memorial Price in economics in 1990 for his works. The model is designed to explain the excess return on an asset as a function of excess return on the market portfolio.
First of all, there are some crucial assumptions in generating the model:
Investors are risk averse and price takers. They maximise the expected utility of the portfolio over a single period.
Investors have the homogenous expectations about the asset returns which is normally distributed.
There is a risk free asset, so investors can borrow or lend unlimited amount of money at a fixed risk free rate.
The markets are frictionless and no imperfections exist. E.g. taxes, transition costs.
All the assets are marketable and perfectly divisible and their quantities are constant within the one period world.
In the next section I will elaborate the derivation of the CAPM basing on those assumptions and their implications.
The derivation of the CAPM starts by assuming that all assets are stochastic and follow a normal distribution. The mean value is a measure of location and the variance 2 is a measure of dispersion.
The first important component of the CAPM is referred to as the Capital Market Line (CML). The assumptions states additional to the many risky assets there "exists a risk free asset R f". According to the two-fund separation principle, the process of investment choice can be broken into two steps:
The option of a unique optimal combination of risky assets (market portfolio M );
The separation option of holding different proportion between R f and M;
In  figure 1, we can draw a straight line R fM illustrate different combinations between the risk free asset and risky assets. This applies to any investors because, firstly, the "homogeneous expectations" implies every investor will hold the same market portfolio regardless of his degree of risk aversion. Secondly, each investor will maximise his utility by holding various proportions between M and R f according to their degree of risk tolerance. E.g. person B has higher risk tolerance than person A (see figure 1)
As we already assume all the assets are "marketable and perfectly divisible", therefore the existence of non-marketable asset (such as human capital) is not taken into account. For the capital market in the equilibrium it will need a set of market-clearing price, which ensures the demand of holding the capital asset equal the supply. Moreover, the tangent of market portfolio M is the one which all assets are held according their market value weight. So the mean and the variance of the portfolio including R f is:
So:
Now taking the derivation of the above equations yields
Therefore the slope of the line (Sharpe Ratio) is:
Consequently, we can develop the equation for the minimum variance portfolio:
We call this equation as Market Capital Line. The assumptions state that the investors have the opportunities of "borrowing (P M >1) or lending (0< P M <1) unlimited amount of money", so they can actually be better off by investing greater percentage on market portfolio or the risk free asset compare to the case when the capital market is absent. (See Figure 2)
The second essential component of the CAPM is the Security Market Line (SML). Since all the investors perceive the same minimum variance opportunity set, then, under the perfect competitive market condition without any market frictions, the market portfolio will be a mean-variance efficient set as illustrated in  figure3. The equilibrium of the market portfolio will include all the marketable assets held in proportion to their value weights. Let us assume a portfolio consisting of x% in risky asset R i and (1-x) % in the market portfolio R m:
The basic insight that William Sharpe provided, was that he noted in the CAPM equilibrium the market portfolio R m has already contained the risky asset R i, so it indicates the above equations must be evaluated at x=0.
Now the slope of SML is:
And it must be equal to the slope of Capital Market Line since the CML is tangent to the identical market portfolio R m under the same assumptions. Thus we have:
The simplified equations become:
Where
The economic interpretation of the CAPM equation is:
The expected return= Riskless return + Beta * Expected market risk premium
By now the relevant estimation of an individual asset volatility as a part a well diversified portfolio is not measured by the asset's standard deviation or its variance; instead we use Beta specifically quantify the contribution of an individual asset to the market portfolio variance. An asset expected return is only related to its level of systematic risk which can not be diversified away.
- The market as a whole has = 1
- Risk free security has a  = 0
- A security with a  < 1 is lesser risky than average market
- A security with a > 1 has risk above the market
The graphical illustration of the Security Market Line is on figure 4. Once we know the Beta of the New York Stock Exchange equals to 100000, for instance, we will be able to predict the required return on equity.
The expected return calculated applying CAPM is an important tool in project appraisal. It helps companies with establishing the "correct" price for their shares and assessing the cost of the equities. The first empirical test is given by Black, Jensen and Schole way back in 1972. (See figure 5) They divided the NYSE stock into 10 portfolios and study them over a 35 year period. The evidence seems to be strong support for the CAPM. Nevertheless, Fama and Frence (1992 and 1993) presented several cross-sectional regression estimate of risk premium and published evindences against the CAPM prediction. The result is intersting because Fama and French use the same procedure as Fama and MacBeth (1973) but reach a very different conclusion:
So, what are the weakness of the CAPM and how can we improve it?
Firstly, the CAPM's empirical problems may reflect theoretical failings, the result of extremely unrealistic assumptions, thus the relaxing of some assumptions becomes necessary.
We may argue that a truly risk-free asset with the constant returns does not exist. Fisher Black (1972) has solved this problem by introducing the "unique min-variance zero-beta portfolio" to modify the CAPM equation. In figure 6, for example, the return of assets A and B have zero covariance with the market portfolio since they are not on the efficient frontier. However, they have the same systematic risk thus the expected return. If the investors use the portfolio R z of risky assets such as A and B instead of the risk-free asset, the expected return on any asset can be written as the combination of the market portfolio and the unique min-variance zero-beta portfolio:
Where
As an equilibrium, the CAPM is really just a 'snapshot' of the market in a single period. It is incapable to explain the relation between risk and return over a 10 years period. Merton (1973) developed dynamic asset pricing model to incorporate intertemporal uncertainty. The difference compared to the original model is to use the instantaneous rate of return and the distribution of return is lognormal rather than normal. Merton's model allows investment and consumption opportunity to fluctuate all the time in terms of "three fund separation": the riskless asset, the market portfolio and a third portfolio R N which has the perfectly negative correlation with the riskless asset. The investors will hold portfolios among those three funds, and the interesting point is the present of R N has linked investors' asset pricing behaviour with the economic condition. The complex mathematical interpretation of the Merton's model is:
Where
The market portfolio should in theory include all the types of assets held by the investors, including human capital and real estate etc. The existence of non-marketable assets may partially explain why people would hold different portfolios of risky assets in the real world. Take the human capital as an example, the return on people's human capital is positively correlated with the stock of the company they work for. Mayers [1972] shows if the CAPM takes the scenario which the people may be holding non-marketable risky assets R H into accounts, the equation can be amended as:
Where
V m = the current market value of all marketable assets
here is performed as the market price per unit risk which especially contains the covariance between the rate of return on the marketable assets and the non-marketable assets. After Mayers' adaptation, now the model allows people hold various portfolios of risky assets due to their human capital has differing risk rate. Moreover, the two-fund separation principle still applies in this case, so the price of risk assets is determined regardless the individual preference towards to the risk.
The second weakness of the model is about its testability. The famous Roll's Critique (1977) argued that the CAPM is not testable unless the true (mean-variance efficiency) market portfolio is identified. The theoretical market portfolio must include every single available asset which may be referred as a "world market". As a result, proxies for the market (such as the FTSE100 in the UK or the S&P 500 in the US) are used by investors in reality are seriously flawed. However, we need to be aware that, instead of denying the CAPM is valid, Roll's Critique only implies the CAPM might be difficult to apply on practice. An alternative to the traditional CAPM is the Arbitrage Pricing Theory from Stephen Ross in 1976. The APT retains the distinction between systematic and unsystematic risk, furthermore it extends the CAPM framework to many risk factors, such as the fluctuation of the interest rate and sensitivity of fuel prices etc, therefore the APT allows deriving a security market line at the absence of the unobservable market portfolio.
The third drawback here is the CAPM is a forward-looking model but based on the historical data. For instance, a company's cost of capital changes with the daily price of its equity associates with the price of bonds, options and other financial instruments. Conversely, Beta tends to be a "static" estimate based on the past information. Because of the unreliable measure of Beta, many firms may decide how much their investments should earn purely depends on their experience or instincts. Companies that do use beta often have to adjust their estimates of the measure to reflect factors such as a company's size, financial condition and the specific type of investment involved.
With many years academic debating the value of CAPM, there are many studies have tested the empirical performance of CAPM , and some of them providing strong evidence of its inability to explain (and therefore to predict) the behavior of financial markets. Nevertheless, from my point of view, the CAPM is generally considered to be a good first step in understanding what type of risk requires a premium and hence what is the excess return we should expect from various assets. Besides, there is no perfect model in this world. Despite the weaknesses, the CAPM is still generally considered a useful tool in evaluating the profitability of a project.