This assay is to investigate firms' decisions to distribute cash flow and their choices between paying out in the form of dividends or stock repurchases.
Traditionally, dividends were predominant mechanism firms used to deliver their permanent earnings, while share repurchases was relatively unimportant until mid-1980. A study conducted by Fama and French (2001) based on the US companies shows the proportion of firms paying dividends decreased sharply after 1978 (from 66.5% to 20.8% in 1999). Meanwhile, Grullon and Michaely (2002) observed there was an increasing propensity in the recent years of purchasing stocks, and the evidence shows the expenditures on shares repurchase program relative to total earnings increased dramatically from 4.8% in 1980 to 41.8% in 2000( see Figure 1).
Thus, in order to understand how the firms choose one method over another, the assay will especially focus on the potential motives behind firms to distribute its retained earnings via dividends or stock repurchases.
A dividend is a cash payment made by the corporation to its common share holders pro rata. It is usually paid out of the current earning of the firm, and thereby represents a partial distribution of profits. Once a company decides whether to pay dividends, they may establish a somewhat stable dividend policy, which might in turn the impact on investors and the perceptions of the company in the financial market. In this section I will discuss two types: regular and special dividends.
It is an alternative program by which a company buys back its own shares from the market place, reducing the number of outstanding shares while allowing shareholders to receive cash payments as a capital gain. Stock repurchase are generally made in the following ways:
Open market: it usually involves gradual programs over a period of time.
Tender offer: corporations specify a number, a tender price and a period of time during the offer is in effect.
Block of shares in on a negotiated basis.
Stock repurchase was permitted in the UK only since 1981 and in Japan since 1995. But since 2000, over three-quarters of the companies in S&P 500 have bought back stocks.
Financial economists have now for a long time tried to explain why corporations pay out its retained earnings via cash dividends instead of share repurchases. It becomes a persistent puzzle because dividends often subject to higher tax liability than buying back stocks. This assay has quoted a number of insights from different researchers, theoretically as well as empirically, into the dividends puzzle by elaborating the relative virtues corresponding to two different payout policies respectively.
Nevertheless, the issues as to why firms pay dividends is yet unsolved. Several rationales for corporate dividends have been published in the literature, but there is no unanimity among the financial economists, despite everyone agrees the issue is important, dividends payments is still the most commonly used mechanism in corporations worldwide.
During my assay writing process, I have shared a same question with many researchers: is share repurchase replacing the dividends payment?
Grullon and Michaely (2002) found the phenomenon that dividends substitute for repurchase in the state. In their paper, they exam the average annual growth rate of repurchase, say 26.1%, is larger than the average annual growth rate of cash dividends, 6.8%, in past two decades.
In contrast to Grullon and Michaely, Dittmar (2000) presents a different all-round research for this issue. His paper defines the shares repurchases by setting repurchases equal to zero for any firm that doesn't repurchase at least 0.05% of its market value of equity instead of 1%, and he concluded the repurchasing does not replace the dividend.
In my opinion, according to the historical total payouts patterns, the smoothness of dividends series combined with the volatility of repurchase series do not appear that one is replacing the other, rather repurchases seem to serve the complementary role of paying out short term cash flows. They are more or less equivalent way of paying out retained earning, while stock repurchases indeed have become an important source of payout in the recent years.