The intention of this paper is move outward from new and old statistical empirical evidence, found on the one hand in the National Archives (PRO) and the RAF Museum Archive, and on the other, in existing secondary literature, and ask what this reveals about British air strategy in the 1920s and 1930s. The methodology used is to take researched evidence, portray it in the form of charts, data bases or spreadsheets, and then use this IT generated information as the foundation for discussion. The archive material was not examined with any pre-conceived conclusions in mind. It will be our job to use all the empirical meat to create an interpretable abstract of air strategy. We will question whether these sources either perpetuate or shed new light on existing discourse. Along the road the sources will be challenged for their usefulness as historical pieces of evidence.
As a point of entry into the mise-en-scne of air strategy in the 1920s, let us analyse a RAF proposed peace strength chart (Appendix 1), as laid down by the Chief of the Air Staff in a November 1918 paper. Figure 1 below, which is drawn from this Appendix, illustrates the proposed location of the squadrons.
Most significantly, the Figure expounds the increasing importance placed by strategists on using air power in the empire, with 34 squadrons placed in colonial possessions. The Chief enthused that 'British possessions...are spread over a wide area and aircraft should prove of the greatest service'. Aircraft were seen as a form of control without occupation, providing a cheap and ubiquitous means of imperial policing. He also opined that 'on the conclusion of peace all available aircraft material should be utilised...in the Dominions and India'. Although this kind of commitment is not realised in the Figure, it shows that air strategists were starting to see aircraft within the typology of imperialism, as a possible means of lightening the white man's burden. However, the Figure is fundamentally flawed in understanding air strategy. It is only an aspiration of air strength in the coming 1920s and does not take into account the financial or procurement feasibility of its estimations. Moreover, in its rich dedication to the supposed war-winning bombers (shown at Figure 2 below), the source bears the fingerprints of the Air Staff's political motive to protect the service from the crossfire of its seniors and attempts to undermine its autonomy.
Overall, the Figure is an idealist snapshot that ultimately is best at revealing Air Staff pressure on air strategy, captured in a accompanying remark by the Chief - 'we wish to turn our swords into ploughshare... but not so fast' - than it is in understanding what actually happened in the 1920s.
It is now important to focus our attention on the true position of the RAF in the 1920s. We can do this through the lens of air service expenditure estimates at Appendix 2 and the resultant Figure 3 below.
It is clear that the earlier optimism of the Air Staff proved ephemeral, as air service expenditure initially sharply fell, and then remained relatively austere. The Figure supports existing discourse about air strategy, which contends that the RAF just about 'held on' during its cradle days, in the face of ferocious economic retrenchment, the Ten-Year Rule and a zetheist that condemned recourse to conflict. The impact of the imposed permanent war planning blight, is particularly evident if we note the acute fall in Technical and Warlike Stores estimates in the Appendix - elements that constitute the kernel of aggressive air strength - from 6,172,850 in 1920 to 1,295,000 in 1922. It is also significant to note from that source that research was particularly barren throughout the period, falling from 2,575,540 in 1920 to 498,000 in 1929. This goes a long way in explaining the poor quality of aircraft the RAF possessed as late as 1934, still consisting of inchoate wooden biplanes. The data also reveal that air strategy was far from a blueprinted plan, and was in fact often pragmatic and respondent to changes in geopolitik. For example, the slight rise in expenditure in 1924 can be seen as a direct response to the perceived threat of the Arme de l'Air emerging from 1923. However, the data has limitations that prevent a challenge to the existing historiography. They give no indication of how many planes were actually produced or what important fields of operation fared better than others. How far was the empire really given wings as the Chief of the Air Staff had proposed in 1918? They also do not offer any information on the Army and Navy, against which to draw priority comparisons; and industrial capacity is unknown.
Moving into the 1930s, let us start by examining the early years, before any significant expenditure rise occurred. Again, we will move our discussions from the empirical base of Appendix 2, as reproduced in Figure 4 below.
The Figure shows that air service expenditure in the years 1930-34 also remained relatively low and stable; this can be seen as an indication of the government's first strategy to avert fears of the knock out blow, through the panacea of air disarmament. The knock out blow principle is important, as it weighs so heavily on air strategy throughout the 1930s. Founded in the futurological literature of HG Wells -' after the smashing of City Hall...the white flag had been hoisted' - and politically confirmed in Baldwin's famous dictum 'the bomber will always get through', the knock out blow endangered the heart of Empire for the first time. This anxiety was reinforced by the Great Depression, where it was felt that a major dislocation, such as war, would catastrophically weaken the durability of industrialised society. In the context of increasing demands to put Britain's financial house in order, and in preparation for the international Disarmament Conference in 1932, an air disarmament strategy was the diplomats preferred negotiating hand. Our sources support this policy. Funding of the important Technical and Warlike Stores element remained about the same between 1930 and 1934. A consequence of this was that production became devoted simply to re-equipping old planes. An illustration of this was an apparent 'moratorium' in number of new airframes being produced, as shown in Figure 5 below.
However, a glaring limitation to the data is again the absence of plane types and their contribution towards the overall force mix and objectives.
Focusing now on the period 1934 to 1938, before the financial picture would be dramatically changed by war, Figure 6 below illustrates that these years were nonetheless marked by a massive increase in air service expenditure.
Appendix 2 indicates that the Technical and Warlike Stores indicator rose by a staggering 337 per cent, whilst two major supplementary estimates were added in 1935 and 1936, amounting to 17,000,000. The source shows Britain dedicating greater spending to research (99 per cent), which may go some way in explaining the relative superiority of British planes by 1939. The prima facie backdrop to the data is the failure of air disarmament and the rvanchiste position of Germany. Indeed, the British Foreign Secretary opined in 1935, 'the verb to disarm should be classified by grammarians as a defective verb'. However, these two reasons represent the mere surface disturbance and crests of foam behind the policy of increased air expenditure, and do not engage with policymaker's more directed mentalits. To understand this, we need to examine the type of planes being produced.
The various air schemes (Appendix 3) developed and amended from 1933 onwards, outlining the types and numbers of planes required for the front line by a certain date, provide the key to unlocking the deeper roots associated with air policy in this period. Figure 7 below, produced from this Appendix, shows that the Britain was increasingly dedicating her resources to bombers.
With the collapse of air disarmament talks, following the ignominious end to the Geneva Conference, policymakers sought a new means to prevent the knock out blow. It was axiomatic to air strategy that a commitment to building a bomber force would act as a deterrent against German air attack, presaging the Cold War concept of Mutually Assured Destruction. Increasing the number of bombers from 476 in 1934 to 1589 by 1937, as shown in the Appendix, worked under the belief that 'qui desiderat pacem, praeparet bellum'. On a diplomatic level, it was felt that a bomber force might bring Germany back to the Conference table. On a political level, it allayed public fears about a lack of preparation for air attack. The data also reveal a proportionally sharp increase of bomber requirements from February 1936 (see Figure 7) onwards. This can be seen as an equalising knee-jerk response to Hitler's alarming 1935 parity-achievement claim, which 'set the Nazi cat squarely among the democratic pigeons'. One limitation to our source, however, is that it does not show the number of bombers required in a reserve capacity to sustain operations. This would distinguish absolutely how far Britain worked under the strategy of shop window deterrence. Nevertheless, this source illustrates that air strategy was doing far more than aimlessly stirring Britain from her slumbers as Figure 6 suggests, and was in fact, in its dedication to bombers, a piece of political conjuring to hypnotise its audience.
The next area of our paper will examine the immediate pre-war years. Firstly, let us look at the data given in an Air Ministry report, as indicated in Figure 8 below,
on the production of airframes between August 1938 and November 1939.
It is clear that, from January 1939, airframe manufacturers started to exceed their production promises. These promises would have been established with policymakers in the deterrence by parity years. Although not explicit in the chart, we can draw three possible conclusions from this. The surpassing of airframe guarantees can almost incontestably be seen as the final nail in the coffin for the parity strategy, as the government encouraged air manufacturers to move towards a war footing. Not only had hopes of an air convention been lost but also the promises of Munich seemed long forgotten. Britannia's trident was now a bayonet and her shield a gas mask. Less probably, it could reflect that manufacturers had simply become more efficient in their production, no longer cruising at barely economical speed. More sinisterly, the data could suggest production profiteering, as captured in the illustration below (albeit in 1935).
Ultimately, however, the source is best at confirming the end of air parity, than it is at hinting at more polemical speculations.
However, these delivery numbers fail to paint the whole picture. We need to examine the types of planes produced. Figure 9, working on a microcosmic level of production, shows the number of Spitfires delivered from the Eastleigh Production Facility.
It is quite apparent that a significant rise in production occurred from October 1938 onwards. However, this source is fundamentally limited in understanding air strategy, as Spitfires were neither the archetypal fighter in 1938-9 nor accounted for the bulk of the fighter force. Hurricane production is also required, in order to obtain a true picture of any significant change in production, and ergo air strategy. The difference in orders was 8647 more Hurricanes (Appendix 4). Importantly, Figure 10 below shows that from June 1938 the number of all fighters being delivered rose feverishly.
This supports existing discourse, which argues that policymakers from early 1938 onwards increased fighter production for air defence purposes. A 1938 Command Paper reflects this, lamenting the failure of the bomber deterrence strategy, and stating 'taking risks for peace has not removed the dangers of war'. Major technological improvements with fighter capability, coupled with the coming of radar, presented the
possibility of withstanding the knock out blow. This in turn threatened Germany with the prospect of a long war, which was arguably a more credible deterrent than simply a bomber build up, given the greater long term resources of the Empire. However, this Figure has a limitation of its own, because it does not tell us the relative fighter position vis-a-vis the wider picture of total aircraft production and in particular that of bombers. To combat these problems, we can refer to the data provided in the Cabinet approved air schemes L and M (Appendix 3). The two pie charts below comprising Figure 11 compare the required aircraft by proportion of all total planes in April 1938 and November 1938.
It is immediately apparent that only a small shift away from bombers towards fighters occurred. This is by no means supportive of existing discourse. Literature on 1930's air power recognises the shift but argues that it was much more pronounced, with production geared three to one in favour of fighters. However, Figure 11 indicates that, in receiving well over 40 per cent of total aircraft production, the bomber remained the main player in air strategy, notwithstanding a greater emphasis to fighters. Thus, the pie charts provide an empirically tested challenge to the current epistemological understanding of the period.
The final part of this paper will question the common usage by contemporary historians of simple comparative air power strength charts, as exemplified by Figure 12 below.
Use of such charts to critique Britain's air strategy vis-a-vis other nations to illustrate Britain's 'dreadful note of preparation' is potentially too shallow. Although not wishing to be overly judgmental - this would require an exhaustive analysis far beyond the scope of this paper - it is essential that we lay bare certain qualifications the air historian needs to comprehend if he or she wishes to use such charts as an empirical authority. It is difficult to compare aircraft production in basic numerical terms, as the quality of aircraft varied greatly from country to country and year to year and was driven by different operational demands. Furthermore the numbers include
more than front line types (for example, Germany devoted far larger amounts of production than Britain to trainers), and they give us no insight into how many of the aircraft delivered were immediately deployable, through pilot availability and other factors. Also ignored in assessing proportional difference in air strength is the contribution of anti-aircraft defences. The contemporary historian, therefore, needs to take these sensitivities in his metaphorical knapsack when he enters the archives.
To conclude, it has been the intention of this paper to work with primary and secondary statistical source material obtained from the National Archives, the RAF Museum and existing literature, in an effort to see what estimate and production data reveal about air strategy in the 1920s and 1930s. Much of the evidence has converged with existing historiographical discourse, outlining a gradual maturity of air strategy, extending from labouring within the parameters of a restricted budget through to the mantra of home defence. But some of the recently researched material sheds new light on the subject. For example, our data on fighter requirements refutes existing understanding that air strategy moved absolutely from bombers to fighters in the years 1938 to 1939. We have also suggested that certain sources, particularly comparative charts, remain too simplistic in composition to hold any more than mere subjective value. Furthermore, the usefulness of solely Air Ministry derived sources, such as the proposed peace strength chart, are somewhat sullied because their technical estimates were shaped by non-financial predilections and bias.
Although ultimately recognising, as Clifford Geertz laments 'what we call our data are really our own constructions of other people's constructions', the charts here, despite certain limitations, not only move our understanding of air strategy slowly towards a more definitive picture but also hint at possible areas for further in-depth study. Indeed, there remains a vast sum of non-researched information relating to air strategy in the 1920s and 1930s waiting for the historian in the archives. Arguably, what our fighter discovery shows above all is that literature on air strategy in the 1920s and 1930s has itself become a too entrenched 'matter of faith'. It is thus the job of the air historian to revise further the subject, particularly the years 1938 to 1939, in greater detail.