This essay aims to discuss three areas of psychological phenomena that have been found to account for a vast number of wrongful convictions, tragically affecting the lives of many people. It appears that the majority of wrongful convictions arise from eyewitness error (Wells, 1993). In light of this, this essay will use criminal cases to demonstrate how false memories could be induced into eyewitness accounts, by examining both child suggestibility and hypnotism, and will also how, even without the implementation of false memories, the complete misidentification of a suspect is possible. From a legal standpoint it is extremely necessary to be aware of these psychological phenomena and their effects on individuals, as it could help to not only diminish the amount of wrongful convictions, but also help convict more of the guilty.
The case of Kelly Michaels aptly demonstrates how highly suggestible children can be. In 1983, a nursery employee was charged with 23 counts of sexual assault against 20 children under her care, based on a child's comment of how she had used an anal thermometer on him. Michaels was later convicted on 115 counts and given a 47-year sentence. However, in 1992, it was judged that "the questioning of the children was so suggestive and coercive that they were rendered incompetent to testify" (State Vs Michaels, 1994, p. 493) and Michaels was released, thus suggesting the children's reports of abuse were false.
Despite the possibility of internal factors, such as, undeveloped memory, linguistics and schemas accounting for the childrens false reports (Bruck, et al., 1997), it has been reported that adults are far greater sources of distortion than any underlying cognitive deficit (McGough, 1996), and interviewer bias is extremely influential on children, producing numerous false reports (Goodman, et al, 1995). The case of Kelly Michaels was particularly ridden with inadequate interview procedures, including the repeated questioning of the same direct questions; a factor frequently associated with children's false reports (Quas & Schaaf, 2002; Ceci, et al., 1994, Bruck, at al., 2002). The source-monitoring framework states that the ability to remember the context in which an event occurred develops gradually with age (Johnson, Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993) and in the absence of episodic memory (because the event did not occur); decisions are based on familiarity (Ruffman et al., 2002). Therefore, as a child has a limited source-monitoring capacity they will rely on familiarity to judge whether events actually occurred. In this case, as the children were re-asked questions immediately after giving an answer, the children may have assumed the initial answer was wrong and corrected it to please the interviewer, and continually providing this 'desirable' answer in repeated questions will ultimately increase familiarity. This is supported by research showing that children's responses can be influenced by contextual factors, particularly repeated questions and the perceived omniscience of an interviewer (Lewis,al. 1995). Consequently, suggestibility is more likely to be attributed to an interaction between internal and external factors, as it appears the interaction between repeated questioning and inadequate source-monitoring can result in false reports.
The children were also repeatedly told that Ms. Michaels was in jail because she had "done bad things" and were encouraged to keep her in jail by the police (State Vs Michaels, 1994), and would have also heard numerous stories about their teacher. Cecial. (1994) found that children are more likely to report fictitious events as occurring, when repeatedly told about them, sometimes even after being told the event was fictitious, once again, due to an increase in familiarity (Johnson, et al., 1993). However, this study was based on ficticious events that involved the children themselves; thus, the sources were perceptually and semantically similar, hence increasing the probability of false memories (Lindsay et al., 1991). Since in this case it was their teacher repeatedly spoken about, the children may not have source misattributed at all. However, Leichtman and Ceci (1995) found that suggestions can generate false memories even involving a stranger. These false reports were even produced during free recall, which is rare as literature tends to report few, if any errors in this condition (Ceci & Bruck, 1993)
The investigators of this case were actually told to engage in lengthy, repeated and direct questioning as this would be required for children to disclose the truth, as they have a tendency to initially deny any abuse. However, it has been recently argued that the strongest studies, in terms or methodology, indicate that if directly asked, children do not deny sexual abuse (Bruck & Ceci, 2004). Therefore, it appears that the combination of repeated questioning and being repeatedly told of their teacher's actions, led to increased familiarity, which in turn, due to inadequate source monitoring, resulted in the false reports. This coupled with the numerous other erroneous police procedures, highlights the need for the police to be made aware of certain aspects of child development and ways in which to elicit more accurate testimonies. This is especially required as younger children are only more susceptible to suggestion when there is a biased interviewer, otherwise they remember just as accurately as older children (Ceci, Ross & Toglia, 1987, as cited in Toglia, Ross, & Ceci, 1992).
False memories can also be readily induced in adults. In particular, hypnosis has the power to also create entire memories (Loftus, 1997), and therefore its ability to merely alter a memory is hardly surprising. In the case of Larry Mayes, hypnosis led an eyewitness to completely misidentify Mayes as her rapist. After spending 21 years in prison, he was later exonerated on DNA evidence. On Oct. 5, 1980, a cashier was raped by two men. At the time she was could not identify either of the men, other than to say one was taller than the other. The cashier was hypnotised by a detective and shown a photo line-up, where she picked out Mayes, despite failing to identify him in a prior physical line-up.
Hypnosis appears is based on the premise that suggestions are readily accepted during intense absorption (i.e. where a witness concentrates on physical/mental activity, Spiegel, 1995), forensically, this suggestion is that memory will improve. State theorists assume that hypnosis alters a person's state of awareness, enabling them to do otherwise incapable acts, such as recalling inaccessible information to increase recall (Gruzelier & Brow, 1985). In opposition, non-state theorists believe that it is not an altered state that gives hypnosis its power, but rather an interaction between mundane psychological factors (Sarbin, 1950, as cited in Kirsch & Lynn, 1995). For example, increased recall may be due to subjects feeling pressure to recall more as this is what is expected during hypnosis. This could easily explain the witness's misidentification in this case; as the hypnosis was carried out by a detective there was increased pressure, from this authority figure, to identify the culprit.
However, although it is suggested that recall increases under hypnosis, accuracy does not (Dinges et al., 1992), as suggestibility to leading questions and post event information has also been found to increase (Dywan & Bowers, 1983). State theorists would claim that as the witness in the case was placed in a dissociative state when recalling the perpetrator, her cognitive processes and hence, reality monitoring (i.e. distinguishing between memories of real and imagined events) would decrease, and so she would have been unable to source monitor any suggestions placed in her mind. However, non state theorists would argue that the detcective's authority increased the witness's acceptance to suggestions, as research has shown misinformation acceptance to increase with the perceived authority of the source of that misinformation (Toglia, et al., 1992). Also, when badgered by an official interviewer, witnesses become rattled and tend to change their memory recall (Wright, 1995, as cited in Wright & Loftus, 1998). It was also alleged that the detective particularly wished for Mayes to be convicted in order to provide information on an unrelated homicide. Therefore, during hypnosis the detective may have implanted the false identity, or at the very least, utilised leading questions.
McConkey, Barnier & Sheehan (1998) reported that clients using hypnosis for therapeutic benefits, typically report previously agreed upon false memories, with the same conviction as the original unwanted memory. In fact, hypnosis not only generates less accurate identifications, but also increases confidence rates behind these identifications (Sheehan & Tilden, 1983). Non-state theorists have proposed that this is due to the pressures that come with the hypnotic process and the belief that a good witness is a confident witness (Sheehan & Tilden, 1983). Therefore, the witness in this case would have been completely confident in her identification, hence, it is not surprising that during the trial her identification was believed by the jurors. In addition, the sheer length of the trial would have also increased her confidence over time (Lofts, 1996).
Although in the U.K. it is only advised to be cautious of hypnotically-based evidence, in some US states, evidence derived under hypnosis is considered inherently unreliable and is excluded (Indiana Rules of Court: Rules of evidence, 2005), thus stressing its fallibility. In fact, in this case, it was alleged that the detectives failed to mention the hypnotism, knowing it would not be admissible in court. Ofshe (1992) even reported a case in which suggestions and leading questioning from authority figures under a hypnotic state induced a man to falsely confess to the sexual abuse of his children. Therefore, I believe the combination of hypnosis, pressure from authority figures and leading questions must have led the witness to falsely identify Larry Mayes, and her high level of confidence ultimately led the jury to his conviction.
Although the previous case showed eyewitness error to result from hypnotic suggestion, it is also possible for misidentification to occur due to inadequate police procedures. The case of Bernard Webster is an example of how fallible line-ups can be if not carried out properly. In 1982, a Maryland teacher was raped in her apartment. She described her attacker as a black male, with dark complexion and close cropped hair. Two workers also said they had seen a man of that description, despite Webster claiming to have been nowhere near the incident. These three witnesses all picked Webster's photograph from a photo line-up and later also identified him in a physical line-up. This ultimately led to Webster's conviction, however, in 2002; he was exonerated on DNA evidence.
In this case, a poorly conducted line-up led to 3 people misidentifying Webster, including the victim, despite him being 8 inches shorter than their original descriptions. It has been proposed that, when selecting a suspect out of a line-up, people undertake a relative judgement process and choose the person most resembling the culprit relative to others in the line-up (Wells, 1984). It is possible that as the initial photo-line-up did not show any conceptions of height, and also as the original descriptions were vague; the witnesses may have resorted to relative judgements in the line-up. This identification could have then led to a subsequent photo-biased line-up, in which the witnesses identified Webster as he was the only one present in both line-ups (Loftus, 1996). This familiarity, like the process of unconscious transference, may then be mistakenly related back to the crime rather than the photo line-up, (Loftus, 1996).
However, a relative judgement process is only an adequate strategy if the suspect is present. Wells (1993) found that when a suspect is removed from a set of distractors and not replaced, those who identified a suspect in a suspect-present line-up, simply identified someone else if the suspect was absent, and so must have been making relative judgements. The most superior method of preventing relative judgements appears to be through sequential line-ups, where photos are presented one-by-one. Lindsay and Wells (1985) reasoned that this would force eyewitnesses to make absolute judgements and make comparisons with their memory, as relative judgements would no longer be possible. In fact, a meta-analysis of 23 papers has found false identifications to be significantly lower for sequential than simultaneous suspect-absent line-ups (Steblay et al., 2003). Sequential line-ups reduce false identifications in biased line-ups (Lindsay et al, 1991) and are especially effective when eyewitnesses are unaware of the number of line-up members as it ensures certainty over their choice (Lindsay & Wells, 1985). Indeed, Lindsay and Bellinger (1998) also demonstrated the inferiority of alternative procedures devised even by the police.
Evidence advocating the sequential line-up has resulted in the sequential-superiority effect; that is the procedure produces a higher ratio of accurate identifications to mistaken identifications than a simultaneous line-up (Wells, 2001). However, sequential line-ups are also approached with criticism. Gonzalezal. (1993) has proposed that showups (i.e. the presentation of a single suspect) may be a better method of identification as they also lead to absolute judgements, and despite Lindsay and Wells's (1985) claim that accurate identifications are unaffected in suspect-present line-ups; these identifications have been found to decrease by others (cited in Ebbeson and Flowe, 2002). In light of this, Ebbeson and Flowe (2002) have suggested that sequential line-ups, rather than initiating absolute judgements, merely raise the criteria for making a positive identification, as witnesses become more cautious of their decision. In response, Wells (2001) now claims that sequential line-ups include both absolute and criterion judgements. Regardless of the type of identification process incurred, it remains apparent that a sequential line-up would have reduced the chances of Webster being misidentified, especially as Maryland courts appear reluctant to use sequential line-ups (Willing, 2002).
It appears that in the case of Bernard Webster, and as the actual perpetrator was not in the original line-up, Webster may have been the best relative match, thus leading to his misidentification. The sheer fact that 3 people separately identified Webster in 2 different line-ups suggests that the way in which line-ups are carried out is extremely important. Also, as research has shown sequential line-ups to be the best method for minimising this, I believe that had a sequential line-up been implemented, then Webster may not have had to spend 20 years in prison for a crime he did not commit.
Regardless of how suggestible children are, they are still capable of recollecting large amounts of accurate information, as long as adults have not engaged in repeated erroneous suggestions (Ceci et al, 1994). As the effect of interviewer bias is fairly pronounced in young children, it would be extremely beneficial to address this during interviews, especially as suggestions can have a lasting impact on the child's memories (Ceci et al, 1994). In fact, strategies to facilitate source-monitoring and reduce suggestibility have been found to increase accurate child accounts (Bright-Paul et al., 2004) and Hibbard & Hartman (1993) have suggested that having more than one interviewer would also be beneficial when combined with consolidated interviews. Therefore, as long as repeated questioning is minimised and parents are also made aware of the harm they can do, we could greatly reduce child false reports.
In terms of hypnosis-based identifications, it is important to bear in mind that although hypnotically suggested false identifications can affect memory, it does not necessarily destroy the capacity to recognise the real culprit. McCann & Sheehan (1988) found that those who mistakenly recalled seeing a robber wearing a mask after hypnotic suggestion, later correctly identified the original videotape in which the robber was not wearing a mask. In terms of the legal system, this would mean that it may be beneficial for cases in which identifications are made under hypnosis, to continue investigating for possible suspects.
And finally, although line-ups are based on the premise that the perpetrator is one of the suspects, this is not always the case, and so other measures should also be employed. For example, along with implementing sequential line-ups, witnesses should also be explicitly made aware that the perpetrator may not be present, as this can significantly decrease the number of misidentifications (Malpass & Devine, 1981). As line-up procedures are system variables (Wells, 1993), there are many aspects that can be manipulated in order to produce less erroneous identifications. Fortunately, some US states are now incorporating research based guidelines set by the justice department on conducting line-ups (Willing, 2002) and similar guidelines in England and Wales have also been set up (Wells, et al., 1998). However, although not all guidelines are being adhered to by everyone, the law does generally satisfy them (Kebbell, 2000), and so valuable progress is being made
As it is clear that eyewitness error can occur in a number of different ways and that these errors coincide with extremely confident testimonies, it seems imperative for both witnesses and the legal system to be aware of these factors so steps to reduce the number of wrongful conviction can be implemented.