In terms of the current situation, the organisation seems to be adopting very much a Taylorist (Taylor, 1911) approach to it's culture and management and employing the methods of scientific management in running operations. This is an early school of job design and focuses on work simplification, limited social interaction and repetitive work processes. The symptoms of low morale, absenteeism and low trust and the autocratic management style are typified by organisations run in this fashion and do suggest a number of underlying issues. It is likely that the root of the problems centre around the culture of the organisation, more specifically how employees are motivated and rewarded. There are a number of different schools of thought in this area and the organisation does have a number of options, each with different technical, social and financial implications and these are considered in turn below.
The overall issue can be described as a problem with the culture of the organisation. Firstly, it is helpful to consider what sort of culture the organisation may want to foster. Handy (1999) identifies seven different approaches which include scientific management at one end of the scale and also, for example, the Human Relations school (Barnard, 1938) the Technology school (Woodward, 1965) and most recently the Institutional school which combines all of the approaches. Perhaps the most applicable to this organisation is the Socio-Technical school proposed by Rosenfeld and Wilson (1999) who have simplified and combined the seven schools into three - Scientific Management, Human Relations and Socio-Technical. The latter suggests that the Scientific Management school fails to manage the social interactions in the organisation, leading to issues such as that faced by the firm concerned here, and advocates managing the interactions between the people in the firm and the technology as the key to successful management. It is probable, given that the organisation is likely to use significant technology in it's manufacturing and given the problems that this particular organisation has, that a socio-technical approach would work for this firm. This would rely on a number of changes being made to the ways of motivating the staff and the design of the jobs in the organisation.
In terms of culture change, the organisation needs to consider three elements (Kerr, 1975). Firstly, the rewards system needs to be altered. Secondly, selection needs to be discussed and finally training is important. The most complex of these areas is altering the rewards system, as this links to theories of motivation and job design, of which there are many, often conflicting, views. There are two main theories of motivation - Extrinsic and Intrinsic. Extrinsic motivation focusses firmly upon the tangible aspects of rewards - pay, conditions and rewards that stem directly from task performance. Intrinsic motivation is much more complex and relies more on motivation through true job satisfaction, and being motivated by the job itself. Each has merit and the choice of how to motivate employees has significant impacts on the organisation in terms of solving the issues that have surfaced.