Organisations that sell Business to Business (B2B) rather than Business to Consumer (B2C), such as Fujitsu, arguably have a tougher task in understanding client behaviour and buying patterns, as these markets are often more complex with a number of intricacies evident only in B2B markets.
There are a number of aspects of business buying behaviour that these companies must understand to demonstrate a marketing orientation, discussed below.
Firstly, the company needs to understand what sort of company it is selling to. Is it a producer, who will use the goods as part of the production process of their own items (for instance a car manufacturer purchasing windscreens), a reseller who will sell the exact same goods on for a profit (e.g. Argos), or a government, public sector or institutional market, primarily purchasing goods or services to deliver services to the public. Each has different buying behaviours as each are buying the products or services for a different reason. Companies like Fujitsu can often be selling to more than one of these markets and so needs to tailor their selling strategies for each one.
Secondly, companies need to understand the primary concerns of business buyers. These are fairly generic across markets and the main concerns tend to be:
Quality - of product and also of service
Delivery - this enables the carrying of lower inventories and reduces risk
Service - the quality of the interaction with the company and of the service it offers in the sale and post sale process
Price - an important consideration. Whilst business customers do not always buy on price alone it is important, for instance in government markets the department is often obliged to accept the lowest quote
Perhaps the most important summary is that it is vital for the product to meet the buyer's specification. Most business customers will specify the attributes a product or service must have and they expect suppliers to meet their specifications.
This leads on to the fact that the company must understand the business buying process and how they can influence buyers at each stage of the process. Broadly, the business buying process is that the buyer recognises a problem, develops specifications to solve the problem, searches for suppliers and products which are then evaluated against the specifications, selects the most appropriate for purchase and finally evaluates both the product and the supplier post purchase. This is the full process and tends to be used for new task purchases. It may be shortened if the customer is performing a straight rebuy or a modified rebuy purchase as the purchase process is simpler and the buyer already has an understanding of the product or service and it's ability to meet the specifications. Any supplier needs to appreciate this process and their role within it - the most important part being to engage with the customer to develop products that fully meet specifications, as well as ensuring the full service mix that that particular business buyer requires.
There are a number of influences on the business buying process described above, and the company selling needs to be aware of all of the factors as well as understanding which ones it can affect. Broadly, there are four types of factor that can influence the business buying process. The first three are factors that the selling company needs to be aware of and adapt to but they only have a limited influence over. Firstly, environmental forces such as PEST (Political, Economic, Social and Technological). These are wider macro-environment issues that any company needs to be aware of. Secondly, organisational factors at the micro level such as the buyer's objectives, the company's purchasing policies and the structure of the buying centre. Thirdly, the individuals within the buying centre in terms of their demographics will affect how they purchase products. Finally, selling organisations need to be aware of the complex interpersonal relationships that exist within business buyers - who has the most influence in the buying centre, how they like to communicate, how the culture of the company works and how all of this affects buying decisions. It is also concerned with relationships between buyers and sellers, which is the key area where the selling organisation can have influence. By engaging in relationship marketing and relationship management in a similar way to Fujitsu, companies gain an insight into the internal workings of the buying company, build up relationships and thus potentially increase sales.
As well as understanding the type of market, buying process and influences upon business buyers, sellers need to understand that there are a few characteristics of business demand that are not present in consumer markets, and tailor their selling strategies accordingly. For instance, business demand is often joint, in that demand for one product is linked to that of another - in Fujitsu's case perhaps selling some system hardware, and then linked with that is selling the consultancy and implementation services for that system. Also, business buying is high risk as volumes are often higher and contracts are for longer. This, of course, also makes it high opportunity. Selling B2B is also resource intensive and a distinctive feature is that businesses often partner with competitors to deliver an end-to-end service to the customer and meet specifications - a feature not often found in consumer markets. Finally, it is important for B2B companies to note that whilst they are selling into businesses, demand is eventually derived from the end consumer so it is always worthwhile keeping an eye on the end consumer markets of the businesses they sell into and shifts in these markets.
Fujitsu's updated appreciation of buying behaviour has fed through into its strategising and client engagement - leading from an increased focus on the customer and meeting customer specifications. This has manifested itself in a number of interlinked ways, discussed below.
Firstly, Fujitsu has moved from a product led development programme to a client led one. This has meant that the company, rather than developing a product and brochure and giving these to the salesforce, is spending considerable time and resource with customers, understanding what they want and developing bespoke solutions in the eyes of the customer. It may not be that all of the solutions are bespoke as, such as in Dell Computers, there may be a core range of components which most customers need and which are adapted quickly and easily to make the final solution - however the solution appears to be fully bespoke to the customer.
This change in emphasis has turned the high level strategising on its head. Rather than Fujitsu executives deciding upon the products to be developed, these executives have moved towards a relationship management approach and are investing their time and that of their employees in discussing customer business issues and coming up with solutions for the problems, rather than fitting the problem into one of their already developed solutions. The marketing focus has shifted from a product focus to a collaborative problem solving one and whilst to some it may seem like a waste of valuable executive time, this kind of focus often reaps dividends as it has done at Fujitsu.
A new factor in Fujitsu's client engagement strategy is to bring in external experts to discuss business problems with senior customer executives, making use of the existing relationships to exploit this channel. This demonstrates that Fujitsu is making a financial investment in its new customer led strategy of understanding customer problems and then developing solutions. It recognises that in order to really understand the nuances of each customer's issues it may need to buy in specialist resource and is making the investment to do so. Linked to this is the fact that in order to develop end to end solutions that fully meet customer specifications and fully solve their problems, Fujitsu is partnering with other organisations that have the required specialist knowledge to enable it, under it's own brand name, to deliver the full service. In this way Fujitsu is making a name for itself as a full service provider, increasing market awareness and brand equity as well as satisfying customers.
In summary, Fujitsu's updated appreciation of buyer behaviour has led to a more consultative sales approach to ensure a full understanding of the customer's business and issues, and a more collaborative approach to solving these problems, focussing on client led development. This has clearly been a success for the company, resulting in increased profitability, client base, repeat business, customer satisfaction and employee morale.