An organisation's performance objectives have been defined by Slack, Chambers et al (2004) p44, as the business's approach to the factors of Quality, Speed, Dependability, Flexibility and Cost. When comparing and contrasting IKEA's performance objectives with their competitors, each will be considered in turn, although it is clear that they are linked, with decisions taken on one objective having an impact on one or more of the others.
Quality has been defined by Slack and Chambers as being doing things right, producing error free goods and reducing re-work. In this way quality impacts positively upon dependability and cost. It can be seen that whilst IKEA's goods are standard, flat packed and share components across product lines meaning that in percentage terms little goes wrong, goods do sometimes have errors in them in some way or another such as a hole drilled incorrectly or a piece missing. Further, the service provided instore is not geared to sorting out these problems - it cannot be said that IKEA competes on quality of service. The staff are there to ensure customers know where to buy things and to ensure product availability, not to provide an individual service. The stores are often very busy, space is at a premium and they can become quite unpleasant to be in at peak times. Competing on quality is not a key area of focus for IKEA. In contrast, for the traditional retailers this is arguably their most important key competence. The product is fully assembled as a back office operation and so there is less opportunity for errors to reach the eyes of the customer. Products are more bespoke, the stores are more salubrious in themselves and, perhaps the key difference is that these companies pride themselves on providing a personal, professional service.
Speed is clearly concerned with doing things fast and about minimising the time between the customer requesting the goods and receiving them. Having a speed advantage can lead to reduced inventories and operational risk, as forecasting can be on shorter timescales (Slack and Chambers). This is a key differentiator for IKEA - customers select their goods in one part of the store and pick them up in the last part of the store before leaving, thereby satisfying their need within a couple of hours. Even full service items are provided immediately. The only slow part of the operation can be the checkout at busy times, however in comparison with the paperwork required at traditional this is still a speedy service. In contrast, traditional stores do not focus on speed. Many items are made to order, often abroad and this builds in lengthy delays to the process - frequently 12 weeks or more in the summer when factories shut down on the continent. Speed is therefore an area where IKEA can, and does, compete very effectively.
Dependability according to Slack and Chambers means doing things on time in order to keep promises to customers. Being dependable can also save time (increasing speed) and reduce costs (Slack and Chambers). IKEA is a pretty dependable organisation - the automated stock re-ordering and stock categorisation systems ensure that stock availability is maximised, the stores are open for extremely long hours (the flagship store in Croydon is open until midnight on weekdays) and they are always easy to locate and get to, even though it make take some time to get there. Customers realise what the IKEA philosophy is and accept that there is little IKEA can do other than get the stock to the shelves - the customer is very much in control of the purchasing and "delivery" process. The contrast with traditional competitors is interesting in terms of the purchasing process it can probably be said that they are less dependable, the increased specialisation and making bespoke items inevitably often leads to delivery delays and disappointed customers and there are far more opportunities for error.
Flexibility as defined by Slack and Chambers means being able to change what is done to adapt to changing and unexpected circumstances or to give individual treatment. Having flexibility can give the company a speed and dependability advantage. Flexibility can be considered in terms of four factors; Product/Service, Mix, Volume and Delivery flexibility. In this case it is helpful to split this into five factors, by separating product and service flexibility. IKEA can be said to have relatively high flexibility in terms of product and volume - as suppliers tend to design the goods and as there are many common parts to IKEA's range, it is relatively easy to change a few things and introduce a new product into the manufacturing chain. Also, in line with the company's philosophy, IKEA produces simple, standardised, high volume products, increasing or decreasing output should not be too much of an issue (although there will of course be associated costs). IKEA's mix flexibility is arguable - to a certain point it is very flexible as it uses standard components, however outside of that range there is almost no flexibility. In terms of delivery flexibility there is very little, and the same can be said for service flexibility. Delivery services are not the IKEA way, and if a customer wants something delivered they must pick it up themselves and carry it over to a small area of the store where delivery can be organised at a cost. Roof racks and boxes can be hired or bought however this cannot be said to offer a great degree of flexibility to the customer. In terms of service, IKEA's strategy for solving problems is to ask the customer to bring the goods back to receive a refund, often involving the customer dismantling the item and driving many miles to get their refund. IKEA's traditional competitors compete on almost the complete opposite. They are generally lower volume, more specialised operations and thus volume and product flexibility is significantly lower. Goods are often many months in design and production, and production facilities need to be sourced and converted to produce the items. However, mix, delivery and service flexibility are much higher. Customers are offered a wide choice of product specifications on factors such as colour, size, wood used, grade of leather etc, and the goods are almost always delivered, often free, at a mutually agreed time and date. Also, when things do go wrong you can generally depend on the business to sort out the problems quickly and to the customer's satisfaction, often offering compensation.
A key objective for many organisations is Cost, and this is affected by the company's strategy in terms of all of the other performance objectives. A decision on speed, for instance, can affect the cost of the operation as can a decision relating to the flexibility strategy of a business. According to Slack and Chambers, cost's can be broadly defined in three ways, staff costs, facilities/equipment/technology costs and material costs. Cost is the single most important field of competition for IKEA - on all three metrics it is clear that IKEA intends to compete, and does so, very effectively. Staff are kept to a minimum, their duties restricted to stocking shelves, taking money and some specialist staff to answer questions (IKEA staff never offer help to customers unless asked) and to build the "rooms" instore as required. Facilities costs are also minimised. IKEA uses large footprint out of town sites where land is cheap to rent and the build is no more than a painted metal shell. Technology costs are higher - however this is deliberate policy to reduce other costs such as staff. IKEA's biggest advantage comes from it's materials costs. By creative sourcing such as using by-products from other processes in it's products and by clever design, multiple uses for components and standardisation and simplicity across the board it ensures it buys, manufactures and distributes in bulk, keeping costs to a minimum. In contrast, IKEA's competitors have higher costs in every area - there are often many staff instore waiting to answer customers and they invariable offer help as soon as the customer enters, facilities are often on the high street, meaning higher rents and are built of sturdier and more expensive building matierals. In terms of the materials costs themselves, they are usually much higher than at IKEA. Traditional stores make most items to order and frown upon using by-products to make components and outsourcing design. They have a much more individual approach to sourcing and manufacturing, meaning a step change in cost.
Turning to how the performance objectives are influenced by IKEA's competitive strategy - this is best dealt with by considering the detail of the IKEA philosophy, as this is the best source of the organisation's competitive strategy. In summary the base of IKEA's strategy is
In conclusion, this translates to IKEA competing on primarily cost and speed and making this the lynch pin of their strategy, whilst keeping quality and dependability in mind, but sacrificing some flexibility to achieve their objectives. The polar representation diagram below, as used by Slack and Chambers (2004) p58, goes some way to explaining the success of IKEA's strategy and what makes it so different from it's traditional competitors:
Another way to illustrate the fact that IKEA and it's competitors focus on the performance objectives to very different degrees and thus why they compete very differently can be shown by using the "Four V's" method of analysing operations as recommended by Slack and Chambers (2004) p25. The authors suggest that business processes can be analysed by the Volume, Variety, Variation in Demand and Visibility of the operation. Considering the contrast in IKEA's and it's competitors stance on these four metrics, the final diagram on the following page provides further support for them focussing on different competitive strategies:
IKEA has had to make a number of key operations decisions in order to achieve it's performance objectives. Using the framework in Slack et al p81, each will be considered in turn by way of a bullet point explanation of the category of decision, followed by the key decisions taken.
Based on IKEA's operational decisions as detailed above, it is clear that there will be significant tension between the operations and the marketing functions in the business. The most striking point is that IKEA is heavily focussed on operations management and back office processes in terms of manufacture, supply chain management and distribution. The front office side of the business does not receive much focus. IKEA relies on it's novel proposition and low prices to bring consumers to their stores, rather than heavy marketing to encourage them in. Perhaps a good way to summarise this is that people buy from IKEA, IKEA does not sell to them.
At IKEA investment is centred on back end efficiencies which then feed through to prices, rather than marketing. Indeed, although catalogues are delivered to customers homes in limited numbers, those that are picked up instore as a reference point need to be returned before the customer leaves. This is no doubt an efficiency measure (given the footfall in IKEA stores if every customer took away a catalogue the print run would have to be huge) but gives a good indication of IKEA's focus.
Finally, and very importantly, customers only get a passing mention in the IKEA philosophy. The company clearly focussed on simplicity of manufacturing, economies of scale, distribution and profit. Customers are a factor because they are the end consumers, but they are not the focus of the organisation's effort or resources. This is also in evidence instore - there are very few staff available to answer questions. Almost all staff are concerned with stock replenishment or taking cash.
In conclusion, it can clearly be seen that there is likely to be significant tension between the powerful operations function and the small marketing function, with marketing being seen as very much the poor relation.