Our company should, as a matter of urgency, look to find alternative suppliers for our products. We should also consider reducing credit terms in order to mitigate any risk in the meantime. The financial stability of Somerfield when compared to Tesco looks precarious and although some performance and profitability metrics have improved over the past year, their position looks precarious. Of concern to us as suppliers are the higher creditor days, but from a wider perspective there are problems with sales margins, profit per employee and returns to shareholders, amongst a number of other things. This company is not in a healthy state and represents a significant supply risk.
This report concerns Somerfield. Approximately 45% of Welsh Bakeries sales are to Somerfield and the company therefore places great reliance on them as a customer. This analysis is being undertaken with the objective of analysing the performance of Somerfield from the perspective of being a major supplier to them, and highlighting any risks or causes for concern which may need to be acted upon.
In order to provide context to the analysis, Somerfield will be compared and contrasted with the market leader in the sector, Tesco, to provide context for the analysis.
The report will contain four sections - Context, Overview, Ratios and Evaluation. This will enable a full analysis of the company in the context of the market that it is operating within which is vital to be able to properly evaluate company performance.
In the Overview section, the key numbers for both Somerfield and Tesco will be presented and discussed.
Bringing each element of the analysis together, as suppliers to Somerfield with the reliance that we have on the company, we should be very concerned about the performance and future prospects for the firm.
The grocery industry is one which has significant external pressures upon it. Coupled with this is the fact that it is highly competitive and with just a few large companies competing for business. Having said that, the Tesco results show that growth is there to be had - even despite the fact that a large proportion of Tesco's growth is in international markets in which Somerfield does not operate, it's UK business did show significant growth during the period. Somerfield clearly does not have the competitive advantage against Tesco in the sector, and this is a concern for future years.
The overview and ratio analysis compound this concern. On almost every metric, Tesco outperforms Somerfield. On some metrics, Somerfield is in a particularly precarious position. Shareholder returns are poor and given that the company is almost entirely equity funded, should they choose to sell and move their money elsewhere to get a better return for a lower risk, Somerfield would be in a difficult position indeed. Of special concern are the liquidity and solvency ratios, given our position as a supplier. Somerfield pays consistently later than Tesco and that, coupled with the knowledge of the overall stability of the firm, gives cause for concern.
More information would be useful in order to more accurately assess Somerfield and Tesco, for example:
In summary, our company should reconsider the reliance it places on Somerfield and attempt to find other purchasers for our products. Not to do so represents a huge risk to our future.