The problem that exists in the organisation is centred on two individuals, Gordon Steele, one of his subordinates, Harry Katama, and Gordon's decision to change the forms used in the routeing of materials in the warehouse. Gordon has been with the company for 3 years, is an authoritarian leader who had been in the army for 10 years. Gordon's authoritarian style appears to fit in well with senior management. Harry has been with the company since its inception, 17 years ago. Harry is well respected amongst his subordinates and his peers.
The text does not imply that there is any history of ill-feeling between Harry and Gordon, although Gordon does appear to look down on his subordinates, having said that the employees are 'unskilled men of generally low intelligence' when he offered his advice to the student trainees. Harry sees Gordon as someone who tries hard, is in with the company boss, but he doesn't understand the warehouse business.
The main crux of the problem is the decision that Gordon made about changing the forms used in the routeing of materials in the warehouse and the decision making process he used to come to that decision.
Fiedler's situational theory (Fiedler et al.1978) predicts the work-group effectiveness. It holds that group effectiveness depends on a successful match between the style of the leader and the demands of the situation. Gordon appears to fit strongly as a task motivated leader. He issued clear guidelines about the new forms that needed to be filled in, which was sent via a memo, which implies that he has poor interpersonal relationships with his subordinates. Harry appears to have a choice of the task / relationship style as his subordinates told the students not to argue with him (Harry) if tells them to do something. However, he seems to be much more participative as he demonstrated when he invited the students to lunch with the other foreman. Fielder found that the task directed style, as used by Gordon, was best in favourable and unfavourable contexts. It is difficult to ascertain the context of the case study, but it does not appear to be either of these extremes. If this was the case, then the relationship directed style fits best.
House's Path-goal theory (House 1971) emphasises on how leaders influence their subordinates' perceptions of work and personal goals. The leaders function is to act in ways that complement the work setting in which the subordinates operate. The subordinates are likely to be satisfied with the leader when they compensate for things lacking in the work setting. He identifies four style of leadership which are as follows (House and Mitchell 1974):
He also identified three variables which impact the effectiveness of the style all relating to the characteristics of subordinates, they are:
Gordon employed a very direct style of leadership, which is typically good for ambiguous tasks, but bad for clear and well defined tasks. However, the effectiveness of the style is impacted by the characteristics of the subordinate, and in this case, Harry was very authoritarian about his operation in the warehouse.
Vroom and Yetton (Vroom and Yetton 1973) developed a leadership decision making model which indicates the appropriate degree of participative decision making. The model emphasises two criteria of decision effectiveness quality and acceptance. Decision quality refers to the importance of the decision, whilst decision acceptance is the degree of subordinate commitment to the decision. The model designates five decision making styles, they are:
Ai You solve the problem or make the decision yourself, using the information available to you at the time.
Aii You obtain the necessary information from your subordinates, and then you decide on the solution to the problem yourself.
Ci You share the problem with the relevant subordinates individually, getting their ideas and suggestions. Then you make the decision.
Cii You share the problem with your subordinates in a group. Then you make the decision.
Gi You share the problem with your subordinates as a group. Then together you make the decision.
Vroom and Yetton then suggest that leaders perform a diagnosis of the situation by applying a number of decision rules:
Is one decision likely to be better than another? (If not, go Ai)
Does the leader know enough to take it on his or her own? (If not, avoid Ai)
Is the problem clear and structured? (If not, go Cii or Gi)
Must the subordinates accept the decision? (If not, then Ai and Aii are possible)
Would they accept your decision? (If not, then Gii is preferable)
Do subordinates share your goals for the organisation? (If not, then Gi is risky)
Are subordinates likely to conflict with each other? (If yes, then Cii is better)
The 'best-fit' approach (Handy 1993) towards leadership dictates that there are four sets of influencing factors that the leader must take into consideration:
The best fit approach maintains that there is no such thing as the 'right' style of leadership, but that leadership will be most effective when the requirements of the leader, the subordinates and the task fit together. This fit can be measured on a scale that runs from tight to flexible. Where there is a mismatch the three factors will move towards each other along the scale. If the factors remain too far apart, the group will cease to function or the task will not get done.
Kerr and Jermier (Kerr and Jermier 1978) have proposed that leaders are superfluous. They agree that providing task structure and showing support for subordinates are important, however, they suggest that these tasks can be accomplished without the leader. Whilst this approach does not address any leadership behaviours, it implies that the leader should leave the experienced subordinate to get on with their work without any guidance.
Gordon acted in accordance with Fiedler's theory; he attempted to change the mismatch in his style and his control of the situation by issuing clear guidelines on the new forms. This backfired when Harry refused to fill in the new forms. Although we can not ascertain for sure whether the context was highly favourable or unfavourable, it seems that the context was neither of these two extremes, so a more relationship directed style would have been more favourable in this context.
House's path-goal theory yields similar results to that of Fiedler. Using the House approach, Gordon's direct style of leadership was impacted by the authoritarian characteristic nature of his subordinate, Harry. Gordon needed to have been more supportive or participative about the creation of the form. The conflict would not have escalated had their relationship been more friendly and the conflict would not have started at all if Harry had been consulted in the first place about the new forms.
Using the Vroom and Yetton framework, Gordon made the Ai decision making style, which was to solve the problem himself with the information he had at the time. This decision making style was clearly wrong because the subordinates needed to accept the decision. If Gordon had analysed the situation in accordance with Vroom and Yettons rules he would have avoided Ai and Aii because the subordinates needed to accept the decision. It does seem doubtful that the subordinates would have accepted his decision regardless, so Gii appears to have been the better option. If the subordinates were to conflict with each other in the group decision, then Gordon should have made the decision, which is the decision making style Ci.
If Gordon would have made his decision based on the best fit approach he would have analysed his style of leadership, the subordinates and the task. This would have given him a mismatch in terms of the flexible subordinates, so he needed to move the factors towards each other. Therefore he should have been more flexible in his approach with Harry inn this instance.
The superfluous leader approach would allow Gordon's subordinates the freedom to get on with their job, without the need for guidance. Therefore, Gordon could have let his subordinates know that he needed them to standardise the warehouse forms, and allowed them to create the standard. Gordon should not have introduced the new forms himself. This approach would have been similar to the group decision making style in Vroom and Yetton's framework, but it doesn't give the leader the scope to make the decision if consensus could not be achieved.
Regardless of the approach taken, Gordon should have taken the time to examine the situation in which he was presented. Had he been aware of the different approaches for leadership behaviour he would have identified that there was a mismatch between his style and the style required in the situation. Had he used Fiedler's approach, he would have identified the mismatch, although Fiedler's theory would have led him to change the situation to favour his style, which would have yielded a similar result to what happened. House's path-goal theory and the best fit theory should have made him more supportive in the situation, which is what was required, although these approaches do not go into the detail required. The superfluous leader approach would have left the subordinates to get on the way they always have done. There would not have been any conflict in this approach, although it would not have resolved the problem with the current process. The best leadership approach in this situation would have been the Vroom and Yetton leadership decision making model, which would have analysed the situation and given Gordon the style necessary to handle the given situation.
It appears from the case that Gordon should not get rid of Harry. Harry is a very effective leader in the surgical stores section and has a lot of friends within the company. Getting rid of him would not be good for morale, and it would be difficult to replace someone with seventeen years of experience with the company. Gordon should sit down with the warehouse foremen and explain why the forms need to change. He should use this opportunity to gather their ideas on the form, allowing the group as a whole to make he decision. If the group can reach consensus, then there it is very unlikely that there would be any resistance to the new forms. If the group can not reach consensus, then Gordon should make the decision himself from the alternatives generated from the meeting. This approach is more likely to have some resistance from the foremen, but, this resistance should be minimal because the foremen would understand the reason for the decision.