For this analysis I will look at the supermarket chain Asda. Asda began life in Yorkshire in 1965 as Asquithes and later became Associated Dairies, which was eventually shortened to Asda. Asda had a troubled history until the early 1990's, when Archie Norman turned the company around by focussing on value for money and permanently low prices. In 1998 Asda became part of the Wal-Mart family, who also shared the same low price strategy. Since the acquisition by Wal-Mart, Asda has gone from strength to strength, although this has started to stutter in the last year.
Asda has always has always focused on sales rather than marketing, which is part of the reason for the recent decline in fortunes. Andy Bond, the new president of Asda, has started to make attempts to rectify this situation by looking towards a more marketing driven orientation. This assignment will discuss the elements of the marketing environment relevant to the retail sector, along with steps that are being discussed to aid the recovery of the company. It will conclude with recommendations on where Asda should be focussing their efforts.
British retailers are constantly calling the current retail economy the toughest they have been in for more than 20 years (Finch 2005). In February, the BBC website (BBC 2006 a) announced that 40% of shops had said that sales were down on a year ago. Consumer concern over energy, water and council tax has caused consumers to spend less. However, consumers still need to purchase basic goods such as food, which means that Asda, along with other retailers should still have customers walking through their doors. Last year Asda won the grocer 33, a supermarket price comparison run by the grocer magazine, for the 8 th consecutive year. This means that they should be in a strong position during tough retail climates. As a result of this, I would conclude that the economy is an important factor in the marketing mix; consumers are looking to get good value for money, so a marketing mix involving price and promotion would be important. Asda recently introduced the promotion of buy one get one free (BOGOFs) on selected items, although they are changing this to be two for x, which should represent better value, but I fear the promotion may not seem as attractive.
Supermarkets, especially Tesco's, are attempting to expand rapidly. It has emerged recently that Tesco's has a land bank of 260 sites (Lyons 2006), at least 60 of which have been granted planning permission (Grimston 2006). Asda had been banking on the successful takeover of the Safeway chain of stores, which the competition commission determined that Morrison's was the only bidder allowed to take over the Safeway chain due to concerns over competition. As a result of the difficult planning permission process, supermarkets have turned their attention to the convenience sector in an attempt to aid their aggressive expansion plans. Both Tesco's and Sainsbury's have already moved into the convenience store format by taking over existing players. Tesco aims to increase the number of small format stores to 1200 in the next 10 years (Grimston 2006) from its current total of 706 made up from 160 metro and 546 express stores.(Tesco 2006 a). Asda is also set to open their first convenience format store in Northampton at the end of March this year. Asda will focus on selling their own brand products, which are sold for less and generate more profit than the branded products sold in their super centres. Asda has plans to open up to 200 small format stores in the next 5 years, whether this is done through acquisition, or natural expansion remains to be seen. The convenience sector is also seen to be ideal for the supermarkets as people's shopping habits have changed, which is covered in more detail later. Recently, the office of fair trading has referred the supermarkets to the competition commission amid the effects they have on local shops (BBC 2006 b), however, this is unlikely to produce any recommendations for 2 years. The legal, regulatory and political forces are set to shape the supermarket industry. The price and place elements of the marketing mix are the most important here. I have mentioned the expansion plans of the major players in this sector, which will attract shoppers to purchase their cheaper produce. The competition commission outcomes could have serious implications to the sector. Some people have called for Tesco's to be split due to their current dominance of the sector. I would be surprised if the competition commission finds anything against the supermarkets because the sector is fiercely competitive, which means that the customer always comes out on top. The potential market share that Tesco's could gain is alarming, but I think their focussed expansion is more likely to come from foreign markets, which should allow the other players the opportunity to claw back some of the domestic market.
Social and green issues are a new area of thought for supermarkets and it is constantly evolving. There has been an increase in concern in how products are grown and of genetically modified food. This has led to an increase in demand for organic produce, 11% between 2004 and 2005 (Lawrence 2005). The supermarkets have provided for this increase in demand, but the consumers appear to be favouring farmers markets and independent shops for this produce.
This customer concern has also changed the habits of shoppers. Customers are less inclined to have one big weekly shop in favour of more regular smaller shops. This is because more eat more healthily and prefer to purchase fresh fruit and vegetables more regularly in favour of frozen vegetables. The acquisitions in the convenience sector move the supermarkets closer to their shopper, which allows the customers to do this.
Consumers are also more aware of the power that supermarkets have. Much of this is aimed at Tesco in the UK, which has it's own anti Tesco website, . The content of this site claims that "Tesco's success is partly based on trading practices that are having serious consequences for suppliers, farmers, overseas workers" (Tescopoly 2006), although Tesco made more than 2 billion profit last year, so this feeling is clearly not widespread. In the US, the anti Wal-Mart movement, , has made more headway, preventing its expansion plans and lobbying for a health care bill in Maryland, which was specifically aimed at Wal-Mart. This has culminated in an anti Wal-Mart movie, the high cost of low price, which hit the screens last year. In the light of hurricane Katrina, Lee Scott, the CEO of Wal-Mart, has taken some of this criticism to heart and has announced plans to improve Wal-Mart and its image by increasing the amount of recycling, committing to use more fuel efficient vehicles, and only use suppliers that meet strict ethical guidelines (Scott 2005). Many of the changes identified could actually increase the company's profitability. If Wal-Mart's trucks increased their fuel efficiency by one mile per gallon, the company would save $52m dollars each year. The social and green issues are becoming more important in the marketing mix, and they would affect the product, price, promotion and possibly the people aspects. The product and promotion mixes would be the largest in this environment. Social and green issues bring about new opportunities for supermarkets; however, these can disappear as quickly as they arise. One only has to think of the Atkins diet, which was a revolution a few years ago, but is never mentioned anymore. The demand for organic produce is currently on the up, and supermarkets need to flex their products accordingly. Companies would not undertake such expensive projects unless there was something in it for their shareholders. This could be in the form of regaining sales opportunities, or long term cost savings. The price mix will also be affected because the company would either need to charge more for the ethical product, or reduce their margin on the item, both of which may affect their profitability. Finally, the people mix would be affected; the situations I have discussed would improve the morality of the companies, which would improve the employee's satisfaction of working for that company.
The major supermarkets are attempting to use technological forces to improve their offer to the consumers. Excluding the new products developed through technology, supermarkets have attempted to increase their online presence. Tesco's online business took 700m in 2004/05, which made it the largest online grocery offer in the world (Tesco 2006 b). Tesco.com deals with 170,000 orders per week compared with second placed Sainsbury's with 38,000 (BBC 2205). Whilst Asda's market share is relatively small, WalMart.com has overtaken Amazon with the number of hits in the US (Hitwise 2005). The Wal-Mart website has focussed on non food items, which typically generates more profit than food does. Asda plans to utilise Wal-Mart's website technology to increase its non food offer. This is a massive opportunity that it is not currently exploiting.
Another area of technology that is interesting the supermarkets is Radio Frequency Identification tags (RFID). Bar codes need to be in the line of sight of the scanning device for the code to be read, whereas RFID tags, which transmit and receive radio signals do not. These RFID tags could revolutionise the way retail outlets operate. The RFID tags could be used in the supply chain to keep accurate and real-time stock information about the number of items on the shelves and the number of items in the store warehouses. This information is currently collated by eye, but RFID scanners could take it a step further by monitor stock as it is taken off the shelf. This should increase availability and hence sales. RFID tags could also be used to reduce thefts from the stores and could help reduce the queuing time at checkout. Asda's parent company, Wal-Mart, is one of the global leaders on RFID technology, along with Tesco. The flip side to RFID is the consumer concerns over privacy. Tesco recently made the headlines by connecting RFID tagged razor blades to the store CCTV cameras to monitor any attempted thefts. Passive RFID tags used by retailers do not contain any power source so they can last forever. This information could be read every time the customer walked past a RFID scanner.
In relation to the marketing mix, technology will have a huge influence on the place and product. It has the potential to shape the supply chain used in the supermarkets. Having the product on the shelves is paramount to selling goods, so this is eagerly anticipated by the supermarkets. The increase in internet sales also allows the supermarkets to reach new markets relatively cheaply.
The bargaining power of supermarkets is immense. Typically, the larger the supermarket, the more power they have over the suppliers. Suppliers need the supermarket shelf space to sell their items, so it is very important to keep the supermarkets happy. With more stores and market share than the other supermarkets, Tesco has the most purchasing power. Asda is looking at ways to use the buying power of Wal-Mart to help reduce the price it pays for items. Wal-Mart plans to centrally purchase items required on a global basis and distribute them to the individual countries. An area where this is starting to happen is with the apparel departments. George @ Asda is using its suppliers to provide clothing for other countries in the Wal-Mart family. By buying larger amounts of fabric, bigger discounts can be obtained, which reduces the overall cost of producing the items, which can be passed onto the customer by means of price cuts. This is a very important element of the marketing environment and is present in Asda's future business plan.
I have already discussed the power supermarkets have over the majority of their suppliers; however, there are certain brands that have some power even against the supermarkets. These are generally very powerful brands, whose products have a large consumer demand. Products in this category would be the cola giants, and Cadburys etc. Many of these brands keep the supermarkets happy by offering their goods on Buy One Get One Free promotions. The suppliers fund the cost of the promotion, which allows the supplier to maintain the price integrity of the brand, and also allows the supplier to favour a certain supermarket over the others.
There are not many substitutes for purchasing food. Customers could shun the supermarkets in favour of smaller independent retailers and farmers markets, as with organic produce. However, modern consumers are conscious about the money and time they save by shopping at supermarkets. Internet and television shopping are possible substitutes, but internet based retailers need stores and / or warehouses to deliver from, and these need to be fairly local to the population in order to provide fresh food. The supermarkets are the only companies that have the local presence to be able to maintain fresh food during delivery. There will always be substitutes to retailers evolving as consumer demand changes, however, the supermarkets are powerful enough, and responsive enough to take on the threats as they arise. With the exception of increasing their presence on the internet, there are no real substitutes to the supermarkets.
As I have already discussed, the competition commission is investigating claims that there are substantial barrier to entry in the supermarket sector. This barrier is not only to new entrants, but also to their own expansion plans. Supermarkets have used the convenience store formats to by pass the planning regulations that prevent new large supermarkets being built. Many people are suggesting that these two sectors should be combined and treated as one. This would allow the planning authorities to focus anti competition complaints by area, rather than by sector and area. This is likely to have major implications on the supermarkets in the future, especially Tesco.
The rivalry between the supermarkets is very high. Sainsbury had resisted from being dragged into a price war with Tesco and Asda, but they had to change their tact once their market share had fallen substantially. Since focusing on price, Sainsbury's has started to take back their lost market share again. Even when they compete on price, the supermarkets are aware of what can hurt the competitor more. In recent years, Asda has had to respond to price cuts from Tesco's rather than making the moves themselves. This has meant that Tesco's can choose the products it can afford to reduce, attempting to hurt the competition the most. Asda's recent launch in Northern Ireland was deemed the reason for the reduction in the price of petrol between October and November 2005 (The AA 2005). A similar observation was noticed when Asda opened their new store in Milton Keynes, where Tesco's had seven stores. As a result of the big four supermarkets competition on price and the convenience stores, price is no longer a point of difference between the supermarkets, which makes shopping at the local store a more viable option. The price element of the marketing mix, although the supermarkets should not only focus on price. In 2006, Asda is going to be more aggressive on pricing, hoping that Tesco, Sainsbury's and Morrison's will be focussing on other things. They are likely to target areas that would hurt the other supermarkets more than themselves, so if a price war does get triggered, then Asda should be better placed than the competition.
Having mentioned all of the macro and micro environmental forces, it is worthwhile analysing the information in a SWOT analysis. This will identify the areas that Asda needs to focus on.
Strengths
Wal-Mart's buying power and Global procurement
Price
Weakness
Number of stores
Slow to react to changes
Lack of suitable sites for expansion
Wal-marts bad reputation for employment and with suppliers
Opportunities
Wal-Mart RFID experience
Wal-Mart's website, WalMart.com.
Wal-Mart's buying power and Global procurement
Threats
Sainsbury's revival
Tesco dominance of the market
As can be seen from the SWOT analysis, Asda's largest strength and opportunity lies within global sourcing through Wal-Mart, and utilising Wal-Mart's experience with the internet and RFID. These factors are all aimed at reducing the price of the goods, and making Asda more accessible to the improving the placement of Asda. The big weakness of Asda is the fact that they have fewer stores than the other supermarkets, so there needs to be an urgency to increase the number of stores, which, I believe, is likely to mean a takeover is on the cards.
In conclusion, the supermarket chain Asda has seen its differential on price eroded by the other competitors in the market. The supermarket sector is hugely competitive and Asda has been slow to purchase sites for expansion and to move into the convenience sector. Asda must redress the balance by increasing the number of stores, which could be achieved more easily by moving into the convenience sector. However, there are plenty of opportunities within the sector for one of the players to take the initiative. RFID should have a major impact on the supermarkets, and could be the technology to shape the sector. Using Wal-Mart's purchasing power, Asda should be able to obtain products at a lower price than its competitors, which, along with carefully considering the price cuts, should help it improve its pricing strategy. Finally, Tesco's current market share of 30% could cause it a few problems because the competition commission's definition of a monopoly is one where the dominant firm has more than 25% of the market, so by that definition Tesco is a monopoly.