The first task that any organisation needs to understand before demonstrating a marketing orientation is to understand who their target customers are. Consumers who purchase goods for their own personal use go through a different process to customers who are purchasing on behalf of a company. There are four types of consumer buying behaviour; customers purchasing frequently bought items buy the goods with very little search and decision effort. For occasionally bought goods, consumers engage in a limited decision making process. For unfamiliar or expensive purchases, consumers engage in an extensive decision making process. Finally, impulse buying involves no conscious planning, just a desire to purchase something immediately. Business buyers are usually made up of more than one person, purchasing expensive items through a negotiation process. Therefore business buyers demand a lot of information about the product they are about to purchase.
Dibb et al (Dibb et al 2006) define the consumer buying decision process as a five stage process. The first stage is to recognise that there is a difference between an actual state and a desired state. The second stage is where the buyer searches for information about products that will resolve the problem. The third stage is where the buyer establishes criteria for comparing the products. The fourth stage is when the consumer chooses which product or brand to buy and the final stage is the post purchase evaluation. There are three sets of factors that influence the buying decision process. These are personal factors that are unique to an individual, psychological factors that influence consumer behaviour and social factors that other people force on buying behaviour.
Dibb et al (Dibb et al 2006) define the organisational buying decision model as a six stage process. The first task for the purchasing business is to recognise that a problem exists within its current operation. The next stages are to establish a product specification to solve the problem, to search for products and suppliers and to evaluate products relative to specification. The final stages are to select the most appropriate product and to evaluate the product and supplier performance. The organisational buying decision model has four major categories of factors that influence business buying decisions. These are environmental factors that are uncontrollable such as laws and regulations, organisational factors that the buying centre must adhere to, relationships of the people in the buying centre and the personal characteristics of the individuals in the buying centre.
Regardless of whether the company sells to other companies or to consumers, marketers need to answer the same questions. The Dibb / Simkin buying pro forma (Dibb et al 2006) recognise that marketers need to be able to profile the targeted customer / consumer. Marketers need to understand the composition of the buying centre, identify their key customer values, determine their buying process and understand the influences on this process. It goes on to say that they need to ask the following three questions:
What needs to be satisfied and for whom?
Where should marketers be active in the customer / consumer buying process?
Which influencing factors can they in turn influence?
The buying pro forma forces managers to think about their customers and what their company must provide. It also reveals the influences that the company must strive to influence and provides a framework against which to compare competitor moves and marketing programmes.
Marketers need to understand their customer's buying behaviour and the influences on their buying process. This enables them to target their marketing material around the buying decision process, which can influence the decision making process of the customer. An understanding of the buying behaviour allows companies to put the right information to the correct people at the right stage in the process. All this should enable the marketers to satisfy their customer more effectively. As consumer expectations rise and businesses become more competitive, it is becoming increasingly important that companies understand their consumer's decision process so they can offer them greater satisfaction in the buying process. By getting involved with the customers at the right time, they can establish a relationship with them that will improve the chances of getting business with them in the future. Customer buying behaviour is an area that my own company has had problems with in the past. The company had become so obsessed with price cuts that they failed to identify that they had dropped short of some qualifying factors that customers expected in the stores in the first place. After conducting market research into why the customers were shopping with competitors, they established that whilst the price of products was important, the cleanliness of the toilets and the caf were more important factors, and the business was failing to meet these requirements.
By spending the time to understand their customers, the marketers can get a better picture of their customer needs and identify the influences that the marketing team can target.
The UK business had a product-led approach to developing systems; they attempted to deliver ground-breaking systems regardless of the client's problem. Referring back to the organisational decision model, their marketing focussed on the fourth stage, which is where the customers start looking for products to meet their organisational needs.
Fujitsu has changed its marketing to a client led approach, which is targeted at company directors and focuses on the goals that organisations will look to achieve. This approach would prompt the directors to look at their current processes to identify problems. As a result of being the cause of the prompt the directors would contact fujitsu when they established that problem does exist in their company. The directors would be believe that fujitsu understood their business environment, and would be keen to do business with them rather than a competitor who would be selling a product. The directors are likely to be the major stakeholders of any project in their business, so would be in a position to steer the proposed solution towards the fujitsu one.
Fujitsu achieved this approach by identifying personnel in their company and external industry experts to identify the business problems facing their potential clients. This analysis enabled them to work with potential clients on verify the nature of these problems and explored how it could be used to solve them. Information Technology was not always a possible solution in solving these problems, so fujitsu's strategising process continued to explore possible solutions to these problems. Fujitsu identified that it did not have the experience to develop the complete solution for these companies, so rather than develop the skills in-house; they developed joint ventures with companies who had this experience. The joint venture solution was then offered to the companies under the fujitsu banner.
By getting involved with customers at an earlier stage, fujitsu is able to offer their expertise at this earlier stage, which enables them to shape the solution that the company is looking at towards their products. This also allows fujitsu to maintain a better relationship with the customer as they get involved with a broader range of stakeholders within the company.