Ikea's strategy is to provide furnishings at low prices that represent value for money with a wide range of choice. This is achieved through flat packed furniture which the customer assembles themselves. 'Traditional' competitors provide high quality bespoke furnishings, which are ready assembled and delivered when ready. Performance objectives highlight the reasons that consumers purchase goods or services from an organisation in preference to a competitor. Slack et al (2003), define 5 difference performance objectives, these are quality, speed, flexibility, dependability and cost. I will evaluate each of these performance objectives for IKEA against the traditional competitor.
Ikea's flat packed furniture is made to a high quality standard, although it needs to be transported and assembled by the customer. The quality is dependent of the customer's ability to assembly the furniture. 'Traditional' competitors have the product assembled in a warehouse and is professionally delivered to the customers home. The quality should be better in this instance, although this isn't always the case. Ikea would rate quality as important, although probably not as much as the traditional competitor.
Flat packed furniture takes up less storage space so IKEA can hold more units in the store warehouse and the regional depots. This allows the customer to take the furniture home on the date of purchase. Traditional competitors usually have a show room, where the customer can select their products, however, these need to be ordered, assembled and delivered to the customers home, which can take up to 12 weeks. An exception of this is when traditional competitors sell the display items. These are normally sold as seen and can be taken away when purchased. Therefore IKEA would rate speed as important, whilst the traditional competitor would not.
Ikea's sales strategy requires that products need to be available in the store when a customer attempts to make a purchase. If the stock is not in the store, then the customer will leave empty handed, unless they order an item. This may not be feasible if customers drive a substantial distance to shop at Ikea, which in turn would deter these customers returning. Traditional competitors can accept customer orders and flex their supply in accordance with these orders. Vague and distant delivery dates allow them to cope with any demand for the products. Delivery dates and times are agreed with the customer when the product is available, and although the range of delivery time is usually long, the customer can arrange delivery around their needs. Therefore Ikea would need to be dependable to be profitable, whilst traditional competitors build in time buffers to allow themselves to achieve this.
Ikea provides a wide range of choice within its stores. This is not only limited to furnishings, but also the colours of the furnishings and the fixtures that can be sold along side the furniture. Ikea has to be flexible to provide this. Therefore Ikea would not rate flexibility as being important as a performance objective. Traditional competitors offer a lot more flexibility in terms of the product selection, such as fabric and colour.
Ikea's whole strategy is to allow customers to have quality goods at a low price, and therefore must compete against the traditional competitor, which is usually expensive. There is a potential trade off between the quality and the cost of producing an item, so IKEA works closely with it's suppliers to help them to provide products at low prices, without compromising on quality. They even go as far as using multiple suppliers to provide different elements for a product. Ikea would rate cost as very important, whereas the competitor would not.
All of these performance objectives can be displayed in a polar diagram, which represents the relative importance of the performance objectives for a product or service.
Ikea's competitive strategy is to provide furnishings at low prices that represent value for money. These strategic decisions often contradict with each other. Low cost operators often struggle to maintain quality in their bid to reduce costs. Whilst Ikea is seen to be at the lower end of the furniture markets, it takes the middle ground here by attempting to achieve both. Ikea's global position and low price strategy puts it in line with other global retailers such as Wal-Mart. Wal-Mart's strategy focuses very much on the bottom line, so that savings can be passed on to the customer. However, this is now seen to be at the expense of employees and suppliers, which is giving Wal-Mart bad press. In contrast to this, IKEA provides products at a low cost, but attempts to work with the supplier to provide them with low prices without compromising quality and socio-economic standards.
Processing costs of providing products can be reduced by providing a low variety of products in high quantities, with a low variation in demand through a sales environment offering low customer contact. Ikea fits this model very well offering high volume products, through low visibility operations throughout the year. Traditional competitors provide a different service. They offer a more visible service, with a better range of products with greater quality. However, these products are very slow to be delivered.
In conclusion, Ikea's competitive strategy of supplying furnishing at low prices that represent good value for money is achieved, not by providing the lowest prices, but offering the best combination of the two. Examples exist where companies have striven for only one of these factors, which can be profitable, but can also cause problems. Ikea aims to be profitable in this way by supplying products in great volume with a large range of variety. It keeps costs down by providing a low variation of consumer demand delivered with a low visibility operation.
Ikea sits in a market that is at the mature end of the product life cycle. There are many competitors and there are a stable number of them. There will always be a fairly constant demand for furniture. Nowadays, furniture is not expected to last 25-30 years as it traditionally would, changing colours and style dictate this, so it is a competitive market, with evolving styles. Many low cost furniture retailers use this fact to bring in new ranges every year, with quality that is only expected to last for a short number of years. Other furniture retailers offer longer lasting furniture at a more expensive price.
Ikea places itself in the low price, value for money end of the furniture market. The layout of Ikea stores mean that people browse through the items in a homely setting, but are able to collect the item in the warehouse, which is located near the exit of the stores.
Ikea is well known for its product creation. It has revolutionised the flat pack market with look of minimalist furniture. They seem to work on the principle that not all customers like the same thing, so they develop a variety of products knowing that they cover a broad range of tastes. Many people dislike styles that Ikea produce, but a great many seem to love them. The new products and marketing function within Ikea are internally supportive in the fact that they are clearly the market leaders.
Ikea mainly sells its furniture out of the store, and are not made to order. It is therefore vitally important that the stock is in the store warehouse. Ikea has developed its stores to allow customers to pick up the items from their warehouse, which means that all of the store space is utilised. Prompt replenishment of items is vital to maintain the stock levels, as customers expect their required items to be available. If the item is unavailable, then this leads to missed sales. Prompt replenishment requires local distribution centres, but as Ikea only has 14 UK stores, these are replenished via the main DC in Sweden. The store warehouse is essentially a distribution centre and as a result Ikea does experience problems with availability. The assignment text implies that Ikea is considering a DC in the UK to deal with replenishment to its UK stores.
Anticipating future sales is a difficult task unless some framework is utilised. Products that have been around for a while can be planned more easily, generally using last year's figures as a starting point. Products with short production times also benefit from more accurate forecasts because influences such as customer demand are known. Lean or just in time (JIT) operations take delivery of the goods as they are needed, eliminating the need for storing inventories. The text describes the problems that Ikea has around the availability of products; it also notes that the UK stores get replenished via a distribution centre in Sweden, which would take time to deliver to the UK stores, as well as the cost in transporting the items. A DC in the UK would be essential if Ikea were to increase the number of stores. This would be essential if Ikea increases the number of stores by taking on smaller stores with less warehouse capacity.
Ikea, like many large retailers in the UK, are finding it difficult to get the necessary planning permission to build the large stores it requires. Ikea attempts to locate its stores close to dense urban areas, with convenient access to major road networks. Currently there are only fourteen stores in the UK, which welcome on average 10,000 people per day (Smyth 2004); 30% of which drive more than 2 hours to reach the store (BBC 2006). Ikea has ambitions to extend the number of stores, having recently announced that it is to open a city centre store in Coventry in 2007. It has also announced plans to develop a website that allows customers in certain area to purchase item on the internet (BBC 2006). In November, Ikea Germany announced plans to increase its mail-order business by launching its own home shopping shows.
Ikea splits its stock into 3 categories; Catalogue items, not catalogued and discontinued (from assignment text). This is similar to many other retailers, my own employer in the clothing business categorises lines into seasonality (autumn/winter and spring/summer), continuity and old. Within continuity, there is a further subset of items, which are the key selling lines. Availability of these key lines is constantly monitored. This helps prioritise warehouse shipments. I would assume that Ikea also closely monitors its catalogue items, because customers expect these items to be in the store, and no availability will reflect negatively on Ikea.
Many of Ikeas operations decisions are based around improving the environment and the lives of suppliers who work for them. Freight companies working for Ikea are required to provide statistics for their Environmental performance sheet (Ikea 2003 a). Ikea has also pledged to double the amount of freight to be transported by rail to 40% over the next 3 years (Ikea 2003 a). Ikea already works with their suppliers in order to help them achieve low prices without compromising the quality or their relationships with suppliers. (Ikea 2003 b). Many larger retailers look at the way Ikea works with their suppliers and their commitment to the environment and have taken action themselves. An example of this is Wal-Mart, whose CEO Lee Scott announced that what steps Wal-Mart would take in the light of hurricane Katrina. He announced, amongst other things, that Wal-Mart would strive to increase the efficiency of their trucks by 25% over 3 years and double it within 10 years. An increase of 1 mpg in every Wal-Mart truck would save the company $52m every year (Scott 2005). This demonstrates that small environmental efficiencies can make a large difference.
Taking all of this information into account, Ikea attempts to be pro-active in its operations decisions. It has started to respond to customer criticisms by increasing the number of stores, despite taking the difficult decision of taking on new format stores. This in turn will have an impact on its operations because it does not have the supply infrastructure to cope with the new formats. Ikea has fantastic relationships with its suppliers, who in turn, produce sustainable products for the best prices.
There is likely to be some tension between the operations and the marketing functions, the way that organisations are structured increases the likelihood of some conflict. The marketing function is likely to want more product variety, which will bring in more sales. Operationally, this is likely to increase the costs of producing products, as defined by the four dimensions of operations (Slack et al 2003), which is what the operations function will want to control. Communications between the two functions is also vital for any positive relationship to exist.
The Ikea marketing function is primarily focussed on printed material. 70% of the marketing budget is spent on the Ikea catalogue (Ikea 2006), which is distributed to 131 million homes across the world (Ikea 2003 d); making it the most widely distributed commercial publication in the world. This printed material obviously does a good job because thirty percent of Ikeas customers travel more than 2 hours to reach the store (BBC 2006). This level of loyalty is likely to be unsustainable. Ikea has recently announced plans to open city centre stores and introduce internet shopping. This will increase the catchment area for customers as well as making Ikea available to new customers who may not have a car. Operationally, this is likely to require a new UK based distribution centre because the city centre stores will not have the same warehouse capacity as the larger out of town stores. This also introduces a new store concept to Ikea and it will have to spend time developing the store format. Ikea would need to pilot new smaller format stores to work out the best format, which would involve a lot of time and learning. Asda has recently undertaken a similar exercise to increase their number of stores. They started by trialling the George clothing brand in city centre stores in 2003. This has led to the trial of numerous locations and the stores have seen many different sales trends. Asda have still not announced a large scale roll-out in this format.
My experiences have also lead to other conflicts between the marketing and operation functions. Limited warehouse capacity, and transit to stores has increased the trade offs between the marketing function and supply chain element of the operations function. The marketing understands that there are a limited number of delivery intakes that each warehouse can achieve, as well as the movement from the warehouses to the stores. However this does not cool the debate between the functions when the intake and transit requests are negotiated.
Not being in a position to comment on the level of communications between Ikea's marketing and operations function I can only speculate from my own experience. In an ideal world the dialogue would be open between the two functions, but my own experience goes against this. The marketing function is concerned with the number of items sold, whilst the operations function looks to save money through cost control. It is very difficult to strike a balance between these two functions, as increasing the sales throughout has associated costs.