Despite the fact that the internet has been emerged for more than forty years, it was only a decade ago that the ebusiness and web technologies was become popular since the boosted dot-com fever. Many people have stated that technologies are offering companies unprecedented business opportunities in developing new business models and processes. However, the reality is many companies have failed in this new economy due to the flawed business strategy. The critical point here is how to achieve a balance between "bricks" and "clicks" strategies that links the physical and the virtual worlds? How do you get your winning business system in this internet era?
In this paper, Apple Computer iTunes Music Store is examined on recent theories. By analysing the underline competitive strategies, Apple's closed selling system is identified which gives managers insights on the managerial implicates to success.
Due to the relative youth of ebusiness, managers are still struggling for the path to enter this new market. With the boost of dot-com fever, traditional brick-and-mortar companies are being attracted to move online by a myriad of new online pure players employing a clicks-only business models. Research also shows that the brick and clicks combination companies posses higher market share and higher marketing efficiency than pure players do (Min and Wolfinbarger, 2005). However, the pessimistic scenarios point to the demise of dot-com to 'dot-gone' (Cassidy, 2002, Currie, 2004) largely because of the 'flawed' business strategy. The underline issue here is whether the advent of the Internet renders the obsolescence of traditional forms of business strategy.
Porter (2001) suggests that manager should see the Internet as a complement, not cannibal of, traditional ways of strategy. Though the Internet provides better opportunities for companies to establish distinctive strategic positions, the greatest impact is to enable the reconfiguration of existing industries that had been constrained by high costs of communication and gathering information in which rendering many traditional business strategies more essential rather than less. Established firms should integrate the traditional successful strategy with the web technology in order to gain the competitive advantages.
On one hand, Porter argues that the integration of existing capabilities and the Internet strategy is essential; on the other hand, Tapscott (2001) contends that radical changes of business partnerships and process will happen by the rapid development of ebusiness that shape the ways to conduct businesses. He states that Internet networks have become the basis of economic activity and progress. They create the opportunities for a firm to make use of assets and resources from other firms outside the organization's boundaries. New business models and processes should be identified and pursed, though products or services are defined most strongly from the old economy.
At the heart of the debate lies the question of what is the right mix of bricks and clicks strategies to the success key in ebusiness. In this paper, Apple Computer iTunes Music Store is examined by the Clicks-And-Mortar Spectrum (Gulati and Garino, 2000) and Willcocks and Plant's (2001) E-strategic Grid. Apple's closed selling system is identified which gives managers insights on the managerial implicates to success in this Internet era.
The term 'Bricks and clicks' has been defined as the engagement of electronic business alongside conventional business operations in the form that best fit the strengths of each channel in a complimentary and synergistic manner (Bahn and Fischer, 2003). However, there is no generic frameworks or models on the formulation of the balance of the Internet strategy with traditional business operations. The challenges managers keep addressing included: Should we integrate our Internet business with our traditional business? How do we leverage our capabilities and connectivity to extend our ebusiness vision? Should we keep the Internet business separated? (Feeny, 2001, Gulati and Garino, 2000).
The answer to those questions is largely determined by the company's Internet initiatives to manage the capabilities of integrations. In order to explore the match-up of "Bricks" operations with "Clicks" strategy, Gulati and Garino (2000) research on three established retailers and come up with a spectrum of choices available, with trade-offs associated in each choice (Figure 1).
Garino and Gulati claim that decision on the integration-separation is not an either-or choice. Instead, different companies should follow their own paths along several dimensions (Table 1) to determine how closely or loosely of the integration with traditional and ebusiness operations.
In general, Gulati and Garino (2000) advocate that by avoiding the binary choice on the integration and considering each aspect of its own business, a company can get the right balance between the benefits and tradeoffs, flexibility and creativity on the bricks and clicks strategies.
Willcocks and Plant (2001) take another approach. They examined 58 major brick and mortar companies that employing a full scale deployment of ebusiness on the Internet. They found that though most of the companies have started with strategy based upon the idea of technology leadership, companies then follow distinctive routes migrating through interim stages to a market strategy that are really sustainable and profitable. Willcocks and Plant identify four crucial strategic quadrants in their frameworks: technology, brand, service and market. They argue that companies can follow either two distinct paths to fully reap the advantages of ebusiness (Figure 2).
Willcocks and Plant (2001) suggest that firms initially take the path of creating or translating their original brands to e-business context, either by reinforcing / repositioning their existing brand on the web or by creating a new brand / copying rivals success in the market. The development of brand identity can be very expensive and can generate huge problems for companies that fail to deliver on the promises their brands represent. Levi Strauss closed its online operations due to its inexperience at selling in the Internet and the channel conflicts (Webb, 2002) with its retail partners (Willcocks and Plant, 2001).
Firms that follow the service improvement initiatives develop an almost obsessive focus on customers and information (Willcocks and Plant, 2001). Willcocks and Plant argue that the focus on service strategy tends to be more effective than solely on brand management. Indeed, the brand leaders also adopted a range of initiatives in service quadrant in order to enhance their brand identity (Table 2).
No matter companies take any path, the final destination should be in the search of a profitable market. As Willcocks and Plant (2001, p.56) state, the leading companies are those which have the ability to "integrate marketing, customer service and use of information and technology to deliver a profitable long term market share or niche strategy". The developed integration capability is scarce and not easily to replicate in bricks-and-mortar companies (Bahn and Fischer, 2003). Once a firm reach the market stage, the critical success factor is to continually differentiate your products or services from your competitors and make them less price-sensitive. By developing a sustainable strategy, differentiated offering is vital as customers can see the distinct value proposition as superior to alternatives.
Apple Computer, Inc., an American computer technology company headquartering at Cupertino, California, part of Silicon Valley (Wikipedia, 2006), was considered as a major player in the personal computer revolution in the 1970s. It is the first computer maker to introduce the commercial personal computer, Macintosh (also known as "Mac") embedded with graphical user interface (GUI) technology.
Apple is well-known for its innovation, reliable and integrated software and hardware, such as the iPod and iMac (Wikipedia, 2006). The iPod has just reached a remarkable sale of 14 million players in the final quarter of 2005 (Burrows, 2006). In April, 2003, they opened their online music store, called iTunes Music Store and has found a great success. As of February 2006, 1 billion songs had been sold through the Internet, consisted of more than 80% of worldwide online music sales (Wikipedia, 2006).
The success of Apple iTunes was given by tightly integrating its web service with its famous brands and products to form a single, seamless music delivery network. The company had three main reasons to integrate the online business rather than spin it off.
First, its existing computer brand, Apple Computer, was well-known for its distinctive aesthetics and superior quality. Apple iTunes website was given an instant credibility of company's reputation. As Wikipedia (2006) states, during its first 18 hours, it sold about 275,000 sound tracks and more than one million in only 5 days.
Second, due to the phenomenal success of iPod in digital music player market, iTunes music store is perceptive as the business extension, providing customers with a single view of Apple. The readily technology of iPod also plays a key role as the preloaded software directs to the iTunes applications family. The combination makes iTunes easier to gain the user's acceptance and at the same time forms a close one - stop shop system.
Third, large record suppliers are more willing to sign contracts with Apple Computer rather than a new Internet venture. On one hand, the suppliers are more confident on the protection of copyright of their sound trucks encrypted by Apple technology, called "FairPlay" (Wikipedia, 2006); on the other hand, Apple enjoys favour trading teams as for volume purchases and large bargaining power. This creates a win-win situation.
The iTunes's experience shows that the benefits of integration overwhelm the advantages of separation. If iTunes had set up an individual business unit separated from Apple family, it would have sacrificed the benefits of a well-developed customer group and the strategic advantages coming from integration. According to Gulati and Garino (2000) Clicks-And-Mortar Spectrum (Figure 1), Apple iTunes music store is classified as an in-house division, with fully integration on brand identity, management, operations and equity dimensions (Table 3).
Apple iTune, same as other e-initiatives, starts with the technology leadership strategy (Willcocks and Plant, 2001). However, different from other rivals, they focused on matching their technology strategy (sound trucks download service) with business strategy (iPod player product sales) and customer requirement (inexpensive, large collections with convenient service). Customers are experienced with unique value propositions from both buying iPod and downloading sound trucks from Apple iTunes.
Then, Apple iTunes rapidly move to reinforce their brand identity by showing their classical apple logo and iPod trademark on their website and software. This greatly enhances the traffic of the website as customers are trying to identify the famous 'apple' sign. Indeed, Apple has the highest brand and repurchase loyalty of any computer maker (Kahney, 2002, Wikipedia, 2006). Customers are devoted to the brand and refuse to switch to other competitors. Apple iTunes also adopts several service initiatives to fulfil the customer's need (Willcocks and Plant, 2001, Daniel and Grimshaw, 2002). For example, no matter you purchase Rock, Jazz, Latin, New Age, Inspirational or Opera sound trucks, Apple iTunes make the transactions easier by adopting uniform price tag per download. As long as the price is competitive, this greatly reduces the time for people to compare between collections.
In the profitable market quadrant (Willcocks and Plant, 2001), Apple iTunes differentiate their service with other music providers by providing exclusive sound trucks and collections. Table 4 illustrates some examples from Apple iTunes competitive strategies under Porter's five force model (Porter, 1980, Porter and Millar, 1985).
By mapping Apple iTunes strategies with Willcocks and Plant's (2001) E-strategic Grid, the path Apple iTunes pursues on market growth is shown as Figure 3.
Who will prevail in Internet Business? Apple iTunes music store shows a phenomenally successful result for over 80 % of online music market share (Wikipedia, 2006). We cannot neglect the power of iPod record sales and its closed selling system that helping the boost up of iTunes music. By executing the "iPod - iTunes - FairPlay" business formula, bricks and clicks strategies are seamlessly integrated to lock in the customers as well as obstruct the competitors. The "Apple Effect", that what Ulanoff (2006) refers to, create a lifestyle and industrial standard around its products. And Apple iTunes does create a new business model to compete in Internet marketplace.
Perhaps an even more provocative issue is how long does Apple sustain on its "closed system" competitive advantage. Microsoft, Apple no. 1 rival, has announced to open discussion with Sony regarding a new generation platform of online music industry against Apple iTunes (Downes, 2006). With thousands of licensed partners and distributors in Microsoft Empire, Steve Jobs, the CEO of Apple Computer will have to tackle the real ultimate challenge coming.