Selective attention is one of the mechanisms we use to manage complexity. As it is not possible to attend to everything in the environment, we tend to inherently select the relevant and filter out the irrelevant. Studies into selective attention generally involve a task in which the aim is to select the relevant information and ignore any distractors; hence a decrease in speed or accuracy would suggest a difficulty in filtering out irrelevant information. However, studies of aging and selective attention reveal various age-related deficits, which also appear to divulge information regarding other areas of ageing. For example, these studies can provide insight into the specific attentional processes affected and the ways in which they are affected. This essay aims to provide a review of ageing literature on selective attention, discussing the experiments and theories that arise from them, illustrating that our knowledge from this type of research can not only provide valuable insights into other theories of ageing but can also help us to improve life in old age.
The most commonly used method is the visual search task, which is where target items and distractors are presented in the same display. Traditional research found that when participants were presented with a cue indicating where a target item would subsequently be presented, only younger adults showed decreased reaction times (Rabbit, 1964). That is to say, older adults did not use the cues to facilitate their search even though they attended to them (as invalid cues were found to increase their reaction times). This coupled with the findings that increasing the display size has a greater effect on older adults suggests that older adults find it difficult to ignore irrelevant or redundant information (Rabbit, 1965). However, these early experiments were heavily criticised especially in terms of their methodology. Madden & Whiting (2004) proposed that as the two stimulus categories in the experiment mapped directly onto the responses, age-related differences in the use of cues may have been due to "a limitation in either the categorisation of the display item or the translation of this categorisation into a motor response" (p. 52). Also, as any one of the display items used in the experiment could also have been the target letter, we may simply be observing an instance of general age-related slowing (Madden & Whiting, 2004). These studies also told us very little about the underlying mechanisms involved in these age-related deficits and gave no information regarding which specific components of selective attention were affected, and so subsequent research has sought to produce theories to explain these results.
Feature tasks (targets determined by a single feature), conjunction tasks (targets defined but two features) and triple-conjunction tasks (target defined by the combination of three features) have shown that performance is a function of top-down and bottom-up processes (Humphrey & Kramer, 1997). That is to say, selective attention is determined by the activation of relevant feature combinations and inhibition of irrelevant features, and also by feature identification and perceptual grouping. It has also been found that age-related differences only occur during conjunction searches, thus suggesting age differences in the ability to use top-down processes to either facilitate the conjunction targets or inhibit the distractors (Humphrey & Kramer, 1997). These findings imply that older adults may require additional information in order to support top-down processes and effectively guide conjunction searches (McDowd & Shaw, 2000).
A common fallacy of visual search studies is that they all utilise varied distractor items, hence the generalisability of these results can be uncertain, as different levels of distractors could lead to different effects on cognitive processes (McDowd & Shaw, 2000). Therefore, it is imperative that research attempts to successfully investigate the role and effect of different sources of distractors. This criticism falls in line with an alternative framework, which assumes that age differences cognitive performance increase with the complexity of the task as this increases demands placed upon an already diminishing processing resource. This age-complexity effect suggests that aging causes a reduction in processing resources and hence, if distractor items are not dissimilar enough from the target, then the demand placed upon processing recourses will increase as the task would be more difficult. Although this framework tells us very little about why or how the reduction in processing occurs (Salthouse, 1991), it does suggest that any 'specific' age-deficits we see in selective attention may purely be down to the complexity of the task, thus implying that task-specificity may account for deficits in selective attention.
The theory that I believe to be more corroborative in terms of explaining selective attention deficits is the reduced-inhibition hypothesis. As selective attention refers not only to the ability to focus on relevant information but also to inhibit irrelevant information, it is believed that ageing is linked to an inefficiency of inhibition processing. The reduced-inhibition hypothesis (Hasher & Zacks, 1988) claims that defective inhibition either causes irrelevant information to enter into working memory, thus reducing its functional capacity or, causes irrelevant information in working memory to not be suppressed. Age-related decline in inhibition processing can be aptly seen in the results on numerous stroop tasks.
Stroop tasks test a person's ability to name the colour in which a word is printed when the word is a colour name that conflicts with the printed colour. Therefore an increase in reaction time would suggest a difficulty in inhibiting the meaning of the word being named. Numerous experiments have shown an age-related decline in basic strop test performance (see Graf, Uttl, & Tuokko, 1995, for a review) thus providing evidence for reduced inhibition. In addition, Hartley (1993) found that older adults can in fact inhibit conflicting information when the colour to be named and a block of the interfering colour are presented separately, but still simultaneously in adjacent display locations. This piece of research suggested that with advancing age, posterior brain attention systems responsible for selecting a spatial location are relatively well-preserved, and that it is the anterior brain systems responsible for processing a line of processing that is compromised (Hartley, 1993).
In spite of this, recent research is beginning to question whether greater susceptibility to interference during the stroop test is entirely indicative of an age-related decline in selective attention (McDowd & Shaw, 2000). Meta-analysis has shown that age-related declines in stroop test performance may be due to generalised-slowing when Brinley analysis is performed on the data (Verhaeghan & De Meersman, 1998). The generalised slowing hypothesis assumes that age differences in performance arise from quantitative rather the qualitative changes in information processing, as processing in all parts of the nervous system slow with age (Cerella, 1990), thus implying a speed-of-processing deficit.
However, some studies have sown that after performing the requisite analysis, age-related decrease in inhibition is greater than that which would be expected by generalised-slowing when distinct attentional processes are demanded by a task (Brink & McDowd, 1999; Hartley, 1993). In a study similar to Harltey's (1993) Stroop experiment, Brink & McDowd (1999) also found that older adults were only impaired when the colour of the word and the meaning of the word differed and so concluded that when attentional processes demanded by each task are distinct, they are not attributable to generalised slowing, hence suggesting a specific, rather than a general slowing. Indeed, Sliwinski and Hall (1998) proposed that when testing generalised slowing theories we should not be using conventional ordinary least squares regression analysis of Binley Plot data, but should rather be using hierarchical linear models (HLM). In fact, HLM analysis also showed evidence of variability of slowing and task-specific slowing.
Salthouse (2000) has concluded that many tasks include contributions from both generalised slowing and task specificity, and so we should be cautious of viewing these interpretations as mutually exclusive theories of age-related performance change. Therefore, although more empirical work is required, more theoretical work would also be needed in order to identify the best approach for explaining the observed age differences (McDowd & Shaw, 2000). It has been suggested that task-specific processes may be useful in expanding our understanding of selective attention in older people as it may influence the degree of age-related slowing. Therefore, we may even be able to produce measures to decrease the amount of age-related slowing that it occurring (Madden et al., 1992). It is also important to bear in mind that most evidence for the generalised slowing hypothesis is based on reaction time data and that this can not be the sole measure for selective attention.
Although, it is contested whether stroop tests are actually showing evidence for the reduced-inhibition hypothesis, experiments applying different methods have also shown support for this hypothesis. For example, Valeriani, Ranghi and Giaquinto (2003) recently found that the increase in Somatosensory Evoked Potential (SEP) amplitude during selective attention tasks was lower in older participants and was also already evoked during natural and distractor conditions. It was suggested that the elderly participants were unable to divert their attention from the electric stimuli during neutral and distractor conditions and, therefore, had lower attention resources to invest during the selective attention task, hence demonstrating a decrease in inhibitory control. McDowd & Filion (1992) also found that older adults were unable to inhibit attention to irrelevant stimuli when asked to ignore a series of innocuous tones. If studies examining inhibition and ageing do comply with the reduced-inhibition hypothesis (Hasher & Zacks, 1988), then this would imply that in situations requiring the processing of relevant information, older adults will be at a disadvantage as more of their attention will go to processing irrelevant stimuli, possibly even at the expense of speed or accuracy (McDowd & Fillion, 1992).
These reduced selective attentional capacities also have a number of cognitive consequences, most of which can be aptly explained by the reduced-inhibition hypothesis. A number of studies have examined the role of selective attention in language comprehension and found the reduced inhibition to account for the age differences as older adults have difficulty in inhibiting distractors that are embedded in a text (Zacks & Hasher, 1994, 1997, as cited in McDowd & Shaw, 2000). However, Dywan & Murphy (1996) found that younger adults who had supposedly inhibited the distractors also remembered them capably, whereas the older adults who had used the distractors had trouble remembering them. As a result, Dywan & Murphy (1996) attributed the age-related differences to source-monitoring errors, stating that older adults are unable to discriminate between the source being the target or the distractor. In spite of this, reduced inhibition has also been considered to affect memory performance as memory for relevant information would be poor due to working memory containing irrelevant information (Hasher & Zacks, 1988). However, this explanation also has conflicting views as the majority of research is based on divided attention studies that suggest memory deficits to be due to a diminished attentional capacity. In addition, selective attention studies have also shown reduced inhibition to affect performance in complex problem solving tasks. Molander and Bckman (1990, as cited in McDowd & Shaw, 2000) found that older adults did less well than younger adults during a miniature golf game when meaningful background noise was played This suggests that they were unable to inhibit the irrelevant information which in turn affected their performance. Regardless of the approach taken, these studies have shown us that diminished selective attention ability in older adults, as a consequence, also reduces language comprehension and memory and problem solving, thus showing selective attention to affect many aspects of the lives of older people.
It is clear that selective attention deficits do exist and studies based on Feature Integration Theory (FIT) also helps determine exactly where these deficits originate in terms of attentional processing. According to FIT, visual search tasks can be separated into two stages of processing, parallel (feature extraction) and serial (feature integration requiring focal attention). Plude & Doussard-Roosevelt (1989) found that during feature (distractors completely differed from target) and conjunction (distractors shared either the targets shape or colour) searches, feature-extraction stages were relatively unaffected by age, whereas the conjunction search showed the typical pattern of age decrements in visual search. Therefore it appears that visual search deficits arise due to later serial processing when features are required to be integrated, which also requires attention. In addition, visual search tasks typically show that as display size increases, there is a linear increase in RT and/or errors which also suggests the presence of a serial search process (Groth & Allen, 2000). Madden (1990) even concluded that these findings could be interpreted as a preservation of selective attention for older adults, as the feature-extraction condition provides subjects with the opportunity to discriminate targets and non-targets on a single stimulus dimension. Therefore, the improvement in search performance in the feature-extraction condition relative to the conjunction-search condition appears to be representative of efficient selective attention (Madden, 1990).
Studies into attention have found that attention could also be a processing resource, as it may serve as a source for other cognitive operations (Salthouse, 1991). Therefore the age-differences we see in experiments may in simply be attributable to a general reduction in attention (Hasher & Zacks, 1988; Plude & Hoyer, 1985). However, there seems to be a difference in opinion as to how we should measure and differentiate attentional processes. Plude and Hoyer (1985) assert that "...measuring attention consists of evaluating the selectivity of information processing" (p.52). However, the majority of research states that the focus should be on divided attention (Burke and Light, 1981, as cited in Salthouse, 1991). This is also reflective of a common flaw in the design of attention studies; namely their need to isolate different attentional processes. This appears to be counterproductive if attention is a processing resource, as it is difficult to entirely separate attention from other cognitive activities (Madden & Whitling, 2004).
In conclusion it appears that there is a lot to learn from selective attention studies, particularly in terms of the processes that not only may be affected by ageing but are also used by other cognitive activities. In addition, it appears difficult to ascertain whether we are actually seeing attentional deficits or in fact merely a product of generalised slowing. However, although the generalised slowing hypothesis is widely acknowledged it is also highly contested, the hypothesis may purely be a simplification of a series of complex and rapid mental processes and may overlook important sub-processes (Bashore, Ridderinkhof & van der Molen, 1997). Hence, it is proposed that this approach should not be considered as an alternative framework to analytical processing models but rather as supplements or extensions of them (Salthouse, 1991). It appears that, in terms of selective attention at least, rather than seeing general slowing we are morel likely to be witnessing specific slowing. Hence, I personally believe reduced-inhibition to be the most plausible and substantiated theory for age-related decline in not only selective attention, but in many cognitive processes, thus also suggesting age-deficits to be local rather than global.
As selective attention studies have shown attentional processes to also facilitate numerous other cognitive activities (e.g. language, memory and problem solving) it is clear that attentional deficits affect many aspects of the lives of older people. Therefore, it would be beneficial to use models of cognitive processes to help understand and improve the interactions between older adults and their environments (McDowd & Shaw, 2000). Research into to selective attention can also aid us in helping older adults with their day-to day tasks, such as by enhancing their interactions with technology (McDowd & Shaw, 2000), for example, by minimising excessive 'distractor' items in a visual display, or by providing environmental support to facilitate attentional processes, as cues are often found to reduce age differences in selective attention (Shaw, 1991). It is clear that the most important findings arising from selective attention studies are the theories that have contributed to numerous explanations for many aspects of cognitive ageing in general.