The search for knowledge has been the quest of mankind since our very beginnings. Running concurrent to this, from as far back as the Hellenic era, has been a desire to understand knowledge itself. The Seventeenth century represented the largest leap forward in this field, since its origins in the writings of Parmenides, Plato and Aristotle. The two works that were widely regarded as the most important of this time were the rationalist Meditations of Ren Descartes and then the empiricist John Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding, with Descartes often hailed as the father of modern philosophy and with Locke described by Bertrand Russell as having "made a bigger difference to the whole intellectual climate of mankind than anyone had done since Aristotle". Book IV of the essay is entitled "Of Knowledge and Opinion" and it is upon this that the focus must be in order to find Locke's account of the difference between the two. First, one must examine the progression of the hypotheses from their roots in the writings of the Greeks until Descartes' work before looking at a general explanation of Locke's theories on knowledge. After developing Locke's ideas regarding knowledge and the strict limitations upon it that he imposes, it is then possible to analyse the differences between these and his ideas about opinion or judgement, which are a development to cope with the limits of certain knowledge. Finally, the criticisms of this account must be assessed to ascertain how well it can be defended.
Epistemological theories of the sort that Locke tackles had been around long before the seventeenth century, one of their earliest exponents being Parmenides. His theory of a dual path, a Way of Truth, that could be discerned through reason and a Way of Seeming, which was the world of perceptions and sensible data, began a long line of epistemological debate. The theory was further developed by Plato with his idea of a higher plane of knowledge known as the Forms, which he famously illustrated in his allegory from the Republic VII of the Cave. Aristotle made huge contributions to the epistemological field through his work in logic, with creation of such tools as the his First Principles, syllogisms and his use of categories. All three of these are essential to Locke's descriptions of the types of knowledge, the types of agreement and disagreement that form the basis for knowledge and the qualities that objects can possess. Aristotle heavily influenced Descartes, who in turn then heavily influenced Locke. The Frenchman's work was seen as the first attempt to create a theory of knowledge that conflicted with Aristotle's but the older philosopher's work did still carry a lot of weight within both their writings, mainly in epistemological areas. Descartes' search for certainty and the production of the phrase "cogito ergo sum" breathed new life into the study of theories of knowledge. Descartes, in Book Six of the Meditations, talks of degrees of certainty that knowledge can have, going from clear and distinct perception to mere belief. Locke drew upon much of this as he grew up, as he was not even 20 years old when Descartes died.
Locke apparently wrote the Essay Concerning Human Understanding after an argument with five or six friends, after which he was heard to say that he desired people to cease "meddling" with things that are beyond the mind's comprehension. The initial premise from which he constructs these limitations for human thought is that the mind is "a white paper, void of all characters" and from this it follows that "the busy and boundless fancy of man" must be constructed solely from experience, through what is often called a Representational Theory of Perception. This theory states that ideas that represent the physical world are in fact the immediate objects of perception rather than the physical world itself. This is often known as Locke's "Way of Ideas" reminding one of Parmenides' earlier "Way of Seeming"in that it is not a direct theory of perception but has us as human beings viewing the world through what Bennett calls the "veil of perception". This brings Locke to an essential part of the line of thought, namely his basic definition of knowledge. He says "Knowledge then seems to me to be nothing but the perception of the connexion and agreement, or disagreement and repungancy of any of our ideas". Thus knowledge consists of a recognition of the agreement between two ideas, the example Locke uses being the fact that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles. These two facts are always and inevitably in agreement and this allows us to say that we can know this fact. Locke then expands upon his initial definition by separating the concepts of agreement and disagreement into four categories. These are:
1. Identity: The ability to separate and perceive the difference between ideas. Very Important.
2. Relation: While the distinct ideas will always disagree on existence (Two distinct things cannot exist together as the same thing) it is possible that they are related. For example a pair of red shoes are not one and the same thing but possess similar qualities to one another (Their shoeness and their redness, so they are related without being the same.)
3. Co-existence: Refers to the connection of ideas. This means that certain ideas will tend to lead the perceiver to other ideas because of their connection. For example, the idea of the Skoda car is connected to the ideas of both a lack of reliability and performance. The latter ideas will always accompany the former.
4. Real Existence Reflects somewhat the two certainties that arise from Descartes' work, that the only things we can be certain of are the existence of our own mind and the existence of God.
The account then continues with a further distinction between actual and habitual knowledge. Actual knowledge for Locke consists of current perceptions of agreement between ideas, fresh knowledge as it were, whereas habitual knowledge is when the memory of agreement or disagreement between ideas is recalled by someone. Habitual knowledge is further separated, into habitual knowledge derived from intuition and habitual knowledge derived from demonstration. This leads onto the final section of Locke's account, the three Degrees of Knowledge. The first is intuitive knowledge. Locke defines this as when "the mind perceives the agreement or disagreement of two ideas immediately by themselves, without the intervention of any other" Many of the examples give are those within the confines of Aristotle's First Principles. The laws of Mathematics are also mentioned, a recurring theme since Pythagorean thinking, when it was believed that Mathematics was of a higher plane of reasoning. There is also strong parallels with Plato's cave allegory that was mentioned earlier, as Locke describes this intuitive part of knowledge as being like "bright Sunshine". The second degree of knowledge is demonstrative knowledge, which requires the use of intervening ideas between two initial ideas in order to find the agreement or disagreement between them. This is best demonstrated in cases such as the syllogisms of Aristotle where conclusions are reached from the combination of a basic premise and proofs. Locke is very keen to point out that reason does not consist solely of this sort of syllogistic reasoning, saying that "God has not been so sparing to men to make them barely two-legged creatures, and left it to Aristotle to make them rational". The final degree of knowledge is often considered the most controversial, that of sensitive knowledge. As outlined earlier Locke's epistemology lead us towards a Representational Theory of Perception but this more direct attachment to the physical world, which does not contain the scepticism of external objects that many feel befits a RTP. This sensitive knowledge Locke says is derived from the fact that one can tell the difference between a sensation and the idea of sensation. For example a man "when he looks on the Sun by day, and thinks upon it at night" is able to make the distinction between the two. This only allows us knowledge of the existence of external objects nothing more.
Having defined knowledge, in order to highlight the distinction between it and judgement, we must now define the latter. Locke does this towards the end of Book IV in his section Of Judgement. Having severely limited the extent of the possibilities of human knowledge in the previous sections he is left with a large gap in human thinking left to fill. Relying on certain knowledge, Locke points out, with it now so restricted will lead to a quick death. "He that will not eat, till he has demonstration that it will nourish him; he that will not stir, till he infallibly knows the business he goes about will succeed., will have little else to do but sit still and perish". Thus, in lieu of this want for knowledge Locke claims we have been given by a faculty called judgement. This faculty allows us to perceive agreements between ideas but without the demonstrative proof necessary for certain knowledge. Men sometimes must use judgement rather than knowledge out of necessity when not enough information is available and sometimes out of choice because they are too lazy to fully analyse the information the have. This God-given faculty echoes the tone of the closing words of Descartes Sixth Meditation when he speaks of how God's benevolence means that we can be free from doubts about our reality if we take the time to check the evidence with both our senses and the intellect, which Locke calls right judgement, though sometimes we may make mistakes when required to make the decisions under pressure and a meticulous check cannot be made. In the Republic, the character of Socrates talks of a similar distinction between the faculties for knowledge and opinion, a concept directly comparable to Locke's judgement. Opinion is taken by Plato to be that which lies between ignorance and knowledge. While knowledge is concerned with what is and ignorance with what is not, opinion, Socrates thus reckons, must be concerned with a mixture of that which is and that which is not.
Locke closes the section on judgement with a similar summary of our abilities, saying "Thus the mind has two faculties, conversant about truth [cf. Plato: what is] and falsehood [what is not]". Here he outlines the distinction once again, talking of knowledge, which allows the mind to certainly perceive, "undoubtedly satisfied with the agreement or disagreement of any ideas". Judgement is described as separating and combining ideas in the same way except here the agreement or disagreement is presumed rather than perceived. With this passage Locke concludes his account of the difference between knowledge and judgement. There are a number of problems raised by this account, many of which focus on the definitions of knowledge rather than upon judgement. This is inevitable given the naturally ambiguous nature of judgement which leaves much less scope for a precise dissemblance of the concept. However, since Locke's judgement is a development and dependant upon his Theory Of Knowledge, attacks upon the latter are equally important to the former. Currently, one of the most heated debates is regarding whether Locke should be credited with a Representational Theory of Perception. For example, the apparent ambiguity over whether Locke is defining knowledge as an agreement between ideas or as an agreement of ideas, the second of which allows more easily for a direct theory of perception. However, agreement between ideas seems to exclude the possibility of a direct theory and thus causes essentially the same problem as outlined earlier concerning the use of sensitive knowledge. Russell highlights the problems caused by this asserting that it limits our knowledge only of "ourself and the operations of our own mind" which he believes to be a problem so far unresolved by those adhering to the joint tenets of empiricism and idealism. Thirdly, Locke's tendency to "sacrifice logic rather than become paradoxical", a refreshingly common sense view that was to some extent continued by the empiricists who followed on from him, does make him vulnerable in some interpretations to the more dogmatic philosophers. One such philosopher is Berkeley, who uses a representational interpretation of Locke's Theory of Knowledge and then refutes it by showing its obvious contradiction with his [Locke's] contention that sensitive knowledge is possible. The apparent errors are so obvious that many philosophers believe that this is indubitably the wrong interpretation. As Woozely said of this debate "when interpretation leads to travesty, it is time to question the interpretation". Finally, there is Locke's commitment to resemblance in veridical perception, i.e. When we gain sensitive knowledge of the world our ideas resemble their causes. This problem arose because Locke felt it necessary to confront an inconsistency raised, namely that "if knowledge consists in the agreement of ideas, the enthusiast [One who believes in personal revelation and thus adheres to a very personal value of truth] and the sober man are on a level". His reply is that it is "not so where ideas agree with things" but this leads to the problems above. However, if instead of resemblance it is interpreted as indicative representation, in the same way that "smoke represents fire, not in the sense of resembling it, but in indicating it".
These are only a small number of the criticisms levelled at Locke's Theory Of Knowledge but in a large number of cases, Locke suffers because of his common sense. His reluctance to rigorously pursue arguments to their logical but often nonsensical or paradoxical conclusions in favour of practical plausibility leaves more room for interpretation. This is then exploited by his critics who are able to turn his words to best construct an easy target for themselves to hit. While it would be completely wrong to claim that Locke's Theory is without flaws, it must be remembered that in order to produce constructive philosophical criticism one must endeavour to conduct arguments on the same terms. By always using the most favourable interpretation from your own view it renders an criticism unhelpful in the least. One must make the interpretation consistent with the rest of the work and not always look for the path of least resistance. Once this has been established it is possible that the account of the difference between knowledge and judgement can be fairly defended.