Parmenides of Elea's doctrine is set forth in his poem On Nature, the survival of the remaining 150 lines we owe to Simplicius and Sextus Empiricus [1]. This is divided into three parts, an initial allegorical prologue, the Way of Truth and the Way of Appearance or Seeming. The prologue, or proem, tells of how Parmenides is led to a goddess who lays before him two ways: "That it is and it cannot not be" and "that it is not and that it must not be"
[2]. This second is immediately discounted as a "misguided route" and so Parmenides is led down the "Path Of Trust", the Way Of Truth. This leads him to conclusion of 'real' monism*: That everything is in fact one, indivisible, unchangeable singularity, t en (The One)[3]. This conclusion is widely regarded as one of the most influential arguments in early Western thought as it challenged, and continues to challenge, many preconceptions in scientific thought and much of the evidence we daily see about us. This challenge was felt by many to require a response before any further progress could be made. After this huge achievement, Parmenides is led by the goddess through the Way Of Seeming, which is concerned with "the beliefs of mortals, in which there is no true trust"[4]. The Way Of Seeming or Appearance consists of a fairly typical Presocratic cosmology but its entirety is completely in contradiction to the first part of his doctrine as it immediately introduces the idea of plurality. There are a number of theories as to why this was included. Among these are interpretations of the reasons the goddess herself gives within the piece about the Way Of Seeming, while still false, being a superior explanation of the world perceived by men and Plato's (unfortunately almost certainly) fictional conversation at the Great Panathenea between Socrates, Zeno and Parmenides[5].
Parmenides decision to include a cosmology that he has already (apparently) proved to be flawed is an interesting one to say the least. Completely aside from whether or not the Way of Truth is valid or not, which is by far the most hotly debated topic surrounding the doctrine, the Way of Seeming appear to lack much purpose, especially placed as it is, after the section that invalidates it. By Plato's time he was remembered as a spokesman for singularity rather than for any cosmology. Russell, for one, curtly dismisses the Way Of Seeming [6] and it is often considered unnecessary even to the extent that Simplicius appears to have greatly favoured the Way Of Truth in the lines that he reproduced. This, however, makes it all the more interesting, why Parmenides included this at all.
The first reasons to consider are those put forward by the goddess herself that this in fact the best cosmology available to deal with this world of change that we perceive. This is fairly practical as there a number of almost certainly insurmountable difficulties associated with living in a world consisting entirely of a singularity, Parmenides felt that struggling human beings caught in the twilight world of opinions need a relatively coherent cosmology, for even though it is all a deception there are relatively superior and inferior accounts of the nature of things. Also, earlier in the proem the goddess talks of how Parmenides "shall learn them [The beliefs of mortals] too and come to see how beliefs must exist in an acceptable form, all pervasive as they altogether are" meaning that it is necessary to think in terms of the beliefs of mortals, (A slight nod towards Protagoras), we must find a way of accepting them as they are what defines the world around us. However, Parmenides is not only interested in finding a sensible way to live, the goddess is also keen that Parmenides is never outstripped by other mortals. This for me is a slightly unnerving as it suggests that Parmenides is taking himself too literally somewhere and otherwise he seems to be in a fully allegorical mood. Here however, the claims of superiority of the divine argument, with all the deferred praise that this heaps upon the mortal author smacks of a certain arrogance or in fact a fervent belief in the literal meaning of what he is saying. There are suggestions from a number of quarters that Parmenides' poem is in no way allegorical and that he was in fact some sort of shaman [7] but in order to discuss the rationale behind his arguments it seems easier to assume that this was the product of a rational, mortal mind, like the man described by Plato.
Ways have been suggested for reconciling the two apparent contradictory stances, Aristotle did much in this field suggesting in the Metaphysics
[8] that the Way Of Truth and Seeming are in fact two different views of the world, one through the senses and the other through reason. This suggests that we should not perhaps view the goddess' concept of a singularity as a ontological truth but as an epistemological one. The Way Of Truth is a perception relying on a priori reasoning rather than the senses and is thus a superior view showing what lies beneath the untrustworthy world of the senses. This image of an underlying world reminds us of the allegory where Parmenides makes his journey into the underworld to learn of the Way Of Truth, for Greeks at the time the idea of an underlying world would be easy to assimilate because of their belief in Hades. This leads to the conclusion that the two Ways are right and wrong methods of viewing one world rather than two distinct ones, a difference that was very important to Plato. Some do not take it quite as far, suggesting instead that the Way Of Truth is really just an important metaphysical truth [9] with bearing on how how we think about the world but The cosmology stems from the first plurality that Parmenides witnesses upon leaving the Underworld where he has been learning the Way of Truth, through the portal of Justice, namely the distinction between light and dark. This duality underpins most of the rest of the cosmology, in a way similar to other philosophies at the time in India and China, for example the Bhagavad Gita teaches "These two, light and darkness, are the world's eternal ways" and the first principles of manifestation in China are yang and yin, often represented as light and darkness.
This sort of duality is recurring theme throughout Greek philosophy. Despite the fact that the philosophers have often discovered something of great import through the application of reason, this discovery's application to the everyday world of the audience was often less than apparent. As is suggested by the goddess, some sort of guide is needed to bridge the gap between the singularity and the world as we see it. Democritus' audience faced similar difficulties, confronted with a deterministic world of atoms and void and being forced, like Parmenides' audience, to doubt the evidence of their senses. Democritus does not leave the audience in a complete quandary but provides a number of appropriate ethical guidelines and avoids completely turning essentials like free will on their head. These are obviously not strongly dependent on the major part of the doctrine but they guarantee that those who deny or cannot follow the previous arguments are left with something to which they can easily reference. This technique of leading listeners to the edge of accepted reason through logical argument and then bringing them slowly back was an important part of the dialectic tradition and a persuasive method. Melissus, a staunch defender of Parmenidian monism, is an excellent example of the division between what reason tells us and the actions we must take on the evidence of the senses, for as well as being a philosopher he was also a military commander of some note. The worlds of warfare and politics do not sit well with Parmenidian changelessness, so through his way of life Melissus demonstrates that it is essential that we view the singularity as epistemological [10], if we are to find a way of reconciling the two levels of thinking which emerge from On Nature. The philosophies of Heraclitus also ended concluded that there existed two levels of perception, the contradictory world above and the underlying union of opposites. Although they disagree in the details it is interesting to notice how pervasive this dualist world view was. This epistemological debate, essentially about the practicality of data obtained through reason as opposed to the unreliability of that obtained through the senses, is today divided into the realist and anti-realist camps. Realists hold that there is a world independent of the mind that we can make inferences about this in the form of scientific theories, which can then be used to make predictions about this objective reality. The fact that these theories are often able to predict events remarkably accurately is one of the main arguments for this point of view. The Way Of Seeming does in fact have many things in common with a scientific calculation, for example were you wanting to calculate the orbit of a planet you would not calculate the movement of each individual atom you would approximate and treat the planet as a point. The Way Of Truth takes the approximation in a slightly different direction, rather than to the material monism of atomism instead to the real monism of the singularity. A final dualism to examine that appears to have at least some of its roots in the doctrine of Parmenides is Plato's Theory Of Ideas. The Forms have a lot of similarities to The One, in that they are distinct from "just the things we see"[11], on a different plane of existence. In the Dialogues Parmenides argues fairly inconclusively around the idea of the Forms but it is obvious that there he is concurrent with many of the essential ideas and it is their which he contends most strongly.
One must be careful when examining the Presocratics through the medium of the Dialogues as they are always a mouthpiece for Plato in one form or another and one can only hope that their views correspond to history. However, the Parmenides does raise a number of issues that are not suggested by the fragments of his work. One of the most interesting quotations, relating to the uses of the Ways Of Truth and Seeming, is from Zeno who issues a challenge saying the "supposition that there is a plurality leads to even more absurd consequences than the hypothesis of the one". This is greatly significant, for it suggests Parmenides and Zeno accept that even their Way Of Truth is an approximation, a less absurd one than the pluralist model, but an approximation all the same. If Parmenides appreciated this then he certainly puts it in very firm terms within his doctrine but that is to be expected of someone so obviously self-assured in his beliefs and the fact that it was deduced logically does give him a right to have confidence. Parmenides Way Of Truth, however, was, as already mentioned, but one of many philosophical world views that contained an underlying layer of order and the fact that so many of these were propounded shows us the beginnings of scientific reductionism, attempting to explain many complex events in terms of simpler more universal entities.
Though the Way Of Seeming is widely disregarded by philosophers today, because of its outdated cosmology, less significant subject matter and also the discord it strikes with the Way Of Truth, it is significant in a number of ways. There is the significance that it had at the time to Parmenides, namely that it gave him a documented cosmology that he could be compared with other thinkers of the time so that he would not have to rely solely on his most cutting edge argument, that of esti and the Way Of Truth. It also gives his listeners a slightly more secure point of reference one that is not so far from the world views of other Presocratics. The fact that he reaches the Way Of Seeming with reference to the Way Of Truth both in his allegorical journey and in the line of the argument means that listeners can perhaps see where there own perspective is flawed in comparison to the Way Of Seeming and from there move on to the Way Of Truth. Furthermore, the Way Of Seeming, coupled with Zeno's comments in the Parmenides and Melissus' attitude to life seem to suggest that both of the Ways are epistemological rather than ontological (Waterfield suggests that the first section would be better titled the Way To Truth, as an epistemological method rather than a physical or metaphysical description [12]) and refer to two different views of the same world. The duality of the Way Of Seeming and the Way Of Truth is actually symptomatic of a wider dualistic theme across the whole of Greek thought, a tradition that has continued to this day. Many philosophies involve a two tier system of belief in which there is a layer of order that explains the higher more chaotic and complex layer, which is a forerunner of today's multi-layered scientific reductionism, with the Way Of Truth being very similar to the much sought after Grand Unified Theory Of Everything of physics today. In this way the cosmology is a necessity to show the contrast between the two layers, and to highlight the significant features of simplicity that the Way Of Truth contains.
The Way Of Truth is undoubtedly a philosophical work of tremendous significance, highly challenging and highly original, but taken only as the bare bones of dialectic steps it loses a lot of weight and becomes much harder to interpret. There is little enough of Parmenides remaining as it is and to address one Way without the other will lead to a reader missing a number of crucial points regarding Parmenides' intentions, an understanding of which is essential if one hopes to grasp the implications of his main doctrine.