The seventeenth century was a time of enormous change, a conflict between the ancient and the modern, as some of the greatest scientific triumphs in history were taking place in opposition to the conservative might of the Church, which fought to suppress many of these innovations. Fear of the Church and more specifically the Inquisition had a great effect on the output of the scientists and philosophers of the day, notwithstanding the fact that Christian teachings represented a deep seated status quo and were thus bound to influence those brought up according to these doctrines. So Newton talks of planets subject to quantifiable physical laws being thrown by the Hand of God and Galileo was publicly condemned by the Inquisition and withdrew his theories of a heliocentric universe, as Bernard Williams states "To Descartes' contemporaries it seemed much more obvious that God existed... than that natural science was possible". Rene Descartes was by most accounts a committed Catholic and wrote his philosophy in an attempt to dissuade the Church from hostility to modern ideas. As a result of this his philosophy includes several Christian ideas, including primarily the existence of God but also the immortality of the soul. It is in order to prove the soul's immortality that Descartes wanted to highlight the real distinction between mind and body, a distinction that had plagued and continues to plague generations of philosophers, physicians and psychologists. Some of the cognitive scientists ideas on the subject, especially those who may have influenced Descartes, will be examined before an analysis of Descartes' argument for the real distinction. As with the rest of the Meditations, it is set out in the classical logical manner and while it will be fairly simple to show its validity, it will require a much deeper analysis before one can claim that it is sound. In order to complete this analysis of how the argument works we must examine each of the premises and their origins within the Meditations and then we will look at some of the problems that the final hypothesis raises.
The distinction between mind and body is something that had been raised back in the Hellenistic period when Plato described the immortal soul as chariot pulled by two horses, with the chariot driver, Reason Nous, trying to control the uplifting force of Spirit at the same time as the earthbound Appetite. As the Platonic soul was immortal it was thus seen to be of a higher plane than the body. Aristotle saw the soul (or mind) as being composed of a vegetative part, interested in reproduction, a sensitive part, concerned with perception and the rational soul which was the driving force of the mind, much like Plato's charioteer. The Aristotelian soul was contained in the form of the body rather than being a spirit completely external, though the highest part, because it was concerned with timeless matters such as mathematics and philosophy, could be capable of existence in isolation. This however led to an impersonal immortality which caused problems for Christianity, for although they drew heavily upon Aristotelian ideas this conflicted with their belief that the soul was immortal and personal to each and every human. Thomas Aquinas adjusted Aristotle by saying that the soul, which contained the intellect, was present entire in every part of the body, and unlike anything else it could survive the body and make its way to heaven or hell. It was in this tradition that Descartes was taught and so it was this tradition that he was unhappy with and sought to reformulate. Descartes' main problem seems to have been with the metaphysics of the Aristotelian soul as the form of the body, part of which Christianity rescued only to preserve the idea of immortality, contrary to everything else known, which was completely in contravention of Descartes' scientific notions. Descartes wished to maintain the immortal soul but wished to reached the conclusion in more satisfactory manner. His intentions are set out in the Synopsis, explaining that the discussion of the soul's immortality is to be left to the Sixth Meditation in order that all the premises needed to prove his conclusion are in place, in the manner of a geometer. Descartes continues "the first and most important prerequisite for knowledge of the immortality of the soul is for us to form a concept of the soul which is as clear as possible and is also quite distinct from every concept of the body". To arrive at this Descartes works the reader through the argument in the way that one has become accustomed to in the Meditations. The first part of the Sixth Meditation deals with the evidence for the existence of material things through sensory perception. This is done by outlining first the dependence upon sense data that the mind has and how it can all be traced Descartes' body because, as he says "I could never be separated from it, as I could with other bodies; and I felt all my appetites and emotions in, and on account of this body". The fact that these sensations come only when the objects are present to his sense organs without dependence upon his will suggested that they arose from other bodies external to his own. The pleasures and pains associated with this body caused various sensations in the mind, so the "curious tugging in the stomach" caused hunger and so on and these things Descartes concludes were taught by nature as his mind was already made up on them before he had worked out arguments to prove them. This then is the conventional view of a mind and a body connected, with sense data from the body being relayed to the mind. Descartes then retraces the steps he took in the First Meditation that undermined his faith in the senses, firstly the falsehood of sensory data, as with the towers in the distance and the pain in an amputated limb, then the two more general arguments of the dream and the evil demon (Though he does not use the phrase in this case, merely saying that in pretending not to know the author of his being he conceived of the possibility that he had been created in a way that left him prone to error) The previous observation that the perceptions of the senses were not dependant upon his will and thus suggest objects distinct from himself he calls into doubt by saying that it is possible he has "a faculty not yet known to me which produced them". This leads him the conclusion that the only indubitable fact any mind can have is that it exists. This level of scepticism set him apart from any previous philosophers, for while the Greek Sceptics had put forward the notion that we should not concern ourselves with matters external to the Self, their definition of the Self had always included the body. Descartes' discovery of logical rather than metaphysical cause for a refinement of the definition of the Self that separated body and soul was thus ground breaking.
This is the position that Descartes had reached midway through the Third Meditation, being able only to know that he is a res cogitans or thinking thing, but now, with the conclusions he has drawn from the Fourth and Fifth Meditations, namely his proofs for the existence of God and the concept of clear and distinct ideas, Descartes has the premises that he talked of in the Synopsis in place and he is able to work on the proof for the immortality of the soul. Descartes has established the existence of God based upon the cogito and the fact that He is capable of creating anything that the res cogitans can clearly and distinctly understand. If it is possible for the res cogitans to clearly and distinctly understand that something is separate from something else then it is possible that they can be separated by God. If it is possible for these two things to exist apart then they must be distinct and as the first three Meditations have described how Descartes has perceived the mind as clear and distinct from all else and that all that he can know is that he is a thinking thing it follows that it is possible for God to create this distinction and if that is so the mind, which has to be a non-extended thinking thing, must be distinct from all else. All else, in this case, refers to body which can be taken to be everything extended (and non-thinking), all corporeal matter. Descartes posits that the mind and the body must therefore be of completely different essence or different forms of substance. This means that the mind is distinct from Descartes' body and thus that the mind could exist without it, leaving the possibility of immortality of the soul. This argument is valid logically in that it reaches the conclusions using only the premises that had been previously established. However there are a few steps that seem weaker than others, one that comes under a large amount of scrutiny, for example in the Fourth Objections by Antoine Arnauld, is the jump from the cogito, where he only knows for sure that he is a thinking thing to the step in this argument for the real distinction when he knows that he is only a thinking thing making him distinct from all else. Despite this concern, his exact words for this inference "that my essence consists solely in the fact that I am a thinking thing" do in fact stand to this scrutiny and do constitute a sound logical step. The most well known of the problems with the second half of the Meditations is the so called Cartesian Circle that results from Descartes proof for the existence of God. As the distinction depends on the proof of God as premise then any weakness in the logic is transferred.
With the existence of God and the real distinction now usable premises Descartes continues the Sixth Meditation by reworking his previous argument for the existence of material things based on the independence of their appearance from his will. He says this therefore must be some external active faculty and as God has led Descartes to believe this active faculty is external corporeal things and God is not a deceiver then it follows that corporeal things do in fact exist. This argument relies not only on God's existence but His benevolence further weakening the structure that Descartes has built upon the solid foundation of the cogito. This discussion of the relationship between the mind and corporeal things leads Descartes on to the corporeal thing to which he is closest, his body. Here Descartes seeks to examine the connection that exists between body and mind despite the distinction between them. Again, as Descartes did previous to his scepticism he uses the sensations of hunger and thirst to illustrate the close connection he has with the body, unlike the way "a sailor is present in a ship", but much closer. Descartes talks of how our nature, which has provided us with these ready made sensations sometimes makes errors, as when a sick man requests food that will make him worse. This leads Descartes to make a very significant change to his model of the human body, because he is unwilling still to believe that God would ever provide something misleading, so he describes the human body as a machine like a clock that will observe the laws of nature whether it is well made and tells the right time or not. This concept of the body as a machine leads Descartes to say that all the movements that the body performs independently of the will would be performed in exactly the same way without the mind. This is hugely significant when considering the mind and body distinction and the human automaton is one of the key ideas of this debate, appearing in the realm of psychology in the work of Burrhus Frederick Skinner that "The human organism is a machine and, like any other machine... behaves in lawful and predictable ways in response to the external forces that impinge upon it."
With the errors in the face of God's goodness still concerning him Descartes makes two other observations concerning the mind and body distinction. Firstly, he remarks that while the body is divisible, the mind is not and remains united to the body and loses nothing when a foot or a hand is cut off. The second observation is that the mind is only in contact with the brain and possibly only one small part of the brain, which Descartes hypothesises in his letters is the conarion or pineal gland which was thought only to be present in humans. The action that the mind has upon the body and vice versa through this part of the brain is also subject to a lot of criticism from a number of quarters. In her correspondence with Descartes, Princess Elizabeth Of Bohemia says "I beseech you, tell me how the soul of man can determine the spirits of the body to produce voluntary actions". The problem of the interaction between the soul and the body was one of the largest that Descartes was faced with and Princess Elizabeth provided some excellent arguments against the Cartesian hypothesis, as the essential problem was how a cause could be of an essentially different substance to the effect, as the mind is non-extended and the body is extended. Descartes responded with the analogy of gravity, though another response was to say that through the pineal gland, the mind was able to alter the direction of the vital spirits that controlled the body, though only the direction. One of Descartes supporters Geulincx advanced another theory, which was later developed by Malebranche, of two clocks, that keep exactly the same time being the same as the mind and the body. When one reaches the hour the other one strikes, with one appearing to affect the other and in the same way when the thought of raising one's arm enters the mind the body performs it though one is not the result of the other, it only appears to be. This happens because both the mind and the body have been perfectly made together by God. This is paralleled in more modern thought by TH Huxley's concept of epiphenomenalism, which he claimed is a logical extension of the work of Charles Darwin, which claims that all thoughts and intentions are no more than the hum of the human machine, Descartes' concept of the human automaton appearing once more. Another exponent of a similar theory is Richard Dawkins in his book the selfish gene, though this is slightly more removed from Descartes' ideas.
By the end of the Meditations Descartes cannot be said to have made a clear incision between the mind and the body, a fact demonstrated by the amount of debate that still continues to this day, but he most certainly laid out many of the tools necessary for the job. Considering the standard of medical knowledge in the time and the pervasion of Christian Scholastic teachings throughout thought of the day. However, Descartes contribution was a major one and his challenge to the total acceptance of Aristotle at the time helped revitalise Western thinking and rightly earned him the title of the father of modern philosophy. The first Meditations that resulted in the phrase "cogito ergo sum" have been used as the building blocks for almost all work on the subject that followed it and anyone discussing the subject must answer Descartes hypotheses. Though the work of the Sixth Meditation is not regarded as highly as this many of the ideas within it have been further developed, independent of the idea of God and the constraints of the Cartesian Circle and remain part of the current debate. Whatever is thought of the first parts of the final Meditation one cannot help but agree with Descartes' conclusion that "since the pressure of things to be done does not always allow us to stop and make such a meticulous check, [Using the powers of the senses, the memory and the intellect] it must be admitted that in this human life we are often liable to make mistakes about particular things, and we must acknowledge the weakness of our nature."