"As for criticism, do it in good time; don't get into the habit of only criticising after the event" wrote Mao Tse-Tung and it is important that the benefits of hindsight and the fact of Mao's absence do not cloud our judgements of his life and work. In power for 27 years, Mao's effect on China was undeniably far reaching and is undoubtedly still felt today. To an outsider, the fact that China is still ruled by the Chinese Communist Party may make it seem as though communism in China is still going strong and that the principles of Mao are a continuing success. However, although as a figurehead Mao is still a very important part of the Chinese consciousness, a massive portrait and his tomb are still a central part of Beijing, many changes have been made to the ideological legacy he left behind in 1976, with many commentators describing China today as only "nominally communist". Mao has been credited for creating a mostly unified China, free of foreign domination, for the first time since the Opium Wars, but his economic policies have been widely criticised. While these were ideologically motivated, their faliure is not necessarily a faliure of the ideology, but may be a just be poor practical realsiation. Other main areas of criticism are his contribution to the Sino-Soviet Split, his establishment of a one-party dictatorship, and initiating the disastrous Cultural Revolution, but these were all motivated by practical concerns of the time rather than directly from a communist ideology. Therefore, in order to evaluate Mao's legacy the focus must be on the economic policies, as these can be more closely linked to a communist ideology. The perceptions of the party leaders and the people are the key issue here, how they initially viewed the ideology and how they felt during Mao's period in office. It is also important to look at the changes that have taken place since Mao's death and their effect on perceptions of his success or faliure. Another difficulty is that in China, and in fact across the world, true communism has arguably never been established. Marx's stages of communism, requiring the overthow of the bourgeoise by the proletariat, the establishment of socialism and then the gradual move towards communal living are designed to be enacted over a considerable length of time and no major modern state has ever made it past socialism. However, if the people and party leaders are seen to move away not only from Mao's specific ideological way but from a communist one altogether, then it would appear they believe that path has failed them.
"Ideologies all promise perfection, although they can never provide it. They are not necessarily neat, tidy, and consistent in their details. As held by individuals they are generally full of inconsistencies because of personal experience and self-interest" Mao came to power in 1949 but it is still debated as to what the agenda of the Chinese people supporting the communist revolution was. On the surface it was an ideological struggle, against the corrupt ruling imperial class, its name in Chinese being gugng nezhn, which means literally Nationalist-Communist Civil War. However the fact that it was the nationalist Kuomintang, not affiliated with the imperialists and actually adhering to socialist style principles, who were defeated in order to gain control, confuses matters somewhat. This confusion is exacerbated by the fact that the Communist party also advocated nationalist principles, promising to unite China after the strain of Civil War and to stamp out the corruption that was rife under imperial rule. While this did fit with Mao's ideologically pure ideals, many of the people who supported these aspects of the revolution were not totally committed to the other side, Mao's version of Marxist/Leninist communism. "The first years of the People's Republic were exciting. Corruption, that ancient Chinese curse, suddenly seemed to have been wiped out by Mao's 1951 'mass movement' against the 'Three Evils". Removal of corruption was not a specifically communist principle, so while support was high, the lack of a common agenda among the people of China casts doubts on the levels of entrenchment of the communist ideology.
Mao said "Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun" and once the Communist Party was in power, they held all the guns, making agreement with party policy and hence Mao's ideology an essential survival tactic. Many believe the problem with communism is a fundamental flaw in the assessment of human beings, hoping to establish a society where they would behave unselfishly as defined by Marxist-Leninists. However, because the embracing of communism was not necessarily as deep as popular support for the revolution suggested a certain amount of coercion was required in order to promote Mao's egalitarian principles. On an ideological level, the majority are only concerned about their livelihoods, "philosophy is a luxury" and this means that the success or failure, in their eyes, of a particular system is determined by how it leaves them economically. In communist thinking, the proletariat take control of the means of production but in practice this means the party must run the economy. For all the communist states, bureaucracy and administration have been major difficulties but what many economists believe to be insurmountable is the economic calculation problem, which states that the use of price controls within an economy will completely obscure necessary information about quantity leading to massive shortages and queues, photographs of which were often used to characterise the flaws of a planned economy. Mao appeared to be more committed to his ideology than most, not only in his rhetoric but also in the policies he enacted; unlike in Soviet Russia where in 1921 the New Economic Policy was instituted restoring some private ownership. This commitment to communist principle, that was arguably unmatched in the long term by other communist states, all of who made concessions to market economics, perhaps means it failure proved more conclusively than any other the inherent ideological flaws. It must also be acknowledged that Mao's understanding of economics could be responsible.
Mao knew that economic reform according to his principles would not be easy famously saying that "Revolution is not a dinner party". The aim was not personal material advancement but collective political consciousness, so sacrifices had to be made. Anything more than a wristwatch, a radio, a bicycle and a sewing machine was considered decadent and for the peasant majority of the Chinese population, this was perfectly reasonable, in many cases something to aspire to. Had this been the extent of the sacrifice Mao required, the people may well have been satisfied, if not the party leaders, but it was the massive economic disaster of the Great Leap Forward is set in the minds of most as the great failing of communism, as it was implemented to increase the growth of actual rather than dictatorial socialism in China. Agricultural and steel production were going to increase massively but this was horribly mismanaged, with lack of workers to store a surplus in the good harvest of 1958 leading to huge shortages and famine over the next three years. The human cost was enormous, with estimates of the death toll around 30 million people. Mao did make self criticism with reference to the Great Leap, something not often done by totalitarian dictators, saying at the conference in Lushan "The chaos caused was on a grand scale and I take responsibility. Comrades, you must all analyse your own responsibility. If you have to shit, shit! If you have to fart, fart! You will feel much better for it." Mao maintained the policy was 70% correct, also blaming the climate and Peng Dehuai.
After the Great Leap Forward, with Mao stepping down as chairman in 1959, his role in dictating economic policy was considerably diminished and it was in order to re-establish this that the second of his great disasters was initiated, the Cultural Revolution. This was not ideologically motivated to the same extent as the Great Leap Forward, and was more about the rebirth of Mao's cult of personality. Its failure, because of Mao's deep connection with communist principles, may have been regarded as a blow against communism in some quarters. The CCP laid the blame upon the Gang of Four and have still not made an apology for what is otherwise universally recognised as an unmitigated disaster.
Supporters of Mao argue that China under his rule benefited from increased life expectancy, reduced illiteracy, removed the corruption of the Kuomintang, without doubt was responsible almost totally eliminating schistosomiasis or snail fever but he most importantly gave China military security and unity. Deng Xiaoping praised him; calling his "contributions are primary and his mistakes secondary" and Mao still forms part of the Four Cardinal Principles of the PRC but the role of his ideas and that of communist thought is increasingly nominal.
After Mao's death in 1976, it was not long before major economic reforms were set in motion under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping, called Gig kifng or "Socialism with Chinese characteristics". China is now well on its way to becoming an economic superpower through the opening of its trade barriers and privatisation of its industry, with a recent survey suggesting 70% of Americans think China will be stronger economically than the US in 10 years. Deng Xiaoping's motto is that "To get rich is glorious" and China continues to grow at a rate well above that of its Western counterparts. In a 1997 Gallup survey, interviews with both urban and rural residents in China found that the most commonly held attitude toward life was "Work hard and get rich" (56%), while the least popular was "Never think of yourself, give everything in service to society" (3%). It has been suggested Mao was correct in holding back from economic liberalisation, as before the development of a globalised economy and the reforms would not have succeeded. However, the effects of the reforms have not been all positive, with its Gini coefficient, a measure of income inequality, now above that of the US and the UK. Many workers look back fondly, even on the days of the Cultural Revolution, because of the iron rice bowl on which they could depend.
Mao's remains a hero and figurehead for the Chinese people, because of his awesome cult of personality and due to the ruling Communist Party's unwillingness to loose their hold on the reins of power. Turning against Mao and Mao's communism would almost certainly mean a loss of CCP control, so while the party leaders may have been convinced that Communist policies did not work they have yet be convinced to let go of the name. The people will always be less concerned than party leaders about ideology and more concerned about their welfare. The huge suffering caused by the collectivisation and other policies of the Great Leap Forward can only have impacted negatively on the Chinese people's perceptions of communism. Many of the new Chinese middle class are delirious about the new reforms, regarding the move away from communism as exceptionally positive, but China must be careful that it does not get too caught up in the temptations of the market economy and leave those who depended on Mao without any rice bowl, iron or otherwise.