In his autobiography Hobbes dramatically writes that "Fear and I were born as twins!" and fear is the underlying principle of his political philosophy. It is inherent in his conception of the nature of man and from there a driving force towards the development of a political society. The political society that Hobbes aims to create, as the logical conclusion of his premises about man, is an absolute sovereignty with no restrictions on the ruler, an idea that Locke vehemently attacks in the Two Treatises. This absurdity Locke illustrates using his polecats and lions, an attack not necessarily specifically directed at Hobbes, but like much of the Treatises was an attempt to detect and overthrow 'the false principles and foundations of Sir Robert Filmer', who repeatedly contended that 'A King according to law makes no kind of government'. Hobbes, however, is the most famous exponent of the defence of the absolute monarchical tradition, most famously in Leviathan but also in De Cive and De Corpore Politico and for this reason consideration of his hypothetical response to the criticism is of the utmost importance. In order to analyse the respective arguments for and against an absolute sovereign, it is first necessary to look at the basis for Locke's criticism of a monarch outside the law. Then it will be possible to work through Hobbes' arguments in support of a sovereign, to assess what his answers would be to Locke's criticism, looking at the crux of their theoretical divergence, the important role of fear and the pressing need, in the historical context, for a stable political system. Then finally an attempt will be made to evaluate Hobbes' argument to see if it is possible to find any flaws while also looking at some of the possible alternatives.
To understand Locke's criticism a brief explanation of his analogy is required. Talking of absolute monarchies Locke asks 'What Fence is there in such a State, against the Violence and Oppression of this Absolute Ruler?" These rulers are the lions to which Locke refers. The polecats and foxes come from the State of Nature, hypotheses about which are common to both thinkers. Based on similar assumptions, Locke follows a slightly different, some would say more optimistic, logical path to form his State of Nature, they both arrive at similar conclusions, namely that in the absence of a political system humans will often be at war. The difference between them at this stage is that while Hobbes believes that the State of War is almost synonymous with the State of Nature, Locke argues that is only an incident arising from it because of the absence of an established Judge who can administer the God-given Laws of Nature. Over this Locke attacks 'some Men', specifically Hobbes, who 'have confounded [the two States]'. So the Hobbesian State of War, 'where every man is Enemy to every man', contains Locke's polecats and the foxes, they are all the other men which one might meet, for in the State of War they will almost certainly be aggressive towards you. While not agreeing entirely on the exact nature of the world in the absence of political systems, Hobbes and Locke do agree that the situation is abhorrent and that remedy lies in a social state. Here, however is where the two thinkers diverge, for while Locke espouses a ruler who is there under the consent of the people. Governments are to be given power, that 'can never be suppos'd to extend farther than the common good' and that is to be used only towards the achievement of certain end. Failure by a government to attain this end will result in the withdrawal of consent and the dissolution of the governing body. The three ends which such a body would be established in order to attain: the protection of property, the appointment of an independent Judge of the Laws of Nature and the creation of the power to sentence and punish those found in breach of the Laws. The key difference here is the limit on political power, the ability the subjects have to remove a ruler or rulers who they feel are not protecting their property or correctly administering the Laws of Nature, something that would not happen to an absolute monarch. Both writers agree that man must escape the polecats, the question is whether the social state he escapes to should contain a Hobbesian lion or a Lockeian sheep dog.
In order defend the increased powers of his sovereign compared with that of Locke, Hobbes must show that the absence of limitations for the ruler is not just an overall benefit to society, but of enough benefit to individuals that they would sign up to the Social Contract. A large part of the absurdity for Locke is that man would 'arrange' to be 'devoured'; in other words, he willingly agrees to be ruled by the absolute monarch, meaning the most important part of Hobbes answer must concern the private benefit gained that leads a rational individual submit to absolute rule. Hobbes outlines three key features of men within the State of Nature, stemming from their relative equality, diffidence, competition and vainglory. Diffidence is fear and mistrust, of your fellow man, of polecats and foxes, and this fear for their lives is what makes the State of Nature so undesirable for men within it. Their lives are 'nasty brutish and short' and it is in the interests of each one that a change is made to raise the average standard of living. An overwhelming force is required to impose order, essentially, in order to control the fear inherent in the State of Nature, an all encompassing fear is required. However, given the men's relative equality, this cannot be done by any single individual, but must be a collective agreement. The contract needs to be agreed by a majority, but not by all men, for when they establish a sovereign whom they shall be subservient to, it is fear of the reprisals of the majority whom the ruler commands that men will now fear. The establishment of an overwhelming power of fear is the only way for Hobbes that order can be upheld, because men's chief fear, the only one that will truly restrict their natural tendencies, is the fear of a violent death. The ruler's powers are directly connected to this, his lack of limits, leaving him all the licence of the State of Nature, is precisely because the sovereign's lion must be inspire more fear than the collected polecats and foxes of the rest of humankind. Locke also believes however, that fear is an important element in the running of a society, for it is, to some extent, fear of punishment by the sovereign that acts as a preventative for criminal action, "Punishing the crime for restraint, and preventing the like offence". Locke places a limit here too, saying that each transgression should be punished proportionately to the extent that it becomes "an ill bargain to the Offender" again referring to its preventative nature.
The difference between Hobbes and Locke's attitude to punishment is explained in their differing Laws of Nature. For Hobbes the Laws of Nature are guidelines dictated by reason, but often subordinate to the passions, the first and most important of which is to seek peace at all costs. This is similar to Locke's tenet that one should "preserve the rest of Mankind". Both of these Laws come with additional clauses and it is because Hobbes' is that much more aggressive than Locke's that their ideas diverge. In Hobbes' case if peace is unobtainable a man "may seek, and use, all helps, and advantages of Warre" whereas Locke merely releases you of your obligation only when your own preservation comes in competition. This difference can be further explained by the two thinker's respective origins for the Laws, Hobbes' being derived from reason and not ever calling upon God as a sole ground for a premise even talking of the State of War resulting from the absence of a "visible Power", intimating somewhat blasphemous lack of control for an omnipotent deity. On the other hand, Locke's Laws are more Divine, saying that God appoints a government to be the adjudicator of all things and that as we are all the "Workmanship of one Omnipotent, and infinitely wise Maker" and can have no "Subordination among us". Locke also quotes "the judicious Hooker" extensively, who uses men's equality as the "Foundation of that Obligation to mutual Love", compare this to Hobbes, who, as already quoted, uses equality to demonstrate how all man may kill each other.
These differing views then explain their final positions, one advocating sovereignty with limits and by consent, the other advocating absolute sovereignty, and total control without the possibility of injustice. Hobbes desires stability above all else and as a result of his more pessimistic view of mankind feels that the less control is in the hands of the masses, the further from the State of War and the safer we will be. Locke, coming from slightly more settled times, sees unlimited powers as an unacceptable threat and trusts that the community should still maintain some control over their destiny. For me, Hobbes' view of humankind is more realistic, but because of his practical political agenda, contradictions do appear, to the extent that Bishop Bramhall felt able to brand it a "rebel's catechism" despite Hobbes' intention. The tenets of Locke's philosophy have been the foundations for much of modern society, the basis, most famously, for the American constitution. His final draft of society is more practical but is reached by a less plausible trans-historical route, incorporating throughout a Christian agenda with respect to morality.