In 1922 Bertrand Russell presciently recognised China's growing importance, that the whole world "will be vitally affected by the development of Chinese affairs, which may well prove a decisive factor, for good or evil, during the next two centuries". Russell, recognising China's essential differences to the West, asks whether China can retain its 'virtues' without being forced to adopt the 'model' of "all the foreign nations with which she has dealings", a question that is just as relevant today. In the last decade, economic importance on the world stage has increased dramatically, to an extent at which even Russell might be surprised. Economic reforms have been implemented rapidly since Deng Xiaoping's exhortation to the people that "to get rich is glorious" leading to its powerful current position, where it stands to overtake the US as the world's largest economy by 2020. The extent of China's influence is easy to see, with their fuel needs pushing up oil prices, their cheap goods fuelling consumption and their huge markets for an ever increasing number of goods fuelling demand for foreign manufacturers, the Chinese economy is playing an increasingly large role on the world stage, a fact that has not escaped the notice of the world leaders, with Tony Blair "painfully aware that China has been growing three times as fast as the UK".
Politically, it is a different story. There is some evidence of a more open and pragmatic approach to foreign diplomacy, with, for example, representatives of the Chinese Communist Party and the Kuomintang recently meeting for a Cross-Straits Economic and Trade Forum, which included a meeting between Honorary Chairman Lien Chan and President Hu Jintao and also Mr Hu's forthcoming visit to the US which will include an unprecedented three public speeches but this has been juxtaposed with comments during President Bush's recent visit that China would not tolerate "so-called Taiwanese independence". Domestically, the leadership has maintained a fairly steady grip on political freedoms ever since the death of Mao thirty years ago with only two real attempts at significant reform, the first being Deng Xiaoping's establishment of an institutional system in 1980 followed by Zhao Ziyang's failed attempt in 1987 to create more of a division between government and the party. More recently, though there have been gains democratically, with increased influence and decentralisation of the NPC, the top legislature, coupled with reformist rhetoric about Hu's vision for harmonious society (hexie shehui), there has nevertheless been practical evidence of a desire to maintain the leadership's grip, diminishing hopes that the current President would do for political reform what Deng Xiaoping did for the economy.
This essay will look at how the pressure to reform economically developed from the neo-liberal revolution in the last two decades of the 20 th century into concrete policy under the banner of the 'Washington Consensus', but how these shock tactics that focused too heavily on macroeconomic figures and not enough on social concerns were hugely damaging to countries that adopted them. China's gradualist approach to economic reform, characterised by the phrase "To cross the river by groping the stone under foot" essentially recognised that unless societal change is addressed, long term stability will be impossible. This new "Beijing Consensus" is being seen by developing countries as a real alternative to the Western free market democratic model. Recent empirical study has demonstrated that the reality of socioeconomic reform goes beyond a simple causal relationship; there is not only feedback between the two factors but also variations in their respective level of influence leading to a large number of possibilities. In China especially, where the ideology of the ruling party is so inextricably tied to economic principles, the two are hard to separate. As a planned economy, there were inevitable problems of lack of both information and incentive and it is important to examine how China has coped with these. This essay will demonstrate that poor implementation of either political or economic reform, often in recent years the result of external pressure, can have disastrous results. The success or failure of the economic reform has a major bearing on what political changes will result and this is why an examination of the economic liberalisation process is so important, as up until now China's decisions have managed to maintain a balance, with the success of the economy continuing to be sufficient justification for the maintenance of the stability of the political status quo. However, growing unrest over corruption and social inequality is leading to mounting pressure for political reform. To accompany these popular pressures, I will attempt to show that in order to maintain the economic growth more liberal policies have brought, China will need to make political changes or face stagnation that will be certain to lead to massive unrest, removing the Communist Party's best legitimisation of its power, namely the booming economy. While the first stage of China's growth, which has resulted from massive capital expansion and use of labour surplus, has been possible, perhaps even more well suited, to an authoritarian climate; in order to progress towards a 'knowledge economy' that climate must relax, before the 'graying' of China's population takes place. The direction China's leadership takes over the next few years is of ever increasing importance to the international community, and now, under the media spotlight as both the 17 th quinquennial Party Congress and the Olympic Games approach, this nascent superpower finds itself faced by many more than just "two paths" of Chairman Mao.
Worries about Eastern dominance are nothing new. From the late 1950's onwards many were in awe of the Communist miracle taking place in Russia. There was a belief that there was a trade off between democracy and economic growth with economist Calvin Hoover suggesting in 1957 that the "collectivist authoritarian state" in the Soviet Union, could overtake the United States in the next two decades. However in hindsight, two well publicised problems of the planned economy are a lack of information and incentives. While these did not prevent the rapid initial growth of Communist countries within the success of the centralised Marxist Leninist system are the seeds for its own destruction, for while planning can work well in small number of sectors producing a limited number of commodities, as consumers grow richer they begin to demand a wider variety of goods. This is especially problematic in agriculture, as the necessity to farm according to local conditions clashes with government quotas even when only producing grain. In China, collectives run by ardent supporters of the Party, rather than those with the local agricultural knowledge, led to poor land management. When the requirements become more varied the problems are greatly exacerbated. The desire for more variation in consumer goods will lead also to the desire for increasingly specialised industries which tend towards lower margins, resulting in a need for closer attention to costs. The need for these new industries is either not recognised or is economically unviable, leading to discontent. The Communist States became more and more aware of these problems as the Cold War drew on and it was soon obvious on both the inside and the outside that their miracle was at an end. The consolidation of US supremacy thus led to the assumption of superiority of the free-market democracy during the Thatcher and Reagan era, and the beginning of its adoption across the world. Globalisation, as this process is known, has resulted from developments in capital, technology and information, all of which having becoming increasingly integrated across national boundaries. Thomas Friedman has called this "new world system", which has replaced the Cold War one, a shrinking of the world from a "medium to a small". The fact that the metaphorical and physical boundaries of the Cold War fell, while technology advanced rapidly, has allowed a previously unprecedented freedom of economic interaction. These freedoms can be used to the advantage of both buyers and sellers in the global market, to the extent that those ignoring them face falling far behind. Companies can benefit from freer flows of capital, allowing them to shift production wherever labour costs take them and countries can benefit from this investment. Consumers can source their goods from a much wider range, ensuring the required quality and price. Free trade allows increased specialisation and thus increased efficiency. In theory, it is a very rosy picture and in practice there have been spectacular gains for the global economy, yet economic liberalisation remains an incredibly thorny issue. Dividing the discussion into those who support and oppose is somewhat redundant, as it is naive to believe that the process can be reversed; but where governments and organisations exert control it could be managed differently. A number of countries have suffered crises or poor performance after adoption of these reforms, which those who are positive about the current situation, like Friedman, say is an inevitable part of the system, while those who believe there is room for improvement, like David Korten and Joseph Stiglitz, argue that these problems not necessary to the extent that they have been suffered to date, of prime importance being that countries accept reform on their own terms.
The integration has meant there are theoretical incentives for countries to liberalise economically but this has been forced home by larger developed countries who wish to make use of comparative advantages that are now more easily exploitable. Examination of the external pressure to reform economically is of more importance in this case because it is China's resistance to this pressure, something it was capable of through the maintenance of its authoritarian government that many believe has allowed it to perform as well relative to other countries in similar positions. The pressure has resulted from the winners once again being able to write the text books on the implementation of economic policy. Thus, the free market model was used to provide the basis for the three principal tenets of the "Washington Consensus", policies that were designed to solve economic problems in Latin America after the 1980's: fiscal austerity, privatisation and market liberalisation. The policies of the "Washington Consensus" were then applied to many other countries, under the supervision of the IMF,  but pursuit of sound macroeconomic fundamentals, as an end rather than as a means, was hugely damaging and is seen as directly contributory to the East Asian financial crisis of the 1990's. Conditionality has been increasingly used since the 1980's as a policy tool that many analysts believe can often have little positive impact and sometimes even a negative one. The fact that not only the IMF itself but also larger countries on the Fund's voting panel are able to attach conditions where it suits them, a criticism most often laid at the door of the United States, means that it is powerful force for the implementation of free market policy throughout the globe, their attitude being that "where one economy is organized under principles that are not completely consistent with that free market model, it can cause an enormous amount of friction within our trading relationships". China's 15 year long battle for entry into the WTO also allowed America to exert pressure for change. Hu has talked of the "mutually beneficial co-operation and win-win outcome that China and the United States have achieved from trade" but currently the US, faced with a massive trade deficit, is threatening economic sanctions unless China devalues its currency a move that many believe is grossly hypocritical.
Having looked at the reasons behind pressures for economic liberalisation, I will now examine the practical manifestations of this in China. There is no doubt that the figures, however much doubt is cast upon Chinese statistics, are impressive. Since setting off on the road to an open economy and comfortable society (xiaokang shehui) in 1978 under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping, there has been considerable increases in performance, with exports going from $9.8 billion in 1978 to $149 billion in 1995, foreign investment rising from $1.7 billion to $91.3 billion and the state's share of industrial output falling from more than three quarters to only 36%. The development of these freedoms, begun by the "Chief Architect of Reform" and continued by Jiang Zemin have been responsible for China's impressive growth in the last two decades, at an average rate of 9.5% per year,, all the while under the Marxist friendly title of "Socialism with Chinese Characteristics". Statements such as "Pauperism is not socialism, still less communism" were used by Deng to justify the more capitalist nature of the policies to come and though there was ultimate goal of 'common prosperity' reference to this was dropped under Jiang. What was left was the slogan "Let some people and some regions get rich first", one that leaves a definite capitalist taste in the mouth. Here there is tension, for the nature of Marxism, its economic basis, means that economic decisions are all inextricably ideological. Making changes to an ideology is difficult because an authoritarian regime, "in order to keep its position, has to be thought of as infallible" as George Orwell puts it, so changes must be carefully managed. As the Communist Party has defined itself in terms of the economic differences between itself and the capitalist West the maintenance of some distinction is important to legitimise their claim to power. Deng Xiaoping was keen to maintain that the ideology remained the same but had been given a new pragmatic attitude, a desire to "seek truth from facts" saying in the same speech that the aim must be to "try and integrate the universal principles of Marxism with the concrete practice of our modernization drive".
Concessions to the markets were made elsewhere in the Communist world, recalling Lenin's New Economic Policy of 1921. Since the death of Stalin in 1953 moves towards reform began to gather a small amount of strength and early as 1956 there was Khrushchev's limited experimentation with market economics but significant reform did not take place until 1987 with Gorbachev's perestroika. In practical terms, this restructuring meant workplace democracy, elections and economic decentralisation, but also, most importantly, attempts at greater global integration. Before making comparisons between the successes and failures Chinese and Russian reform, it must be remembered that the two countries were at different stages of development upon the commencement of liberalisation policies. Russia was already a heavily industrialised nation that had launched men into space whereas China was a largely rural nation with much more room for growth. The Soviet Union was also just that, a union, held together largely by central economic control, and the rapid fragmentation that took place after the collapse of Communism was hugely detrimental to the recovery process, unlike China where feelings of cultural unity can be traced back to the original Qin dynasty and the use of phrases such as 
 and 
. Most importantly, the Soviet Union had reached this stage after thirty years of centralised economic management, whereas China, had only made a move towards a command economy after the death of Stalin, and then in a far less aggressive manner than Russia after the Bolshevik revolution, certainly up until 1957 with the advent of the Great Leap Forward. However, this does not detract a great deal from the relative success of the Chinese model. It is worth considering that had Sino-Soviet relations not deteriorated during the latter period of Mao's rule, the move towards a more open form of socialism may have taken a very different path. Certainly, Russia was very critical of Chinese reform until they began to realise how much worse their own efforts were faring.
While one Soviet economist blamed the fact that while the Chinese worked hard, the Russians talked hard, a distinction more oft cited is in the direction in which the reforms were implemented. Deng Xiaoping provided a rhetorical and fiscal environment amiable to reform, encouraging practical debate and reducing taxes on local government, but the policies themselves were mostly enacted incrementally, initiated on a local level and then adopted more widely afterwards, as opposed to the reforms of perestroika, which came directly from President Mikhail Gorbachev. This difference in the reform process has been attributed to unwillingness on the part of the Soviet ruling class to yield the reins of economic control, wishing to preserve a state capitalist system and also to a desire to reform at a more rapid pace, but Deng's, even in 1962, essential realisation was that "relations of production" to be introduced must be those that "the masses... see fit". Deng was influenced at that time by the economist, Sun Yefang, who in turn had been inspired by the Soviet Yevesi Liberman, who advocated local autonomy of enterprise while maintaining obligations to the state, ideas that Mao rejected as the "capitalist road", but that Deng was keen to revive after his accession to power. As a result partly of the differing levels of development in the two countries, the Russians focused their economic reform on the heavy industry sector, an area with more prestige attached in their competition with the United States, while China began the process in agriculture, with Deng believing this would be the most effective method to stimulate the growth of "productive forces". The first reform was the introduction of the Contract Responsibility System, which allowed farmers to receive incentive payments for carrying out production contracts, usually given to family groups, first on a yearly then a longer term basis, though the land remained publicly owned. This has had implications in today's society, as one of the causes of tension between the government and rural regions, as Beijing consequently retains considerable power over the agricultural communities. Small scale family farming rather than the huge collectives introduced under Mao meant there was a return to the good land management using specific local knowledge. Though grain remained under central control which enabled for the state provision of food known as the Iron Rice Bowl, farmers were gradually allowed to sell other goods outside of their production quotas on the free market. When this proved to be successful it was introduced across the country, a move which quickly boosted the income of rural areas.. While farming moved more towards family management through the contract system, the town and village enterprises maintained the essence of the commune system, despite their nominal abolition in 1982. These small rural enterprises, along with the rapidly growing farming industry, acted as an alternate sector to support the State industries through their transitional phase, something that Russia lacked.
Here we can see the introduction of both decentralised management, which allows for a better use of information, and a better system of incentives, reducing the "tragedy of the commons". However, in Russia, the focus on State enterprise and heavy industry did little for the majority of the people, leading to major demonstrations against the government in 1989 about the lack of certain consumer goods, specifically soap and cigarettes. One of few significant reforms in agriculture was the abolishment of the policy of livestock slaughter to preserve grain, leading to the Soviet Union becoming a net importer of grain from the 1970's onwards, importing 42 million tons of grain annually during the Eleventh Five Year Plan that began in 1981. This was at the expense of oil export revenues, money that was being wasted on an inefficient agricultural system. While incentives were introduced the attempt to reform from the top down ignored the basic lack of information about the needs of the economy, and these poorly conceived incentives, instead of stimulating growth in newly privatized enterprises led to widespread asset stripping with revenues then invested abroad, because capital markets had not yet been developed at home. This could not be controlled because there had been no time to develop the legal and financial regulatory systems to stop it, a result of the speed of the reform which the IMF imposed. The Chinese changes to the State sector consisted only of privatisation in a small number of poorly performing enterprises and was founded on reform instead. Much like the communes were changed to become the TVEs, State industries were subject to Liberman style reforms, being run on a quota system, and following a statement of intent by Zhao Ziyang in 1984, more reform followed. Again, it was an appreciation of social consequences that led to this more gradual process, without resorting to privatisation, as there were fears this could lead to unemployment, one of the major problems that transition economies face. In light of this, there was also a large and extensive welfare system in place for State enterprise employees, another move that helped to prevent widespread discontent. While the reform of the State sector is not regarded as successful as that of agriculture and the TVEs, the avoidance of sweeping and risky privatisations, made possible by intersectoral support, meant far fewer problems during the earlier transition stage.
Thus, it was Deng's pragmatic and incremental approach, enacted on economy that had not been subject to an extended period of brutal economic planning that allowed China to develop its rural economy, improving the lives, but more importantly for Deng the purchasing power of more than three quarters of the population, meaning that reform in other areas was enacted in an atmosphere of growth rather than stagnation. That Deng had no real overarching master plan for the economy is indicated in his statement in 1987 that the township and village enterprises that aided growth were "appearing out of nowhere" and his description of the reform, borrowed again from Mao, of "crossing the river by groping for the stones under foot". This trial and error approach, allied with a desire for stability that pragmatically acknowledges the needs of the people has thus proved more successful than the one size fits all numbers game advocated by the Western dominated international financial community. This is illustrated beautifully by the remarks of Poland's former deputy premier and finance minister Grzegorz Kolodoko, who attributes his countries position as the most successful of the East European former Communist States to their explicit rejection of the "Washington Consensus" and writing of how they wanted "Polish citizens to go along with these reforms" and "respected their own society". Countries that chose the alternative and have suffered like Russia include Moldova and the Ukraine, who, despite being held up as excellent examples of free market reformers, saw their outputs fall to as low as a third of their pre-transition levels. However, praising the leadership too much for their popular empathy is perhaps a little misguided, as it must be remembered that their actions were merely pragmatic ones that enabled them to retain control.
After a meeting on March 4 th of the China Society of Economic Reform, a think tank affiliated with the State Council, the minutes were leaked on the Internet. This breach of usually opaque Chinese financial bureaucracy offered a glimpse of a number of issues facing the transitional economy.
One of the key matters under discussion was the selling of the state owned banking system to foreign investors. After pursuing autarkic policies for many years, towards the end of Mao's life China started to increase trade with non-communist countries and it has grown fantastically fast, quadrupling between 1985 and 1999, but in order to manufacture the exports that fuelled this a large amount of foreign investment was required. The lure of China's huge domestic markets was too great that investment opportunities would be ignored on, despite the fact that investment was imposed very much on Chinese terms and "those terms are often opaque, contradictory, and bewildering". While an initial preference towards manufacture for domestic consumers rankled somewhat with the government, the firms soon began exporting their products and building China's enormous trade surplus, which is still growing. This huge foreign capital investment, valued presently at $420 million a day, meant a massive increase in labour force participation, lessening concerns about the discontent of unemployment. This increases what Paul Krugman calls, in his controversial Myth of the Asian Miracle, "total factor productivity" but it is an increase in inputs, not one of efficiency. In his example, "a man with a bulldozer can dig a ditch faster than one with only a shovel but he is not more efficient; he just has more capital to work with". Krugman's warning is that up until now growth in China has relied only on increasing inputs, working harder not smarter, and that this kind of growth is unrepeatable. A recent OECD report backs up these claims and goes on to recommend major changes in social and economic governance in China. The changes outlined require the development of a knowledge economy within China, stimulating innovation. While changes in basic education created an excellent labour force capable of low cost production, the majority of this has been using designs from the West or Japan. In order to become more than a manufacturing powerhouse China must develop an economy based more on "inspiration" than "perspiration". This will necessitate changes to the higher education system, avoiding what James McGergor calls the "stuffed duck" approach and working to develop creativity and innovation. As this new creative workforce arrives there will need to be changes to their workplaces, as much of China's research funding goes towards state laboratories which are often not run in a way that is "in accordance with economic results" as they would be in the West. Another issue in this area is the woeful protection of intellectual property, so severe a problem that is one of the main points that Presidents Bush and Hu Jintao are scheduled to discuss during the Mr Hu's forthcoming tour and it is one they have debated at length in the past. This not only makes it difficult for foreign investors but is another barrier to a climate of innovation.
Bad state management was another issue raised in the minutes of the March 4 meeting, with Citigroup quoted as proclaiming one Chinese bank "a total mess". What makes this statement even more interesting is that it is one of several that were edited in an official draft of the minutes that was released after the leak became publicly known. In the revised version the bank was described as having poor internal management instead. This editing has been seen as symptomatic of the lack of transparency and accountability in China's financial dealings that has been blamed as the cause of widespread corruption and graft. In 2004, only 4,915 of the 170, 850 party officials implicated in corruption cases were subject to criminal prosecution. As foreign firms become involved and business dealings become more complex, the lack of effective systems of control is beginning to cause problems, last year a US financial services company was investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission after $1 million in "consulting fees" were paid to the head of the state run China Construction Bank. This sort of corruption can be problematic for foreign investors, but it is something of which the Chinese people are becoming more aware, thanks in no small measure to the Internet, as the leaked minutes also show. Li Shuguang pointed out in the meeting that in 2005 the government received 30 million petitions from people seeking redress for grievances, something else that had not been made public, as opposed to 20,000 between 1979 and 1982. This growth in political activism by the general population is a trend that has obviously not gone unnoticed in Beijing and is one of the areas where the most pressure for reform is being applied, not only against corruption, but also pollution, poor health services, rural land policy and the education system.
The growing popular discontent is being manifest in many ways, thousands of blogs catalogue government wrongdoings, rural protests are becoming an increasingly regular feature, with the Public Security Ministry recently admitting that last year, there was a 6 percent rise in instances of social unrest, there has been major popular concern about pollution and most recently the White House lawn was witness to a very public protest. The last of these illustrated two interesting points, firstly, the woman allegedly was acting for the religious group Falun Gong, which is one of two groups, along with the China Democracy Party, that the CCP recognise as opposition and secondly, all reports of it were suppressed by Chinese censors. So in the March 4 meeting when a leading academic called for "a multiparty system, press freedom, true democracy, real individual freedom" it was another strong indication that these are still some way off
A large amount of activism is due to the growing middle class in China, with their increased economic control of their lives. Urban housing privatisation meant that the new middle class were "safe from the party's whims" and this allows an increasing degree of political expression but, as mentioned above, the rural population still lives on largely publicly owned land that can be seized at any moment. The slowly rising tide of political activism has certainly led to reformist rhetoric from the leadership; with Hu Jintao proclaiming a "scientific concept of development" and measures for "Green GDP" and a recent well publicised case of a woman infected with AIDS from a blood infusion has also apparently led to policy change. These changes may indicate an increase in the ability of the people to exert political pressure but it has not yet led to real talk of democratic reform on the part of the leadership, instead calling a Western style multiparty system "a blind alley", and more content to police themselves better. China has returned to the system of "merchants and mandarins" and this is a profitable system. As China grows there is an increasing incentive for the ruling class to stay in power and the revenue earned can then be put into increasing state control. Instead of democratic reform as a result of unrest Hu Jintao has pledged investment in the state and local authorities to reduce "social frustrations, disparities and unrest" and keeping pace with technological development the Ministry of Public Security's Internet and Security Supervision Bureau, now reportedly 40,000 strong, maintains the Great Fire Wall Of China which suppresses content containing political dissent online.
The current political situation in China is thus no longer conducive to the form of economic development that they must now pursue. The maintenance of an authoritarian regime that has helped shepherd the Chinese economy through the transition period has been essential, a fact shown by comparisons with countries that have faced similar problems. In the study cited at the beginning of the essay the empirical evidence suggested that the chain of causality runs counter to the understanding of the title, but more significantly for the case of China, countries which institute economic before political reforms outperform those which operate in the opposing sequence. The problem for those initially reforming politically is that the institutions needed for financial and judicial regulation are often ineffective, but their role can be filled by an authoritarian government in states like China. Economic policy must be well implemented, as stability has been the key avoidance of unrest. However, in many of the examples, states were often making capital gains, rather than the improvements in efficiency referred to by Krugman and if economic growth is to continue, stability maintained and unrest averted, changes will have to be made. As I have shown, in order to become a 'knowledge' economy China must liberalise the distribution of information, as the economic development required will not take place in a society that preaches isolation. The principles at the heart of higher education will need revaluation to create a workforce that innovates rather than imitates. There needs to be a loosening of the Party's grip upon the business sector to allow enough transparency to halt the spread of corruption. If these changes are not made it will threaten the economic growth and stability of China, which in turn will lead to an intensification of unrest. If these changes are made, the Party's grip may have been loosened to such an extent that the repression of opposition movements will become impossible. So, while the understanding of the title has not only been disproved by China, it has also been shown to be a pernicious influence when the principles it implies are forced upon transition economies. The Communist Party has relinquished economic control to a certain extent in order to let China grow, but to continue not only this growth but improvement, further sacrifices are required, and the world waits to see if the Chinese leaders are bold enough to make them.