When it comes to intra-regional economic cooperation, East Asian countries have never escaped the position of latecomers. This essay seeks to identify the internal and external factors that have affected the slow progress in institutionalization of economic cooperation in this region.
Even though the demise of the Cold War, realists approaches focusing on the strategic goal of the United States and leadership struggle between China and Japan still have a explanatory power in exploring the cause of underdevelopment of cooperative institutionalization. Economic disparity within ASEAN and between ASEAN-Japan, China, South Korea is another obstacle which should be overcome. Foremost, the attempt to hasten economic cooperation in this region should begin with the establishment of multilateral dialogue body which is able to reconcile the potentially hostile Japan-China relationship. Security community and economic community show strong inter-relationship in this region. For the successful progress of cooperative institutionalization, willingness and capability of political leaders should be emphasized as well.
East Asia had been the only barren in the world when it comes to institutionalization of intra-regional economic cooperation until early 1990s. Although the Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs) began to dramatically increase and to take a position as a prevalent type of inter-state economic cooperation since the establishment of World Trade Organization (WTO), neither bilateral nor multilateral negotiations for the RTAs were pursued in this region.
A number of analyses were attempted to explain this incomprehensible phenomenon and a variety of inferences were presented. These outcomes, however, should be reconsidered from the late 1990s because the East Asian states began to reorient themselves toward the reinforcement of economic cooperation and ultimately the economic integration.
Their collaboration for institutionalization of cooperative system was unprecedented. Moreover, the impact of successful institutionalization is also expected to be unparalleled in world history. As Bergsten portrayed, 'world-shaking development' (Bergsten 2001, 19) started for the first time.
Nonetheless, the progress of economic cooperation in this region signals the advent of long thorny path. Above all, the biggest stumbling block was embedded to rooted political antipathy among the states in this region. At every juncture toward the consolidation of economic cooperation, political impeder will be come across on the pathway. This is the reason why we must consider not only prospective economic efficiency as a result of intra-regional cooperation but also the political dimension that actually design the process of such cooperation.
In this sense, this essay aims to identify the conditions that enable East Asian countries to push forward a meaningful progress in economic cooperation. It begins with the review of conventional explanations on the lag of economic cooperation in East Asia. Subsequently, it moves to the examination of obstacles to impede the intra-regional economic collaboration. Finally, this essay will conclude with several suggestions to eliminate the obstacles and hasten the economic cooperation in East Asia.
Although East Asia has relatively high intra-regional trade volume, the degree of institutionalization of economic cooperation is strikingly slight so far. Though the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has established in 1967, its principal aim was an alliance for anti-communism based on the fear of threat of communist power triggered by formidable regime change in Vietnam. In 1960s, many developing countries were pushing forward an economic integration beyond simple functional cooperation. Central American Common Market (CACM, signed in 1960), Latin American Integration Association (LAIA/LAFTA, signed in 1960), Andean Pact (AP, signed in 1969) are launched at this time. The only exception was East Asia. Since then, this institutional underdevelopment in economic cooperation has been explained from different theoretical perspectives.
Many scholars have attributed the incomplete institutionalization in this region to cultural and ideational factors. They paid attention to the Asian tradition that preferred trust and consensus-building rather than contract-based transaction and law-based problem-solving as means of cooperation and confrontation with neighbour countries.
They saw Asian characteristics can be applied to the explanation of institutionalization in this region. According to North, 'informal constraints' are likely to produce cooperative behaviour as well as the existence of formal institution. He also paid attention to the importance of 'self-imposed codes of behaviour' as a factor affecting cooperation and conflict (North 1990, 42-43). In addition, neoliberal institutionalists claim that institution does not merely mean the formal organization as a physical entity; it also includes informal type of convention that affects actors' behavior without explicit rules (Keohane 1989, 3-4). Thus, it could be interpreted that institutionalization in East Asia had already been implicitly implemented within the shared norms or the expectations of actors' behavior in this region.
In contrast to this, realists have identified the causes of the lag of cooperation in East Asia from the political conflict based on security instability in this region. The most prevalent explanation is that the opposition of the United States prevented East Asian countries from pursuing deeper intra-regional cooperation. In relation to the stance of the United States, the focal point was given to the role of Japan.
James Baker, then U.S. Secretary of State recalled that he would do his best to 'kill' (EAEC ; East Asia Economic Caucas) because he did not envisage the East Asian Community without U.S. His mission, at this time, was to lessen the risk to the America's economic interest that the new emergent economic bloc might bring about in this region (quoted in Terada 2003, 259).
The U.S. vigilance over East Asia, different from that directed toward Europe, gave rise to the preference to bilateral security dialogue in this region rather than the construction of post-war collective security community such as North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). According to realists, the establishment of economic community is promoted by the existence of security community. It is also certain that the political instability as a result of the absence of multilateral security community is a risk in constructing economic ties.
On the other hand, it is worth noting that the recent signs implying the incremental change of the U.S. strategy were seen (Bergsten 2000, Curtis 2004). This will be examined below.
At this time, in reality, Japan was forced by the United States to oppose the East Asia's own regional grouping. By coincidence, when the EAEC was proposed, Japan was getting into trouble due to the recurring pressure by the United States condemning the non-cooperative attitude to its participation in the Gulf War. Even then, one of the Japanese policymakers confessed that :
Japan's role in economic cooperation in East Asia also provides one of the answers to some realists who have attempted to identify the reasons of faltering cooperation in this region. According to Grieco's analysis, based on 'relative disparity shift' hypothesis, Japan's dramatically increased economic hegemony from 1970 to 1990, prevented other Asian less-advanced countries from participating in the negotiation for institutionalization of economic cooperation on the grounds of the fear of Japan's power (Grieco 1997, 176-178).
European neo-functionalists, who have emphasized the existence of 'supranationality' as a driving force bringing economic cooperation and integration, keep an eye upon the low level of interdependence in spite of the fair degree of intra-regional trade volume in East Asia. The reduction of transaction cost was regarded as being less needed than in Europe due to the absence of supranational capitalist groups and interest groups in this region.
On the other hand, another strand of neo-functional explanation argues that East Asia inherently doesn't have any necessity of close cooperation. According to this argument, the openness of the U.S. market, natural economic forces of proximity and the general complementarity in industry (Haggard 1997, 46) enabled the East Asian countries to be competitive enough without substantial regional cooperation.
As an alternative option that can complement the lack of cooperative institutionalization, neo-functionalists have paid attention to the 'elite bargains' as well. They identified 'elite bargains' between the Commission and business as a driving force through their case study over 'the 1992 movement' (Sandholtz and Zysman 1989, 100). The process of elite-driven policy coordination can also be applied to Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). According to Higgot, the tripartite community of corporate, research and government have led regional cooperation in the Asia-Pacific (Higgot 1998, 50).
On the other hand, as an antithesis to rationalist approaches, constructivists have emphasized ideational factors and collective identity rather than the political and economic interests that both realists and neo-functionalists principally explored.
The key argument of liberal constructivism is that collective identity can cause a peaceful shift from anarchy to political community (Higgot 1998, 63). The emphasis of 'collective identity' in East Asia has a relative explanatory power in the light of the common experience of colonial rule by western power in Southeast Asia and the influence of Confucianism in Northeast Asia.
If we agree with Wendt's argument that cooperative process is reconstructing actor's interest in terms of shared commitment to social norms (Wendt 1992, 417), the failure of EAEC can be explained by constructivism. When it comes to the formation of the East Asian community, Mahathir, the proponent of EAEC, once seemed to pursue an idea of a race-oriented cooperative entity because he maintained a recalcitrant attitude over the participation of Australia, although no other Asian countries oppose its accession to the proposed EAEC. However, East Asian countries failed to form any kind of shared understanding or collective interest in this region.
Japan's attitude to EAEC was still lukewarm then since it had believed that its own role should be placed on bridging, by linking less-advanced Asia and industrialized Pacific countries such as Canada, Australia and New Zealand (Terada 2003, 258). In addition, ethnic diversity and political disorder in Southeast Asian countries also have hindered political and economic cooperation through institutionalization. In this sense, the lack of shared interest in East Asia - in practice, the physical combination of Southeast Asia and Northeast Asia - was another obstacle to impede cooperation in this region.
To some extent, these analyses had demonstrated efficient explanatory power to solve the puzzle suggested by the lag of regionalism in East Asia. Indeed, however, everything was changed after the Asian financial crisis since 1997. The multilateral institutions such as APEC and ASEAN in this region played no role to counter the sudden external shock. The main agenda surrounding intra-regional economic cooperation seems to be changed from trade liberalization which APEC strongly pushed forward to the more diversified concerns such as narrowing socio-economic gaps (Yu 2005, 41). In particular, disillusionment with the incapability of APEC finally provoked the scepticism over the role of the United States. The disappointment at the United States and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) made Asian people and their political leaders begin to dream of the East Asian Community without the U.S. The outcomes of this disillusionment are ASEAN+3 and the growing RTAs.
In sum, the Asian financial crisis was a devastating disaster for East Asian countries; however, at the same time it served them as an impetus to facilitate political and economic cooperation. Blooming East Asian regionalism will be examined in the following section.
The first ASEAN+3 Summit was held at Kuala Lumpur in December 1997. The member countries of the ASEAN+3 are exactly the same as the invited members of EAEG which was proposed under the goal of the realization of so-called 'Asianism'.
ASEAN+3 was initially launched as a loose conference group through the official invitation of Japan, China and South Korea by the ASEAN and has been developed toward firm association so far. The relatively successful start of the ASEAN+3 in contrast to faltering APEC can be explained by both internal and external factors. First of all, consciousness of belonging to the same region makes it possible to reinforce the mutual cooperation overcoming economic disparity such as gaps in economic growth and trade imbalances in this region (Terada 2003, 255). On the other hand, the expansion of NAFTA to Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) integrating Western Hemisphere into an 800 million person marketplace and increasingly widening EU's deepening integration also stimulated the regional grouping in East Asia.
Needless to say, however, the most powerful impetus toward the establishment of ASEAN+3 was the lesson of financial crisis in late 1990s. The experience of the collapse of macroeconomic stability and skyrocketing unemployment provoked by the IMF's conditionality for providing bail-out money, brought about the disillusionment of the necessity of institutionalization of intra-regional monetary cooperation. Since then, various levels of functional cooperation in fields such as energy, environment, industry standard and cross-border transportation have been pursued in this region.
This response after the crisis increased the explanatory utility of neo-functionalism rather than the constructivism mainly focused on 'Asian Identity'. Instead, after the crisis, market-led economic reform was prevalent and the influx of foreign capital was dramatically enhanced including short-term portfolio investment in this region.
The most striking response to external shock which East Asian governments experienced during the crisis was the currency swap and repurchase agreements entitled the 'Chiang Mai Initiative' in 2000. At the same time when they begin to get out of deep economic recession, the Finance Ministers Meeting in Chiang Mai launched new financial mechanisms to prevent a currency crisis caused by the temporary depletion of foreign exchange.
The Chiang Mai Initiative dramatically enlarged the size of currency swap committed by existing agreements among five ASEAN members. Notably, it is worth emphasizing Japan's pivotal role in the implementation process. As a result of bilateral swap arrangement to embody the Chiang Mai Initiative from 2001 to 2003, Japan's one-way based currency pledged reached US$ 12 billion (unlike the two-way swap with China). This is ten times as big as that of the maximum amount of currency which five members of ASEAN arranged in 1977 (ASEAN swap arrangements increased to US$1 billion in 2000). Moreover, ASEAN's arrangement did not even efficiently operate on the verge of the financial crisis in late 1990s. This arrangement was just activated in case of Indonesia in 1979, Malaysia and Thailand in 1980, the Philippines in 1981 and 1982.
However, it is clear that the Chiang Mai Initiative is not a solution to prevent financial crisis by East Asian countries' own effort. According to the agreement on currency swap, the 90 per cent of bilateral swap currency is linked the IMF facilities. The swap amount that can be provided without the consultation with the IMF is only 10 percent of pledged amount of currency. Above all, the Chiang Mai Initiative is based on bilateral approach, not on multilateral arrangement.
Despite the debate over the amount of currency pledged and the autonomy secured from the U.S.-dominated IMF, it is worth noting the implication as a first step for the institutionalization of economic cooperation in this region. Actually, it triggered the subsequent monetary cooperation in this region.
The Asian Bond Fund (ABF) was structured by The Bank for International Settlement (BIS) in 2003 accepting the proposal of the Executives' Meeting of East Asia and Pacific Central Banks and Monetary Authorities (EAEAP). According to this proposal, the ABF portfolio is invested in a basket of liquid US dollar bonds of major Asian economies (excluding Australia, Japan and New Zealand). This implies that the starting point was set up in order to vitalize East Asian regional bond market. More broadly speaking, indeed, 'monetary regionalism' (Dieter and Higgot 2003, 442-45) began to burgeon in East Asia.
However, the obstacle which had impeded the meaningful progress of economic cooperation has not been eliminated so far. Rather, increasing nationalism in Northeast Asia and the deepening of economic disparity in the wake of the expansion of the ASEAN in Southeast Asia is bringing about new hurdles ahead.
In that sense, the observation of evolving economic cooperation in East Asia from the perspective of realism is still relevant although its conventional explanatory power was remarkably weakened due to the progress of functional cooperation. In the following section, several hurdles that stand in the way to East Asian economic cooperation will be examined.
I will suggest four different obstacles to impede the economic cooperation in East Asia in this section. Three of them draw on international power politics in this region. Moreover, the origin of contemporary power politics mostly can be traced back to the past history and to the inter-regional conflict beyond East Asia. This is why we consider the interaction of political and economic dimension among various factors that affect international cooperation and conflict.
First of all, if we agree with the fact that stalled APEC can no longer play an important role for the facilitation of the East Asian economic cooperation, it will not be difficult to accept that the heterogeneity among member countries in APEC gave rise to its malfunction. The heterogeneity in East Asia, however, is not so much as that of Asia-Pacific. Although the East Asian region has religious, cultural and ethnic diversity as a whole, it seems to be a less serious issue than the current debate over the participation of Australia and New Zealand in the East Asian community.
Examples abound. Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi argued that Australia and New Zealand would be a core member in regional economic community during his visit to Southeast Asia in 2002. On the contrary, Mahathir had striven to exclude Australia despite the Australian Prime Minister Keating's consistent effort to be involved in the formation of an East Asian community. Mahathir's strong opposition to the participation of Australia led to his boycott to the first APEC leaders' (summit) meeting in Seattle 1993.
However, since mid-1960s, Japan has consistently adhered to the cooperation in 'Asia-Pacific', embracing advanced nations such as Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and most notably the United States. In Japan's approaches to regional economic cooperation, there has been no concept that embraced 'East Asia' as an entity (Terada 2003, 258). Until recently this debate still continues.
Generally speaking, Southeast Asian countries still worry about the expansionism of Japan and China. China is still regarded as potential hostile country by Indonesia and Vietnam. On the other hand, a number of Southeast Asian people have an unhappy memory about Japan's behaviour before their liberalization. Nonetheless, Southeast Asian countries do not hide their feeling of expectation at the emerging role of China recently (Ba 2003, 639).
The competition for achieving bilateral preferential trade agreement with ASEAN shows an example of potential diplomatic conflict between two contending super powers in East Asia. The scramble for ASEAN between Japan and China has taken place since 2000 in the wake of slow progress of trade liberalization and market expansion in APEC. China and ASEAN has promised to complete bilateral FTA by 2010 as an outcome of the summit in 2001. Japan was surprised to hear this news, and decided to initiate the negotiation with ASEAN for FTA in special summit in 2003. South Korea also announced to start the negotiation with ASEAN for FTA in 2004.
Especially, the FTA between ASEAN and China (ACFTA) draws attention because it will create the world's biggest free trade area with a market of nearly two billion people. The Framework Agreement for Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between China and ASEAN was signed in 2002 and ACFTA aims at the conclusion within ten years. Yet this does not mean the imminent change. It is premature to take an overoptimistic view of the ACFTA. An excessively long implementation period and the lack of complementarity between two economies are likely to impede the progress of bilateral negotiation. Some have scepticism about the willingness of trade liberalization of ASEAN members (Ravenhill 2002, 190-91). Paradoxically, however, the degree and speed of implementation of ACFTA arrangement will be seen as a litmus paper to measure the willingness of economic cooperation in this region.
To summarize, an extremely complex equation to be solved was laid on the ASEAN+3 negotiation table. It begins with the respective ambitions of China and Japan to be the uncontested leader of this region. Although China and Japan have ostensibly emphasized the leading role of the ASEAN in forming the East Asian economic community, they, in reality, seem to regard ASEAN as a mean to embody their hegemonic power in East Asia. The compatible leadership - absence of uncontested regional leader - and the rivalry between China and Japan must be obstacles to force the expansion of regional grouping. Nonetheless, what is in no doubt is that Japan cannot successfully achieve a regional arrangement for cooperation without the support of China, and vice versa (Moon et al 2005, 148).
The second element to affect the progress of East Asian economic cooperation comes from outside the region; the United States. The role of U.S. power in East Asia arises long-lasting question again ; is the broadening and deepening of economic cooperation in East Asia a boon or a bane to the national interest of the United States ? Will the United States still maintain a 'wait and see' strategy in spite of the increasing regionalism in East Asia?
In retrospect, one of the reasons which brought about APEC's malfunction as a steady vehicle to pursue the intra-regional liberalization and to facilitate the economic cooperation can be identified by the 'hegemony defection' (Mack and Ravenhill 1995, 8). In this context, the 'patriotic' voice requiring the restoration of American hegemony in East Asia was ringed out from America.
This voice represented the argument that the expansion of the East Asian economic cooperation and own regional grouping will be to threaten the United States' major economic stake in East Asia (Gordon 2003). Gordon - then cabinet member, the advisor of the U.S. Department of Defence - also worried about the U.S.-Japan security relationship being affected by the progress toward East Asian economic integration. This concern mainly draws on strong suspicion about the ascendant China's role rather than Japan that has declined last decade. Neoconservatives do not hesitate to describe China as an 'oil-hungry adventurist' who is willing to succeed the Soviet Union during Cold War period (Safire 2001).
This 'patriotic' hard-line policy possibly provoked the facilitation of intra-regional cooperation in East Asia, notably after the financial crisis. According to Kupchan, the manner and character in which the leading state wields its power determines the way how other states react to the preponderance. In other words, a 'benign' exercise of restrained power creates trust while an 'unfettered' exercise of predatory power trigger the formation of balancing coalition and strategic rivalry against the leading power (Kupchan 1998, 46).
In this sense, it is convincing that the financial crisis offered a momentum to strengthen the intraregional economic cooperation. The analysis that East Asian states could realize the predatory nature of the United States power through the devastated experience of economic collapse is fairly plausible in the light of the harsh IMF conditionality. This explanation is draws on the perception that the U.S. government exacerbated Asian economic crisis in league with the IMF (Ravenhill 2002, 171).
On the other hand, it is worth noting that new perspectives emphasizing the strategic utility of the East Asian bloc are emerging in Washington. The protagonists argue that East Asian regionalism is not necessarily inimical to the U.S. national interests albeit the united East Asian bloc might be a more formidable competitor to the U.S. economy (Bergsten 2001, 20). Moreover, it will prompt new liberalization of trade, and notably put the stepping stone in the process of market-friendly economic reform of China.
They also argue that East Asian bloc without U.S. could not undermine the existing the U.S.-Japan and U.S.-South Korea alliance and further propose the establishment of collective security regime in this region (Curtis 206-208).
Other signals of changing attitude are also being detected. Above all, tremendous aversion to collective security dialogue to ease military tension in Northeast Asia seems to be lessening. The Bush administration, for example, has continued a six-party talk over two years in order to look for the breakthrough of stalled nuclear conflict in East Asia, which hosted by China and comprising North Korea since August 2003. This could be regarded as a political change in terms of the Bush Administration's East Asia initiative.
It is premature to anticipate how the United States will response in the event of emergence of 'Asian Great Wall' in East Asia similar to the imaginative 'Fortress Europe' in the past. There can be little doubt, however, the impetus to hasten the institutionalization of economic cooperation is shifting from the United States to East Asian people.
Thirdly, the economic disparity within ASEAN+3 is still serious and it impedes the rapid progress in economic cooperation. Notably, the gap in economic volume and performance between Southeast and Northeast Asia is a decisive element to hinder the progress in economic cooperation. According to functionalist perspective, the successful economic integration increases if the economic gap is low among the member countries. Latin American Free Trade Area, for example, could not realize due primarily to the presence of three different-level groups in their economic volume within potential members (Mattli 1999).
As we examined above, the individual size of the currency which might be respectively provided by the currency swap agreement also demonstrate the serious imbalances between Southeast and Northeast Asian economies.
This extreme asymmetry can cause the debate over 'who is eligible to wield the leading power to promote the economic cooperation'. In addition, economic cooperation within the ASEAN members might give rise to limited trade creation effect by the elimination of tariff since the economy of scale is less likely to be realized than that with China. Needless to say, the ASEAN's most urgent aim is to obtain preferential market access toward 'huge' China. One of the EU case studies shows the strong co-relationship between the order which eventually join the unified EU and the dependency of trade on bigger market (Baldwin 1995, 35). In practice, many studies examined by IMF survey in 1992 shows the South - South PTAs are less convincing than those among advanced economies (Torre and Kelly 1992, 38).
In this sense, indeed, the ASEAN got in trouble of double dilemma. When it comes to intra-regional economic cooperation, the ASEAN has a longer history in comparison with bigger-sized Northeast three countries. However, it might surrender the driver's seat to the latecomers. This possible conflict of interest seems to be another barrier to the progress of regional cooperation.
Less emphasized but still important factor is the willingness and capability of political leaders to push forward the economic cooperation in this region. No economic cooperative system emerges in a political vacuum. Widespread demand for economic cooperation does not automatically assure the institutionalization of the cooperation. As Moravcsik (1993) underlined, inter-state bargaining is a decisive element to promote successful conclusion of economic integration. Needless to say, the most important actor in inter-state negotiation is political leaders as well as government officials who sit on the table of negotiation. Public officials tend to maintain a balance between aggregate national welfare and interest groups' voice whose support needed to retain their office (Mansfield and Milner 1999, 603). Yet politicians' interests depend more upon their constituency. What is increasingly important is the capability of political leaders to persuade their constituency who might victimised by market opening in the process of parliamentary ratification.
East Asian community initiative just re-emerged after nearly 10 years' hibernation.
This late resurrection needs more cautious approach to achieve the goal they arranged at every step. In this sense, I propose three overarching strategy not to repeat preceding failure.
Firstly, multilateral body for dialogue focusing on the security and economic cooperation is likely to be suggested. It is needed to make clear the necessity of intra-regional discussion on security issue beyond the 'East Asia Forum' for which ASEAN+3 already arranged in 2002.
As Keohane emphasized through the conceptualization of 'commercial liberalism' (1990, 177-79), trade creates the interconnectedness between exporters and importers and both of them are reluctant to disrupt this mutually-benefited and peaceful system created by trade. This liberalists' view implies economic cooperation is able to guarantee the peaceful inter-relationship between trade partners. Realists stress the role of 'balance of power' at a regional level to set up safer environment for multilateral cooperative regime beyond bilateral partnership. As Carporaso pointed out, security community tends to enhance the likelihood of the emergence of economic community (Caporaso 1993, 464-465). Both realists and liberalists acknowledge it relevant to reinforce the interaction of security and trade.
The security dialogue proposed should be expanded and upgraded version of East Asia Study Group (EASG) which had already accomplished and put an end its mission imposed. When we take into account the fact that the degree of implementation of EASG's 26 action plan focusing on functional cooperation is fairly low, the arrangement of political agenda will push the intra-regional cooperation and reinvigorate the collaboration.
Secondly, in order to narrow the development gaps within ASEAN, the economic cooperation programme between ASEAN older members and Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam (CLMV) and between Northeast three countries and ASEAN members should be increasingly enhanced. Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) programme, for example, launched in 2000 needs to be more focused on the economic integration programme among 8 areas proposed comprising energy, tourism, Human resource development and so on. In addition, CLMV countries enhance their own contribution to increase the outcomes of IAI. Empirical evidences also shows the fact that economic disparity offered an impetus to drive economic integration between existing bloc and outsides (Mattli 1999, 15)
Finally, I repeatedly emphasize the role of political leaders in pursuing the institutionalization of economic cooperation in East Asia. Both Beijing and Tokyo currently seem to regard intra-regional cooperation in East Asia as an appendage of their relationship with the United States. These attitudes reflect, to some extent, the security instability in relation to the role of the United States in this region. At the same time, it implies no Asian political leader is capable for being Jean Monnet or Robert Schuman in this region. In that sense, Mattli who emphasized the political leaders' willingness and capability in economic cooperation as a supply-side factor as well as demand-side factor such as market expansion (Mattli 1999, 50-53) seems to have the foresight to anticipate the cacophony political and economic dimension in economic cooperation.
I don't agree with the interpretation viewing the institutionalization of economic cooperation in East Asia as a 'politics of resentment' (Higgot 1998, Ravenhill 2002, 171). This, arguably, reflects the assumption that the assuagement of resentment lead to the automatic demise of impetus for economic integration. Burgeoning cooperation in East Asia is directed to deeper interpenetration based on internal dynamism beyond the simple response to the external shock.