Before NAFTA, it was widely believed that market integration was likely between the countries equally developed and that a gap in economic development would be an obstacle to successful integration. However, NAFTA, as a first example of a developed economy and a developing one harmonizing in market integration, clearly shows the driving forces that have made progress in the negotiation.
This article breaks down the key issues regarding Mexico's accession to the NAFTA in 1992 into four categories, of which the two will be particularly emphasized. Most notably, the hegemonic role of the United States will be tackled in order to deal with the initial incentive of the NAFTA negotiations. The main feature of American hegemony in this period will be described as rapidly declining rather than ascending after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system. That is, the retreat of the United States from the multilateral trade order caused by the domestic economic distress is addressed as a principal driving force toward market integration with the first major developing partner.
The large discrepancy in economic development can also be pointed out as an important factor to be examined. The developing countries' efforts for regional grouping can be understood, to some extent, as collective attempts to maintain political influence without erosion from strong powers. Also economic asymmetry between the United States and Mexico offered a building block, rather than obstacle, toward market integration. Given the relatively high membership cost that Mexico had to bear, however, the total benefit derived from NAFTA needs to be reconsidered.
The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) originated from the Free Trade Agreement between Canada and the United States (CUSFTA) signed in 1988. The aim of the market integration of North America was at last accomplished by Mexico's incorporation into the US-Canada trading bloc in 1992 ; as a result, NAFTA combined GDP of US$ 6.3 trillion and a population of 363 million (as of 1990) into a single trade bloc (Lustigal. 1992, 4).
The United States had already pursued various forms of political and economic cooperation with Canada thanks to their geographical proximity and economic interdependence. A US-Canada auto pact was already signed in the 1960s to promote the car industry in both countries. The CUSFTA was the outcome of bilateral negotiation grounded in such past economic cooperation.
On the other hand, economic ties between the United States and Mexico had only been reinforced, at the earliest, since the 1980s. Several key agreements for the understanding of facilitation of trade and investment were signed by the two countries between 1985 and 1989 (Lustig 1994, 49-50).
Such imbalance of individual bilateral relationships within the trilateral trade agreement shows the gap of economic development respective members have achieved. Mexico's accession to NAFTA, in particular, offers a significant implication analyzing the similar cases of economic integration between developed economies and a developing one, which were followed by regionalization based on the North-South interface in the contemporary era.
This article intensively addresses the implications and lessons of Mexico's accession to NAFTA. In order to do this, the framework of analysis to view Mexico's joining the CUSFTA is categorized by four different elements. As mentioned above, the principal characteristic of the CUSFTA+Mexico is defined as an economic coalition between developed countries and a developing one.
The major determinants such as domestic preference for trade liberalization and the existence of hegemonic leadership within the region should also be stressed. Lastly, it is worth noting that NAFTA can be divided into a two-stage process of economic integration. The first step was the establishment of a preferential Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between the United States and Canada, and the next one was Mexico's accession. In the light of this sequencing process, examination is needed to identify the main factors affecting the expansion of the existing preferential trade treaty.
This article begins with the overall review of the preceding theoretical framework which tackled economic integration, ranging from functionalism to political realism. The second section examines the factors which promote a developing country's participation in an economic cooperative body led by developed countries.
Another important factor, that is, domestic reasons for making state actors prefer economic integration, will be addressed in the next section. Subsequently, the role of a regional hegemonic leader will be explored. Given that most current regional blocs have been or are being led by hegemonic leadership (Gilpin 2001, 356), the role of a hegemonic power which crucially affects the formation of a regional bloc should not be ignored. Finally, the establishment of NAFTA gives rise to a need to identify the ways in which existing members of trade bloc combine with a latecomer. This issue will be dealt with in the section before the conclusion.
Generally speaking, it is difficult to define clearly why states pursue economic integration when such an integrative process may imply the relative erosion of the rights of self-determination in the economic, probably even political, policy-making at a domestic level. Various elements have been suggested regarding increasing regional trade agreements (RTAs) ranging from freer access to the partner's market by the elimination of trade barriers to the possession of political levers in a power balance.
Traditional functionalists claimed that the international arrangement in functional and technical areas such as health, postal services and communications made political integration possible and secured a peaceful international system (Mitrany 1943). Being inspired by Mitrany, neo-functionalists more strongly emphasized the role of a domestic interest group - notably from the business sector - in achieving regional integration (Haas 1964). Haas anticipated these interest groups would exert pressure on their home governments to create regional institutions securing more cross-border business opportunities.
Since Viner defined the Prussian customs union (Zollverein) as a 'political' institution in order to entrench against lesser German states (Viner 1950, 98-99), realists have paid attention to the 'political' factors such as the role of the regional hegemon and the individual nations' political interests. They stressed either the importance of relative gains as a key factor to influence the advance and pace of integrative behavior (Grieco 1997, 175-178) or that of 'political' determination leading - not following - the creation of a trading or monetary union (Gilpin 2001,357).
Unlike the constant wrangling among political scientists, macroeconomic analyses of the effect of economic integration by separate self-contained economic areas demonstrated relatively clear conclusions in common. That is, it was widely accepted that the economic integration led to the benefits of specialization, greater effectiveness resulting from enhanced market competition, technological diffusion and the reduction of uncertainty and so on (Balassa 1961).
However, it seems necessary to note that the most states that participated in the post-Cold War RTAs had two or more motives for doing so. Their determination cannot be explained by a single reason. For example, Japan appeared to envisage the Pacific Asia Free Trade Area (PAFTA) in the 1960s as achieving easier access to the wider market in the United States, Canada and Australia and so on. However, if we examine the background to Japan's decision making, its strategic goal of appeasing the Southeast Asian countries must be taken into account. At that time, Japan aimed to consolidate the relationship with Southeast Asian countries through the pledge of 'collective measures' by Pacific countries including itself (Kojima 1971, 171).
Likewise, even if the explanatory utility of the nonrealistic analysis which stressed the intention of the United States to spur the stalled Uruguay Round negotiation through the NAFTA is acknowledged, it is also true that the Mexican government's conscious effort for unilateral trade liberalization laid the cornerstone toward the complete market integration of North America.
Historical trajectories show a diversity of reasons, which cannot be easily generalized, for pursuing integration. Nevertheless, the driving force for integration in industrial countries and developing countries shows a sharp difference between them. Simply speaking, market integration among industrial countries aims at improving the economic welfare of participating countries.
On the other hand, the attempts at regional integration among developing countries, which began to burgeon in the 1960s, were perceived as conscious efforts to achieve political stability as well as economic development (Torre and Kelly 1992, 25). Neorealists perspective also interprets the regionalist activity among developing nations as the natural response of weak states trapped in the world of the stronger powers (Hurrell 1994, 49).
Yet, a very limited number of scholars have paid attention to integrative efforts between a developed country and a developing one. NAFTA, in a way, is a very uncommon case which clearly shows a striking asymmetry of negotiating partners' economic power and bargaining strength.
NAFTA is the first major free trade agreement between a developing economy and a developed one (Hufbauer and Goodrich 2004, 37). Statistics show the serious asymmetry in major macroeconomic indicators between Mexico and the United States. The Gross domestic product (GDP) of the United States in 1990, when Mexican President Salinas initially proposed the NAFTA idea, was US$55 trillion, the nearly 260 times of that of Mexico (US$ 214 billion). Although the striking difference in population decreased the gap in per-capita GDP between the two, simply speaking, the average income of the US citizen (US$ 22 thousand) was nearly ten times that of Mexican people (Lustig 1994, 59). Further, almost 70 percent of Mexico's exports go to the United States, whereas at most 5-6 percent of exports from the United States go to Mexico (Lustig 1994, 54).
It is widely accepted that the large discrepancy in per-capita income and level of economic development between negotiating partners gives rise to the issue of adjustment costs, which means the political and socioeconomic expenditure invested to make or amend their standard of transaction to be consistent with the trading partner. Moreover, the asymmetry of bargaining structure between the United States and Latin America is likely to generate unequal costs distribution. In other words, larger economic gains by weaker partners might be offset or reduced by higher adjustment costs (Bouzas and Ros 1994, 27-28).
In the bigger countries, although relatively lower costs are imposed on them, RTAs are not necessarily welcomed by domestic actors either. Industries negatively affected by the market integration are highly likely to require as much compensations as possible (Bouzas and Ros 1994, 28).
However, unlike the European Economic Community (EEC), which tackled this issue through the establishment of adjustment funds, NAFTA has no redistribution mechanism to cope with the adjustment costs of developing partners (Wyatt-Walter 1994, 87). This means Mexico's adjustment costs might be much higher than that of European countries later accessed to the EU - e.g. Britain, Denmark, Greece and Austria etc. - , which had to accept the strict criteria imposed by existing members of the European Union. Such high adjustment costs may bring about developing countries' reluctance to pursue deeper integration with developed countries.
As stated above, considering the political and economic motives of cooperative behavior between state actors, several questions arise from the intention of the United States and Mexico regarding the participation in the negotiation for NAFTA. Why did the United States accept Salinas's proposal without hesitation even though it already had overwhelming political and technological superiority over Mexico? Why did Mexico propose the market integration initiative with the United States despite a considerably high membership fee - adjustment costs - knowing well it could not overcome its relative backwardness to the United States? The realist answers to such questions begin with the following perception.
Grieco's 'binding thesis' offers one of the relevant answers, explaining that weaker partners will pursue trade agreements to secure 'voice opportunities' to themselves (Grieco 1993, 331). According to his hypothesis, the collaborative arrangements that developed and developing nations jointly participate in, despite the gap between their bargaining powers, will be assumed to contribute to restraining the unilateral use of power by stronger partners.
Similarly, economic disparities among state actors are also regarded as a catalyst rather than an impeder in promoting economic integration (Mattli 1999, 15). In particular, a higher level of economic development and a larger membership of existing trade agreements tends to stimulate more active behavior in participating in the regional group. The weaker outsiders, in this process, have an incentive to pay a high membership cost, such as radical structural adjustment at a domestic industrial level (Mattli 1999, 63).
Although Mattli was affected by the strand of new institutional economics  whereas Grieco manifested his political neorealist orientation, their common formulation on bilateral arrangements between weaker and stronger countries explains convincingly the Mexico's accession to the CUSFTA. In that sense, they seem to refute the underlying assumption of traditional mercantilism that economic asymmetry between two actors impeded their collaboration.
In the light of their hypotheses, Mexico's adjustment costs caused by unilateral trade liberalization in the 1980s, as Mattli pointed out, can be interpreted the membership fee for becoming a member of a trade bloc led by developed countries. It is worthwhile to note that the CUSFTA, even though Mexico's constant liberalization was implemented in the 1980s, forced it again to accept measures for wider and deeper financial market opening. Moreover, given that the Peso crisis in 1994 was indirectly influenced by the excessive dependence on foreign portfolio investment in the local stock market, Mexico's membership fee for participation in NAFTA should not be underestimated.
Despite their seminal theorizing, however, relatively little account of Mexico's domestic environment formed by political actors from both the legislature and the executives has been offered so far. What Grieco and Mattli mainly explored was not the domestic variables of state actors but the inter-relationship between them. Thus, the following questions remain to be answered about the two negotiators' choice at that time.
Why did Mexico select a radical market-opening policy despite the political risk which might be raised from the domestic constituency? What made the United States embark on the FTA negotiation with its first developing partner, aside from Israel and Jordan as strategic security allies? These questions will be addressed in the following section.
The objective of domestic policy reform has been regarded as one of the important reasons why countries seek to join RTAs, along with traditional explanations such as trade gains and the acquisition of bargaining power (Whally 1998, 70-74). Furthermore, states have pushed forward liberal economic reforms characterized by the market openness and the elimination of trade barriers by locking themselves in the external mechanism such as Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs) (Mansfield and Milner 1999, 605-6). In this sense, RTAs were a useful means to appease domestic resistance from interest groups which might lose their profit in the future.
Nevertheless, as we are unable to assume that all the outsiders can be allowed to be a full member of existing trade agreements whenever they want, other factors forming individual preferences for regional integration should be simultaneously considered.
A series of unsuccessful attempts which sought to economic integration, 'a patchwork quilt of trade agreements'(Whalley 1992, 126), were made in Latin America in the 1960s. Various initiatives for economic integration which have emerged since then in this region still remained as abortive proposals without any meaningful progress for the achievement of the unified economic bloc.
Unlike other frustrated initiatives in this region, NAFTA was successfully launched because it was motivated by a strong unilateral reform for liberalization undertaken by Mexico in the 1980s. Subsequently, the actual negotiation was initiated by the official proposal of Salinas, Mexican President, in September 1990. Despite the fact that all three members - Mexico, Canada, the United States - had internal divisions between the executive and the legislature over trade policy, the official negotiations successfully began thanks to US Congressional approval for 'fast-track' (Milner 1997, 213).
However, we should go back to the early 1980s in order to broadly understand Mexico's preparation for the NAFTA by choosing a radical trade liberalization policy. Mexico launched comprehensive economic reform program in 1983 just after the occurrence of the debt crisis. Most striking measures taken for trade liberalization was the replacement of import licenses by tariffs and the promotion of exports through new fiscal incentives, which means the overall re-examination of import substitution industrialization (ISI) policy that has characterized Latin America's postwar development strategy. As a result, the portion of import license coverage plummeted from 100% in 1982 to 22% in 1990 and average tariff decreased from 16.4% (1982) to 6.1 % (1988) (Pastor and Wise 1994, 460-61).
During this period, Mexico was suffering from serious economic recession caused by massive debts and exacerbating terms of trade. Nevertheless, President Miguel Madrid (1982-1988) persistently pushed forward economic reforms for trade liberalization along with entry to the GATT in 1986. Considering the economic turmoil Mexico was facing, from the perspective of external observers, the pace of liberalization for the domestic reforms seemed to be unduly fast (Pastor and Wide 1994, 463).
This seemingly paradoxical response by the Mexican government can be ascribed notably to a widespread presence of enhanced volume of intra-industry with the United States, which resulted in the formation of a strong supporters group for trade liberalization in Mexico (Pastor and Wide 1994, 464).
Furthermore, President Salinas (1988-1994) strove to adopt such radical policy packages accelerating trade and investment liberalization that a pro-Salinas constituency was naturally fostered in the United States (Dresser 1998, 246). This facilitated the exchange of mutually guaranteed access to the partner's market and Mexico's admission of Washington's economic ideology (Hurrell 1994, 271).
Despite Mexico's unilateral market-opening policy, by the mid-1980s, for the United States, Mexico still remained as an unimportant partner on its candidates list for bilateral FTAs. American analysts primarily worried about the large disparity in economic development between the two countries, which might affect the timing and pace of the implementation of trade concessions mutually agreed (Schott 1989, 47-49).
Although the United States has manifested strong and consistent support for multilateralism in international trade regime since the onset of the GATT system, it was gradually getting into trouble due to the expanding regionalism at a global level. This dilemma of the United States surfaced in self-contradictory suggestions, some American ideologists simultaneously argued for 'non-discriminatory' treatment for trade partners alongside the exceptional application of a Most Favored Nation (MFN) clause to a 'good neighbor' (Schott 1989, 60).
The deepening of the trade imbalance and the erosion of its dominant economic position after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system signified the crisis of American hegemony. Eventually, in the 1980s, American hegemonic leadership was damaged by its pursuit of short-term economic gains and resentment was provoked from its economic partners and even from its traditional allies (Gilpin 1987, 345).
The so-called 'multi-track' approach in US trade policy emerged in such a climate, coupling bilateral and unilateral along with traditional multilateral negotiation for trade liberalization (Wyatt-Walter 1994, 85). Salinas's idea for the FTA with the United States was also proposed under such circumstances, and was accepted by the Reagan administration and that of its successor, President Bush, without long contemplation.
In particular, from the US perspective, several benefits which could not be achieved from the existing attempts of multilateral trade liberalization could be expected from the US-Mexico FTA. According to the realist approach, it was perceived that this creation of a 'preferential' trade area by regional grouping might exert additional pressure upon the intransigence of Europe and East Asia in the ongoing Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations (Wyatt-Walter 1994, 85, Hurrell 1994, 266). As political realists regard the US's strong support for the establishment of an Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in 1989 as an implicit display of its willingness that it might give up the ongoing multilateral option and encourage institutionalization at a regional level, NAFTA was perceived as one of the potential alternatives resulting from the faltered GATT round (Hurrell 1994, 266).
In sum, Mexico's joining the CUSFTA can be interpreted as the outcome of individual efforts to eliminate particular domestic obstacles which Mexico and the United States were confronting respectively. At the same time, this conclusion enhances the explanatory power of realists assuming that state actors tend to pursue regional integration as a means of diminishing the discrepancy among them.
Needless to say, in the negotiating process of NAFTA from 1990 to 1992, the United States played a pivotal role. In other words, according to the logic and terms of hegemonic stability theory, the United States in the NAFTA negotiation can be described as a 'dominant beneficiary' from economic integration which holds overwhelming 'economic supremacy'; thus, it offers 'free trade' to the international trade regime as 'public goods' (Olson 1965, Kindleberger 1973). Public goods, in this context, are characterized by 'non-excludability of benefits' and 'non-rivalry of consumption'.
However, in terms of 'public goods' approach in analyzing the expansion of free trade regime, some critiques have been suggested surrounding the fundamental question like 'is free trade really public goods?' (Conybeare 1984, Snidal 1985). As we can see from the fact that the current WTO system does not offer benefits such as the provision of market access rights and the dispute settlement mechanism for non-members, the notion of public goods is already challenged.
Rather, Krasner's argument coupling neorealism with 'hegemonic stability theory', which Kindleberger previously theorized, seems to be more persuasive than the 'public goods' theory. He formulated that the hegemonic distribution of potential economic power brought about an open trading structure at a global level preventing states from being tempted by regionalism (Krasner 1976, 318).
According to his analysis, the preference for openness in international trade is most likely to occur during periods when a hegemonic state is ascending in its economic power. On the other hand, an international trade regime which is comprised of unequally developed large states tends to prefer a closed structure (Krasner 1976, 321-23).
However, a more interesting and significant question in terms of Krasner's hypothesis, which mainly dealt with the case of nineteenth and early twentieth century, would be the availability of such a formula in analyzing the complex dynamics of new regionalism in the 1990s.
The trade policy of the United Sates since the mid-1980s, as stated above, overtly reflects a declining leadership role in the wake of exacerbating trade deficits. The US hegemony, dubbed as 'predatory' by Conybeare (1987), that has constantly ascended since the onset of the postwar period, was seriously damaged at this time.
This means, inevitably, the lack of capability to induce other protectionist countries to participate in the open trade regime. It was obvious that the declining hegemonic leader could not use its economic resources to create an open structure. In addition, the large US domestic market could no longer be offered to underdeveloped countries which needed a greater market (Krasner 1976, 322-23).
However, Krasner's argument has several weaknesses in explaining the hegemonic role to achieve regional institutionalization. His analysis was solely focused on the global openness such as an offer of the domestic market by a state relatively advanced in its size and technology. Such openness, however, does not necessarily negate the newly emerged regionalism. It is the case that declining hegemony accelerated the resurrection of regionalism in the 1980s-1990s but it does not necessarily undermine the global openness. For example, liberalists viewed the newly burgeoned regional arrangements in the Asia Pacific region as a facilitator to push multilateral trade liberalization (Bergsten and Noland 1993, Lawrence 1996). This shows the compatibility of global openness and RTAs. The concept of 'open regionalism' or 'soft regionalism' reflects such compatibility.
In addition, it is still in question whether a declining hegemonic state immediately changes its orientation in trade policy toward protectionism. As Krasner acknowledged himself, Britain in the nineteenth century and the United Sates in the 1970s respectively experienced the decay of hegemony but largely maintained a liberal - or market opening - policy despite their weakening economic power.
Another explanation was offered by Gilpin. According to 'state-centric realism' as he earlier labeled it, one or more core political entities should play a decisive role in pursuing political integration (Gilpin 2001, 356). He argued that the unwillingness of the United States to continue its hegemonic leadership provoked regional grouping among other countries across the world, which aimed to sort out their own problems without American hegemony (Gilpin 2001, 359-60).
Given that his argument mainly focused on the role of the United States, the establishment of NAFTA also can be interpreted as the outcome of a changed attitude of the United States from multilateralism to regionalism. This indicates that the retreat of the United States from the multilateral free trade regime, created by itself several decades ago, laid the cornerstone of NAFTA.
In sum, the establishment of NAFTA can be understood as the phenomenon of regionalization of American hegemonic power. That is, American hegemony made narrow the scope in which its power is wielded in the wake of its declining influence at a global level. At the same time, the United States, frustrated by the snail-paced progress of the Uruguay Round, was likely to show its bargaining strength toward the rest of the world. In this sense, it would be broadly agreed that, cutting across the theoretical debate between liberalist and realists, as Hurrell portrayed, Latin America became America's refuge from an increasingly hostile world (Hurrell 1994, 268).
The last question this article is going to tackle is to do with the outward expansion of existing RTAs. However, to date, very few scholars have paid attention to theorizing the sequencing process of regional grouping. To begin with, Wonnacott, who was interested in the political economy of the formation of the NAFTA, conceptualized 'hub-and-spoke' bilateralism, which refers to the FTA by bilateral negotiation between only one member of the existing union and a new country from outside. That is, if Mexico chose the simple and quicker bilateral agreement with the United States after the preceding US-Canada FTA, Mexico can be described as a 'spoke' and the United States can be expressed as a 'hub' which has two separate partners as a individual spoke. Actually, relatively small economies which has a vulnerability in bargaining power tends to prefer this kind of 'hub-and-spoke' bilateralism on the grounds that bilateral agreement can be more easily achieved than a multilateral trade bloc which needs all members' consent (Lipsey 1990, Wonnacott 1990).
Likewise, superior negotiators also tend to prefer bilateral agreements because they can exercise more dominant influence to build up the pace and condition of the trade liberalization. Chile, for example, failed to become a new member of NAFTA, even though any other qualified countries were able to access to NAFTA since it manifested an open door policy to outsiders who had a willingness and eligibility to join. Chile amply met the qualification the existing NAFTA provision required, but pressure from the US labor and environment groups prevented it from joining (Wonnacott 1996, 238). As a result of the reluctance of the US government, Chile eventually became a 'spoke' through bilateral FTA with the United States in 2002.
Although hub-and-spoke bilateralism is being rapidly expanded, however, the 'less' economic gains from an 'imperfect' type of trade liberalization were indicated as a stumbling block. The main reason was that the spoke country must compete with its neighbors to occupy the limited market of the hub country. In this sense, Wonnacott asserted that hub-and-spoke bilateralism is risky and thus undesirable from both the view of wealthy 'hub' and relatively less-advanced 'spokes' in the light of the unnecessary adjustment costs it inevitably provokes (Wonnacott 1996, 242-46, 249).
The 'Domino effect' designed by Baldwin encapsulates the process of expansion of an existing economic integrative body. Baldwin was mainly interested in the factors that trigger the membership request from non-members based on domestic exporters' needs calling for greater market. Baldwin's hypothesis is grounded in the expectation that a chain reaction will occur if once the existing bloc begin to enlarge (Baldwin 1995, 33-36).
It is generally accepted that increasing number of members and enhanced volume of trade in an existing bloc lead to a bigger loss of opportunity cost for the outsiders who failed to join. In this sense, once one of the outsiders has joined the existing union, further liberalization is likely to occur due to the remainder's fear of relative losses (Baldwin 2004, 55). Unlike in European countries, however, a domino phenomenon has not occurred in Latin America. Just after Mexico became a new member of the NAFTA, adjacent countries such as Chile, Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay knocked at the door of US market following their neighbor, but failed to be allowed to join the existing union. Instead, they were recommended to create their own regional group before applying for FTA with the United States.
This shows the irrelevance of Baldwin's domino reaction hypothesis. The political realists who have stressed the influence of post-Cold War global power politics over the wave of regionalism, rather than liberal economists, are likely to answer the question about the re-orientation of the US trade policy from multilateralism to bilateralism.
By the 1980s, the United States was deeply concerned that the increasingly reinforced of European cooperation would develop into a 'Fortress Europe', and spurred the creation of its own regional bloc. However, the final conclusion of inter-agency review by the US government was that the real likelihood is extremely low (Featherstone 1993, 270-271). Such situation made the United States to voluntarily deter the continuous expansion of regional grouping. For the United States, bilateral FTAs are a more accessible way to resolve an enormous trade deficit without the occurrence of mercantilist competition with Europe and Japan.
In this article, the key issues which affected the Mexico's accession to NAFTA were examined under a categorization into four factors. The domestic preference for market integration and the existence of hegemonic leadership contributed to initiate the negotiation and to lead the subsequent procedure. What is seemingly obstructive to progress in negotiation, the discrepancy in economic power between two parties and the opportunity cost issue that stimulated the non-member's willingness to join the existing union, also offered a building block toward the successful conclusion of US-Mexico negotiation.
The traditional interpretation of the arrangement of the NAFTA in 1992 was mainly focused on the two separate points. Domestic factors emphasizing the electoral calculations of political leaders or the ratification procedure of the member country legislature (Milner 1997, 214) shaped one of important trends. The other primarily emphasized the economic benefit the market integration between the countries in geographical proximity can bring about.
However, these separate theoretical explanations are still insufficient to show the complex nature of the NAFTA establishment and must be supplemented by an alternative approaches. In this sense, the economic integration model between a less-advanced and a more-advanced country reveals a difference between NAFTA and any other RTAs, which has so far been neglected. For instance, even if this is not the place to scrutinize the issue, there is a need to fully calculate the benefits Mexico could gain despite the relatively high cost of adjustments for which it should pay. The unequal game model which was first shown from the US-Mexico negotiation case will suggest a useful policy implication to the increasingly popular pattern of bilateral trade negotiation after the Cold War.
The hegemonic leadership approach which consolidated the realist explanation on regional economic integration also supplements the explanatory weakness that was shown in preceding studies. For example, in the RTAs between a high-tariff and a low-tariff country such as NAFTA, the losses derived from preferential tariffs tend to be more remarkable than those between advanced and opened economies (Panagariya 1999, 485).
However, it seems plausible to assume that the political incentive to the United States to display its intention to the world subsumed the potential economic losses such as trade diversion effect that preferential trade agreement might cause.
Nevertheless, if one must choose a single pivotal determinant which can decide the destiny of negotiation for RTAs, it would probably be agreed that the power of the United States - including both executive branches and interest groups - is a primary factor. This is the reason why attention to the role of the United States should still be drawn in analyzing increasing FTAs - worldwide as well as on the American continent - in a way that cuts across the different theoretical perspectives divided into liberalism and realism.