This essay aims at the assessment of the explanatory utility of liberal IPE and the benefit of free trade in explaining globalisation. For this examination, it will primarily focus on three key characteristics of globalisation ; Increasing mobility of capital, the stagnation of multilateral liberalisation and the expansion of regionalism, emergence of transnational production chain. In particular, this essay emphasise the fact that unprecedented transnational production have changed the interpretation of traditional comparative advantage. The increase of global division of labour and the decrease of cross-border movement cost cause the diversification of investment and production priority. Following the priority change of decision on production and investment, the concept of traditional comparative advantage moves to more flexible type. This essay names the change 'from the rigid comparative advantage to elastic comparative advantage'. Finally, it conclude that that neither the assumption of classic liberalism nor its modern revision have enough explanatory utility on globalisation.
No place is free from the influence of globalisation in our era. The influence of increasing globalisation reaches to the realm of political decision-making process, the domain of cross-border economic transaction, the phenomenon of cultural convergence and worldwide division of labour.
Above all, however, the key word that defines the globalisation is the freer flow of goods, services and capital beyond territorial constraints. Such expansion and consolidation of globalisation seems to imply the triumph of classic assumptions of liberalism that elaborated the rationale and the benefit of free trade.
However, contemporary globalisation needs totally different interpretation that conventional dichotomy between mercantilism and liberalism or between realism and liberalism could not identify. This essay aims at the test of validity of liberal IPE theory including the notion of free trade in explaining the globalisation.
To do this, it will begin with the overall review of classic liberal IPE theory which Adam Smith and David Ricardo encapsulated. It will then examine the modern revision of liberalism which underpinned the interdependence theory and the regional integration theory. Subsequently, the explanatory utility of liberal IPE will be assessed by the empirical evidence that showed the emergence of newly-formulated cross-border transaction of capital and goods which classic liberals could not have envisaged.
In addition, deepening and widening regionalisation will be also suggested to test the explanatory power of liberal assumption for the globalisation. Finally, this essay will conclude that liberal IPE has limited relevance to demonstrate the various aspects of globalisation.
Mercantilism which has reflected the interest of great merchants and financiers, provoked an opposition by some of the economic interest group of the growing market economy in mid-eighteenth century. 'Self-adjusting market' was the key conceptualisation by Adam Smith, greatest economic liberal to date (Fusfeld 1966, 25-26). For Adam Smith, by the time he came to write his landmark work, Wealth of Nations, the economic system which ought to be approximated was a 'natural order'. An extensive economic reform was emphasised to make the economic system come closer to a 'natural order' (Deane 1978, 10).
Smith argued that each nation would discover 'a productive niche' if it was placed in an unregulated international economy (Crane and Amwai 1997, 56). Such optimism is broadly dependent upon the separation between political behaviour and economic choice and further between states and market. Realism emphasizes the influence of state as a single and pivotal actor while Marxism notably pays attention to the economic substructure. But the target of liberalist analysis is the inter-relationship between states and market.
Ricardian economics was recorded as the first attempt to apply an analysis of domestic economy to international economy. He showed that international specialisation and division of labour was advantageous to all nations. However, he also emphasised the importance of domestic well-being. Free trade based on comparative advantage is the method to achieve it (Fusfeld 1966, 40)
Classic liberalist view, indeed, on the effect of commerce was enthusiastic. J.S.Mill, for example, proclaimed that commerce is rapidly rendering war obsolete (cited in Parkinson 1977, 94). Of course, the different perspective mirrors the different interpretation of commerce.
Commercial liberalism (Keohane 1990, 177-79) based on the belief that commerce leads to peace made significant contribution in the domain of international relations theory for the development of classic liberalism and underpinned contemporary interdependence theory.
In terms of the impact of globalisation, the liberal anticipation can be identified in interdependence theory as well. Keohane and Nye deployed their liberal interdependence theory through the comparison between military force and economic policy. They did not deny the necessity of military force but emphasised the relative cost-effectiveness of economic means rather than military attack to achieve given purpose (1977,17).
Liberal economist, Raymond Vernon who coined 'sovereignty-at-bay' and John Diebold who prophesy the end of nation states laid the foundation of later hyper-globalisation. This evolution of interdependence theory shows in advance the subsequent emergence of the hyper-globalisation school in contrast to the sceptics on the debate over globalisation. This debate will be briefly discussed and it will move to the examination of liberal relevance in explaining the globalisation.
Hyperglobalisers, such as Ohmae and Writson, argue that economic globalisation provokes a 'denationalisation' of economies through the establishment of a transnational network of production, trade and finance. By contrast, the sceptics, such as Hirst and Thompson, regard the globalisation as a 'myth' which conceals the reality of still powerful national governments (Held et al 1999, 2-7).
Regardless of whether we accept or deny one of the two contending perspectives, in any meaningful sense, liberalism is undergoing a series of fundamental challenges under globalisation.
First of all, the strongest challenge of globalisation against liberalism comes from Adam Smith's 'invisible hand'. Fundamentally, Adam Smith and David Ricardo assumed capital immobile and only available for national investment. Smith's 'invisible hand' presupposed the internal relations of community, so that the capitalists feel a 'natural disinclination' to invest abroad (Burchill 1996, 57).
In addition, recurring financial crisis across the continent calls into question on Adam Smith's 'natural order' (Deane 1978, 10) discussed above. This is the case that globalisation in finance deepened asymmetric interdependence between advanced states and less-advanced states. Less-advanced nations have an incentive to the access to huge export markets and advanced nations want an external outlet for domestic capital surplus. Inter-state co-operation in macro-economic level is also becoming compulsory to efficiently counter unbridled capital movement.
However, currently increasing inter-state co-operation does not automatically guarantee the triumph of liberal thinking. Behind the co-operation, the losers might be discontented with the 'relative loss'  in the light of the share the winners might enjoy. The potential hostility such inequality might cause represents the instability and vulnerability the globalisation confronts. The repatriation of capital profit and short-term capital taxation, for example, still remain as a 'hot potato' which irritates liberalists and their adherents.
In addition, the over-speeding capital flow only searching cost-productivity and state's deregulation have coerced the domestic industry and labour into structural adjustment. Adam Smith previously asserted that free trade should be gradually phased over a large enough time span to complement the competitiveness of domestic industry and labour (Crane and Amwai 1997, 56). But this classic liberalist idea was, in practice, ignored by liberalist policy itself because of the worldwide deregulation and the wane of the states' power.
Furthermore, international institutions tend to be mobilised by individual states in order to hasten the domestic structural adjustment accompanied by domestic resistance as a result of high unemployment and deepening income inequality in labour market.
Indeed, as Keohane depicted as a 'common blind spot'(Keohane 1988, 392), the domestic politics under globalisation was neglected by both game theoretic strategic analysis and structural explanations of international regime (that is, two representative modern liberal approaches). The validity of the domestic-international dichotomy is fairly arguable. However, it is the case that Laisser - faire policy commonly maintained by liberal thinking in domestic economy exacerbates income inequality and deepens the bipolarisation globalisation cause.
Secondly, the worldwide proliferation of regionalism also cannot be explained by liberal assumptions that free trade enhance the interdependence and finally pacify the inter-state relationship. The liberalist approach on trade international relations theory begins with fundamental assumption that 'trade wars' both between and within trade blocs is essentially unthinkable (Richardson 1995, 291).
The number of Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs) reported to GATT/WTO as of Jan. 2004 was three hundred and half of them have already been activated (). More than half of worldwide trade volume was expected to be conducted within RTAs in 2005.
Highly-increased bilateral and regional trade agreements ought to contain the discriminatory treatments contradictory to Most Favored Nations(MFN) clause, the supreme principle of GATT. From the beginning, GATT aims at the 'freer and fairer' trade, thus, unilateralism, bilateralism and trade blocs were prohibited except in unusual cases (Dam 1970, 391-400, Gilpin 2001, 218). The post-war trade regime based on the principle of nondiscrimination reflecting 'commercial liberalism' was damaged both by the stagnation of multilateralism and reinforced bilateralism and regionalism.
Finally, as a result of globalisation, freer and faster shifts of labour and capital in particular, more opportunities were provided to existing lower-wage economies to participate in global division of labour. This trend led to the specialisation in production focused on labour-intensive manufacturing industries and also gave rise to the rapid growth of manufactured exports from a range of developing countries (Perraton et al 1997, 263-265). For David Ricardo who considered the profit of fledgling bourgeoisie as supremacy, worldwide division of production based on the comparative cost was likely to be seemed as the triumph of comparative advantage, his landmark theory.
However, the dispersion of a sarategic position for manufacturing resulting from globalisation in production inevitably causes the re-examination of conventional factors which have affected investment and manufacturing for trade. That is, the globalisation in production increasingly makes geographical elements and national borders obsolete.
Comparative advantage, thus, is increasingly treated as secondary factor in investment decision under the specific circumstances in the globalisation of production. In particular, cutting-edge technological industries that need more sophisticated production chain - i.e. research, device, development, design, part purchase, assembly, wrapping, innovation, marketing, customer service etc. - are increasingly decentralised in production, thus, comparative advantage in national level is relatively less considered in an investment decision. In addition, the diffusion of the 'diversion road' such as tax heaven and transfer-pricing which enable to firms circumvent obstacles on national borders also erode the myth of comparative advantage.
Moreover, some critics of the notion of free trade argue that the traditional national sovereign state trading is becoming the exceptional pattern of trade due to the increasing transnational manufacturing. They proclaim the end of the necessity of comparative advantage theory because transnational investment decisions are governed by absolute profitability rather than comparative advantage (Burchill 1996, 57).
Globalisation in production, however, does not simply mean the obsoleteness of de facto and de jure national entity in global trade. The sovereign state still remains as a stable and powerful actor which has benefited or suffered from free trade. The comparative advantage as a rationale in deciding the priority in investment and trade is still relevant. In this sense, Burchill's critique that regards comparative advantage as anachronistic shows the misinterpretation either on the nature of globalisation in production or on the likelihood of evolution of comparative advantage.
Instead, I argue that traditional 'rigid' comparative advantage is evolving towards 'elastic' comparative advantage under the globalisation in production. In this situation, investors and manufacturers can find more profit opportunities through strategic geographical re-allocation of production facilities. The time needed to make investment decision as well as cancellation becomes shorter. In this sense, 'elastic' comparative advantage is the outcome of globalisation, at the sane time, and its stepping stone.
Above all, globalisation is largely understood as the rapid shift of power from the states to the market. One of the key points of globalisation in finance is that global capital flows are able to penalise the individual government whenever it is discontented about the economic policies in which it invests (Lairson and Skidmore 2003, 114). Seemingly, the predominance of market over states seems to prophesy the end of realism and the triumph of liberalism.
In reality, however, as I discussed above, the crisis in national level is repeated and inter-states tension does not diminish. Multilateral liberalisation is in crisis and inter-state bargaining  is still vigorous. In general, four different elements, that is, domestic and international politics, domestic and international economic efficiency are considered simultaneously to set up trade policy. And the line among four elements becomes to blur (Cohen et al 2003, 14-15). Liberalism and the Ricardian defense of benefits of free trade have explanatory utility current globalisation, in part, on domestic and international economy and obviously weaknesses are seen in explaining the political dynamism. On the other hand, the change of traditional comparative advantage shows the possible acceleration of globalisation. The broader the realm to which globalisation reaches, the more extensive approach will be needed.