An old-fashioned debate between free trade and protectionism is recently re-emerging in the form of wrangling between multilateralism and bilateralism. From the liberal political economy perspective in IPE, bilateral trade treaties are regarded as attempts to incorporate each party into a global market, thus these are completely compatible with the postwar international trade regime based on non-discriminatory multilateralism. In contrast to this, economic realists condemn the discriminatory nature of the PTAs on the grounds that bilateral or regional trade relationship is contradictory to the postwar arrangement based on the spirit of 'freer and fairer' trade that the GATT earlier committed.
This article first analyse the inter-relationship between multilateralism and bilateralism through the examination of historical episodes in international trade realm since the second half of the nineteenth century. This will be carried out with the categorisation into three chronological phases.
The first phase as a prologue shows the bilateralism does not necessarily undermine the trade liberalisation. On the other hand, the wave of protectionist regionalism among LDCs in the 1960s-1970s and the explosion of bilateral PTAs after the end of Cold War imply that the absence of hegemonic leadership in international trade facilitated the enhancement of bilateral PTAs. Finally, this article concludes that such increasing number of bilateral PTAs inevitably erodes the multilateral regime, but still, more salient emphasis would be placed on the existence of hegemonic leadership rather than the dichotomy between multilateralism and bilateralism.
The postwar international trade regime launched under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) has been challenged by two strands of criticism. Some observers who centered on the unequal nature of international trade criticised the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) clause (Evans 1968, 92-93) and the principle of reciprocity (Spero 1981, 188) on the grounds that, in practice, these key provisions of the GATT promote unfair free competition between less-developed members and industrialised advanced countries.
On the other hand, the liberal purists advocating multilateralism showed great concern for the emergence of a bilateral trade treaty among the GATT contracting parties, which might undermine the global free trade order (Krugman 1993, Bahgwati and Panagariya 1996).
The former issue still remained as a significant cause which might endanger the multilateral free trade regime, although a series of measures for internal reform such as the introduction of Generalised System of Preference (GSP). However, a much more dreadful scenario is likely to caused by the latter. Given that reckless mercantilist interstate competition during the interwar period triggered World War , multilateralists are likely to argue that the formation of excusive trading blocs is even dangerous as well as undesirable.
They point out that Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs) will erode the multilateral trade system that has underpinned economic relations since the end of World War. The PTAs are regarded as contradictory to the non-discriminatory rule on which the GATT is based, because they allow excusive access right for selected partners' markets. Although the GATT article 

 approves the arrangements, the dramatically increasing number of PTAs cast a cloud over the commitment of welfare increase and peace settlement promised by the GATT planners.
On the contrary, the advocates of PTAs state that trade liberalisation at a regional level is complementary to multilateral free trade order and that, ultimately, it can jump-start the stalled multilateral trade negotiation (Bergsten and Noland 1993, Lawrence 1996, Mansfield and Milner 1999). They stress the non-exclusiveness and openness of contemporary regional PTAs which are willing to accept outsiders if they once want to join. A seemingly self-contradictory term, 'open regionalism' was coined under such underlying assumption.
This article begins with an historical approach examining the trajectory that regional PTAs have created. The development of regionalism in this article is largely divided into three phases.
The first phase starts from the second half of nineteenth century, the heyday of liberal trade order, and this lasts up to the outbreak of World War including interwar periods. Interstate exchange of manufactures to maximise national interest under the circumstance of the political disorder in this phase clearly indicates the tension between bilateralism and multilateralism through the episodes of success and failure occurred by turns.
The second phase ranges from the late 1950s to 1970s. The demise of American hegemonic power with the collapse of Bretton Woods system facilitated the moves of regional PTAs in this period. However, the main actors in this wave were still less-developed and small-sized economies, thus, these show insufficient evidence in explaining the sharp conflict between bilateralism and multilateralism.
Vehement debates were not deployed until the post-Cold War economic giants, including the United States and European Union (EU), struggled with each other towards an initiative within multilateral negotiation with eliminated trade barriers in the 1990s. In this period, the traditional supporter for non-discriminatory multilateralism, the United States, dramatically changed its underlying tone of trade policy from multilateralism to bilateralism. Further, the United States has actively led the recent wave of bilateral PTAs.
After the chronological survey to trace the meaningful evolution of postwar multilateral trade regime, the relevance of the concept of 'open regionalism' which represents the liberal view over the increasing regionalism will be examined. One of the most accessible conceptualisations of this multilateralism-bilateralism conflict seems to be the 'building block versus stumbling block' hypothesis (Bhagwati and Panagariya 1999). That is, the former views the role of PTAs as a facilitator to achieve worldwide multilateral trade liberalisation, while the latter regards them as impeding the non-discriminating trade liberalisation. In conclusion, the historical scrutiny and theoretical examination in this article will show the outcome : that current PTAs led by the United States are in a state of considerable tension with the multilateral and liberal trade order that GATT architects envisaged.
Development of regionalism has been undertaken since the second half of nineteenth century. A vast number of custom unions, which culminated in the formation of the Zollverein in 1834, were emerged and bilateral commercial agreements hastened by Anglo-French commercial treaty in 1860 also contributed to the enhancement of trade. However, it should be noted these trends were a largely European phenomenon (Irwin 1993, 92, Mansfield and Milner 1999, 596).
At this time, the broad network of bilateral commercial agreements in Europe was heavily linked by unconditional Most Favoured Nation (MFN) rules. Irwin depicted such a trend as 'progressive bilateralism' ; European countries 'effectively pursued multilateralism via bilateral treaties' in the nineteenth century (Irwin 1993, 99, 114). Unfortunately, however, bilateral trade regime came to an end in 1914 with the outbreak of World War. Nonetheless, such experiences offered substantial inspiration later to construct a postwar international trade regime based on the GATT's provision of non-discriminatory treatment to their trading partners.
By contrast, the interstate trade relationship during the interwar period was likely to be characterised as highly 'preferential' and 'discriminatory'. The central aims of European states that had experienced devastating war were zeroed in on the maximisation of political power. Also the mercantilist trade policy was an efficient way to coerce past enemies into abandoning any military threat to themselves.
Paradoxical episodes were clearly seen in the evolution of the pattern of international trade between the second half of nineteenth century and the 1930s with this phase. In other words, one can identify the fact that international trade system grounded in bilateral agreements in the nineteenth century did not generate pernicious effects even though it failed to create any form of multilateral institution.
On the contrary, multilateral attempts to prevent interstate conflicts driven by mercantilist trade policy in the 1930s failed to dissuade major powers from the beggar-thy-neighbour strategy which led to World War(Irwin 1993, 114). Frequently, the failures of the formation of multilateral agreements in trade and finance are also regarded as one of the factors that triggered disastrous war (Kenwood and Lougheed 1971, 218 Eichengreen and Frankel 1995, 97).
In the light of such historical episodes, it is difficult to generalise hastily that multilateral institution is likely to guarantee trade liberalisation without consideration the influence of other variables. Moreover, the postwar international trade order created by the GATT shows remarkable differentiation from that of prewar era. The principal factor constituting such difference was the emergence of a new hegemonic leadership in the world trade regime.
Despite widespread consensus requiring 'freer and fairer' trade flows, the onset of the postwar trading system was accompanied with subtle distinction about the pace and degree of trade barriers elimination between Britain and the United States. While the United States wanted to achieve completely free movement of goods, as soon as possible, under the conviction of industrial superiority, British negotiators worried about the erosion of domestic economic autonomy to pursue a full employment policy (Gilpin 2001, 217).
The final beneficiary in this war of nerves seemed to be the United States. Although Britain was concerned over its commitment to the creation of a Keynesian welfare state, the founders of the GATT subordinated individual parties' domestic circumstances to the aim to construct an open world economy, with no return to the vicious cycle of retaliation and counter-retaliation that had characterised the 1930s (Gilpin 2001, 220).
Being propped up by the request for leadership able to replace the decayed British hegemony of the nineteenth century, the United States consolidated its newly obtained hegemonic role in the postwar period. As a result, the GATT efficiently implemented its commitment and still remained as a most significant and powerful party who set the trade rules and achieved liberalisation by multilateral arrangements (Panagariya 1999, 480). Also the repeated multilateral trade negotiations, by and large, were successfully led by the United States.
Nonetheless, there is an uneven fluctuation of the formation of PTAs between 1948 and the 1990s. Most striking point in this trend was the surge in PTAs during two decades from 1960 to 1980 (phase) and the explosion of regionalism in the 1990s (phase ). In this period, nearly thirty PTAs during every ten years in phase and also similar number of PTAs during ten years of phase  were signed respectively (Mansfield and Milner 1999, 600-1).
The increase of PTAs between phase and phase  shows the sharp difference with respect to the causes and impetus to trigger regionalism. The former wave was mainly initiated by less developed countries (LDCs) which wanted to reduce political dependence on industrialised advanced countries. Latin American regional groupings such as the Latin American Free Trade Area (LAFTA, 1960) and the Andean Pact (1969) emerged in this phase. Subsequently, it affected the disillusion of regionalism in Sub-Saharan African countries and promoted PTAs like the Economic Community of Western African States (ECOWAS) and the Customs and Economic Union of Central Africa (UDEAC).
The spate of PTAs in this phase, however, had the colour of protectionism caused by the member countries' import-substituting industrialisation strategy. Regulatory measures like the import licenses and high levels of tariffs were devised and maintained for the creation of the PTAs in this region (Nogus and Quintanilla 1993, 281). As a result, the attempts of these states were assessed as fundamental failures. They could neither stimulate regional economic growth nor overcome the structural weakness of their economies (Faezeh 1993, 264).
PTAs among LDCs without a hegemonic leader are likely to bring about unavoidable conflict over the distribution of benefits and costs and compensation rate of relative losses stemming from economic integration (Mansfield and Milner 1999, 600). This failure, thus, can be attributed to the absence of a powerful leader with a great consumer market which is able to absorb the exports from less-developed PTAs partners.
Moreover, the members of trading blocs among developing countries tended to try to produce every goods within their own union instead of importing from the rest of the world. They strove to give preferential access rights to individual members' markets to one another and inevitably this self-sufficient trading system engendered a 'trade diversion effect' which poses higher cost to the importing country (Lawrence 1996, 6). This empirical evidence indicates the fact that such failures can be attributed to the outcome of pursuit the extended import-substitute strategy.
The perspective of key institutions constituting postwar world economic order also shows the sceptical view over the PTAs among LDCs. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) survey report regarded the voluntary regional groupings in two continents in this phase as conscious efforts to reinforce political stability rather than economic development (Torre and Kelly 1992, 25). At the same time, the participants in the conference jointly organised by the World Bank also criticised the discriminatory and regulatory nature of Latin American regional agreements (Nogus and Quintanilla 281-85).
This implies that the increased number of the PTAs in the phase were not necessarily consistent with the underlying assumption which the architects of the GATT designed in the late 1940s. The PTAs could not contribute to the creation of enhanced welfare (Mansfield and Milner 1999, 600), and finally turned out to be a 'stumbling block' rather than a 'building block' to achieve global liberalisation (Panagariya 1999, 493).
While the wave of regionalism in the previous phase mirrors the confrontation provoked by the Cold War to the extent that it has sought to pull themselves out of political influence of industrial nations, phase which commenced from 1990 reflects changed international power politics after the end of the Cold War.
In retrospect, the United States, by and large, successfully led the seven rounds of multilateral trade negotiations. One piece of evidence that substantiates the sustained evolution of the postwar multilateral international trade regime was the amendment of the GATT provisions. More active participation of developing countries was encouraged by the introduction of 'Enabling Clause' which allowed the application of Generalised System of Preferences (GSP).
However, the United States faced an obstacle to resume the eighth multilateral round due mainly to the influence of external factors. It seemed to be at the GATT Ministerial Meeting in 1982 that the United States began to take into account the re-orientation of underlying agenda of trade policy towards bilateralism (Schott 1983). Despite the repeated persuasion of the United States, the EU and the other trading partners still showed reluctance to restore the stalled multilateral negotiating table. Meanwhile, the outward expansion of the EU was continued and Greece (1981), Portugal and Spain (1986) became new members in turn.
At the same time, the United States adopted a 'multi-track' approach as an alternative measure replacing consistent commitment to multilateralism, which means, in practice, the declaration showing willingness to pursue bilateral trade arrangements with individual WTO members despite nominal re-affirmation of multilateralism it has inherently espoused (Wyatt-Walter 1994, 85).
On the other hand, the voice of protectionism was burgeoning, caused by the vast amount of the US trade deficit along with the appearance of strategic trade theory in the realm of economics, which emphasised the state's deeper intervention in industrial policy to enhance the competitiveness for export (Brander and Spencer 1985, Reich 1992, Thurow 1993).
Bilateral FTAs led by the United States began with the arrangement with Israel in 1985. This was precipitated by the consolidation of European politico-economic integration and stalled Uruguay Round negotiations, and the United States increasingly expanded the partners of bilateral treaties towards North America and Middle East. As a result, the Bush administration concluded ten FTAs in his first term since he entered into office in 2001 (Schott 2004, 359-381).
The re-orientation of US trade policy reignited the ongoing debate over multilateralism versus bilateralism. This wrangling ranges from the censure blaming the breach of hegemonic leadership, to the defense stressing the complementarity between FTAs and multilateral trade liberalisation.
The key difference between the regionalism in the phase, and the recent wave of bilateral FTAs can be pointed to a high level of economic 'interdependence' (Mansfield and Milner 1999, 601). Unlike the observation of regional grouping under the Cold War regime, the bilateral FTAs after the Cold War have facilitated the members to join the world economy rather than insulating them from multilateral order (Lawrence 1996, 6). This indicates that enhanced politico-economic 'interdependence' could be the main feature of post-Cold War bilateralism.
Regarding interdependence, as Keohane and Nye stated, 'vulnerability' needs to be emphasised as well as the 'sensitivity' earlier formulated by Cooper (Cooper 1968). Keohane and Nye elaborated that less dependent actors tended to be empowered to exercise influence in order to set the rules of the game in asymmetrical interdependence relationships (Keohane and Nye 1989, 11-19). In this sense, it can be generally accepted that the relatively superior country in economic capability which is able to coerce its trading partners into accepting its request has little preference for a formal institution of economic co-operation than more vulnerable partners.
In contrast to this, the relatively weaker country is more likely to have preference to institution of economic co-operation. As political neo-realists named it as 'binding thesis', the creation of formal institutions such as PTAs was believed to give developing countries increased 'voice opportunities' and enhanced bargaining power in the international trade regime (Grieco 1993, 331).
Such hypotheses clearly show that the bilateral trade arrangements were traditionally developed as a policy option of the weaker countries that wanted to be guaranteed an opportunity to sell their goods to a larger market, and by doing so, they sought to enhance their security under the influence of stronger countries. Even if the United States cannot be regarded as a weaker country, at least since the end of Bretton Woods system, the environment of international political economy certainly indicates declining American economic power.
The relatively decayed economic power of the United States was the fundamental factor which forced the main architect of postwar multilateral international trade regime to pursue bilateralism in spite of the censure that blamed them for 'self-contradictory' attitude.
From time to time, some critics attack the FTA policy of the United States on the grounds that the overwhelming super power pursues the weaker countries' trade policy (Jonquires 2004, 31-32). However, one can easily know that this criticism is off target if we consider the decreased power of the United States during the period that PTAs were expanding.
The arguments deployed so far reflect the so-called 'stumbling block' school who insist on the contradiction between multilateralism and bilateral PTAs. They assert that increasing regional trade arrangements will undermine the multilateral trade regime, whereas the 'building block' theorists emphasise the complementarity between expanding regionalism and the development of the multilateral trade regime. The latter has mainly explained the explosive increase of regional trade blocs, including East Asia, the only exception from the worldwide regionalism, as a progress towards ultimately integrated multilateralism. Open regionalism, which will be examined in the next section, reflects this view.
Increased PTAs should not be solely attributed the United States. Even the WTO was unable to deter the proliferation of bilateralism at a global level. Among 250 PTAs notified to the GATT / WTO up to 2002, more than half were created during just ten years after the establishment of the WTO. ( accessed on 20/04/2006).
Notwithstanding this global trend, one should take into account the fact that postwar trade regime based on non-discriminatory treatment granted far more relative gain to the United States, rather than European countries that enjoyed trade preferences. The United States successfully obtained market access to efficiently exploit the devastated Western Europe by forcing the United Kingdom and other European countries to accept a multilateral system (Gilpin 1971, 58-59).
Considering this relative gain the United States took just after the end of World War , the reality that the supreme beneficiary of multilateral trade order clamors for bilateralism is certainly self-contradictory.
From the historical survey examined above, we can draw several implications about the key factors that affect the formation of PTAs and the evolution of regionalism. First of all, the role of hegemonic leadership is primarily important to facilitate the development of multilateral trade order. While the several rounds of multilateral negotiations, which voluntarily altered the GATT rules and agendas up to the 1960s, show the integral role of the United States as a postwar hegemon, the abortive regionalism among the LDCs in the 1960s-1970s can be attributed, at least partly, to the lack of hegemonic power. Particularly, increasingly important controversial issue, such as the distribution of 'adjustment cost' caused by the PTAs between the developed countries and developing countries, needs the sufficient contribution of hegemonic leader.
Secondly, the notion of 'open regionalism', in practice created by the United States, shows the self-contradictory nature of currently expanded bilateral PTAs. Although such justification offered a cornerstone to artificially change the traditional stance of the United States, as we can see from the fact that even liberalists acknowledged the incompatibility of the two, the priority in the allocation of resources for trade negotiation - e.g. distribution of civil servants or feasibility research - was unilaterally given to bilateralism rather than multilateralism.
Thirdly, the environment of multi-polarisation and economic instability after the end of the Cold War was likely to give rise to regionalism. Although joint efforts by business groups and government to restore multilateralism were partly made, they were subordinated by increasing economic uncertainty. As a result, states competitively pursued bilateral trade treaties for securing their own interest just in preparation for any eventuality. The United States also did not have willingness and capability to undertake the hegemonic role in international trade to alleviate increasing instability.
Despite the concerns from both multilateral purists and civil society group, the current wave for bilateral PTAs seems to be accelerated for the time being at least, in so far as the United States maintains bilateralist trade policy. However, in so far as the United States fail to demonstrates the persuasive reasons why the world's only superpower devote itself to pursue self-serving policies, its political and economic - except military - influence in the international trade regime will be eroded.