The Midland Metro is part of Centro (the corporate name for the West Midlands Passenger Transport Executive) and has been running since 1999 when its "Line One" opened.
The public transport industry is one which contains numerous competing technologies (cars, buses, trains etc.) but no immediate competition within the light rail technology itself. This phenomenon is characteristic of all light rail systems operating in the UK at present as is shown by their distribution around the country.
These companies have many similarities. For example, regarding the industrial structure, five of these seven firms were designed, built and maintained by public sector companies. This diffusion has not occurred by chance; the reason for it is essentially government control as is explained later.
The structure of the light rail industry is such that each localised firm has a monopoly for light rail travel. In the wider context of all public transport, trams do not have a monopoly. A comparison of Hirschman-Herfindal indices (the index shows dominance on the scale 0 to 1 where 0 corresponds to perfect competition and 1 is a total monopoly);
Source for part ii figures is reference one, see below
Information regarding the performance of the industry in relation to other modes of public transport is presented here. The figures used in the above HHI calculation were taken from this table. Yellow columns were assumed to be "public transport" technologies and "other rail" was assumed to be all light rail. Note that Part ii data includes all areas of the UK so the HHI coefficient is lower than it would be should only light rail served areas be considered.
These figures show how one must consider trams in the wider context of public and private/ personal transport in order to get a meaningful picture of their place in industry.
As discussed above there are no instances in the UK where light rail operators are in direct competition. The public transport sector as a whole is still worthy of scrutiny.
The Midland Metro is a part of Centro which operates bus and train services as well as the Metro. On closer inspection, it is clear that Centro is dominant in each of the public transport areas.  (the local government webpage for Birmingham) lists only Centro as the local provider of train, tram or bus travel. There are no providers of a network in direct competition with Centro; only a few isolated services are run by smaller firms.
Centro does have a monopoly in the region for light railway systems and also for West Midlands public transport more widely. This is an email response from Pete's Travel
Centro has the power to restrict the number of companies that operate along any particular route. Only commercially run routes can be serviced by operators who do not win contracts. This situation arises because Centro has authority granted to it by government and therefore normal monopoly conduct (such as price fixing and promotional activity) is controlled since the government aims to create a service for all rather than a purely profiteering enterprise.
Recent patronage figures are discouraging. The Midland Metro figures are some of the most disappointing as can be seen in the table below.
The financial figures are no more encouraging as this source shows.
With the exception of the Sheffield Supertram this last financial year, none of the light rail systems in Sheffield, the West Midlands, Manchester or Croydon have made a profit in the last two years. Based on the figures shown, on average there has been a 5.3m loss per year before tax. It is fair to say that the industry is inefficient at creating profit at present.
In terms of the return on total capital employed, the Metro is not performing well. Using the formula shown here
and working with the initial capital used to set up the business in 1999 (145m) and the profit before tax from the financial year ending in 2002 (-1.2m) we find a ROCE coefficient of -0.00828 (3s.f.). A value close to 1% would be good; anything below zero is poor.
"Patronage is expected to build up over time, reaching maturity after some five years of operation"5. This information somewhat alleviates the impact of the financial and patronage figures but one should note that those five years have passed for the Sheffield and Midland providers and for the majority of the Manchester system. In reference to the life cycle of the product, light rail systems are somewhere between rising star and maturity.
Barriers to entry are considerable. Three key barriers are the vast amount of capital required for business establishment, legal and government restrictions and, to a lesser extent, switching costs. These barriers are explored below.
Capital Intensity required for business setup
The table below shows capital investment in some light rail systems shown on the map on the first page. The figures show that, realistically, a capital investment in the order of 10 8 is necessary.
According to the National Audit Office's report already referred to, the cost of construction of light rail systems is rising and although most of the schemes have been kept within their budgets, this has been achieved by excluding some of the design features that were incorporated in the original plans.
Legal or Government enforced restrictions
"Local authorities decide whether a new light rail line or system is appropriate for their area and usually have to seek funds from the Department [for transport] and be granted legal powers by the Secretary of State for Transport before their schemes can proceed."7
This has threefold implications for prospective market entrants;
the local authority must be satisfied that a new light rail system is appropriate;
funding must be accumulated;
the Secretary of State for Transport must grant the scheme permission to be constructed.
Likely costs incurred overcoming these problems would be;
Switching costs
Customers who already use the Midland Metro will have passes which are only valid on Metro trams. Users may not be willing to purchase a second pass for a new operator's trams which would affect passenger numbers adversely. A market collusion with Centro so that passes could be purchased which covered both operators would add further cost to the scheme and its success would be dependant on Centro's co-operation.
With an understanding of these barriers to entry the argument for acquisition is stronger than that for setting up a new firm. Acquisition is a more attractive business venture because it removes two of the barriers to entry described above, those being government restrictions and switching costs. These do not apply since a new firm would not need to construct a new line and would not need to gain local or central government backing or financial support. Furthermore, provided Centro did not react badly to a takeover bid, the recent patronage and financial figures could be used to get a fair price for the business.
With reference to Michael Porter's generic strategies for business placement within a given industry, a cost leadership strategy would be most appropriate for a light rail firm. A low cost and industry wide strategy (the cost leadership strategy) would maintain the widest possible customer base and is the only strategy that would be supported by government since a fundamental principle of public transport is service for all.
Investment required for a new light rail system would be a high risk venture and, in contrast to some high risk business opportunities, there does not appear to be a lucrative reward for those who succeed.
The acquisition of Midland Metro would not be as risky a business manoeuvre for reasons detailed in the previous section. My recommendation is that, if you are to either set up a new business in competition with the Midland Metro or attempt an acquisition of that company, then an acquisition would be the best strategy. Irrespective of the decision to purchase Midland Metro or establish a competitor, a cost leadership strategy would be most appropriate.
It is possible that given the rising concerns about the impact our way of life is having on the environment that government may increase its efforts to persuade people to use public/ environmentally friendly modes of transport. If such a campaign were to be successful then light rail and other public transport could become a much more attractive industry. It may be worth waiting for a more favourable climate (in terms of personal transport) before attempting to enter this industry.