In this essay I will briefly outline the distinction between a belief in objective moral truths and a belief in moral relativity. I will then suggest that even if we accept one or other of these views we are not consequently tied to a certain answer to the question of whether morality should be private. If we reject objective moral truths we may still be reluctant to adopt a relativist viewpoint due to other, mainly political, considerations. Similarly, if we accept that morality is objective we may nevertheless believe, perhaps because of certain religious views, that morality should be a matter for the individual. Finally, I will argue that the introduction of categorical and hypothetical moral imperatives allows for the conception of an argument based on hypothetical imperatives that perhaps both the moral objectivist and the moral relativist will be willing to accept.
A distinction is traditionally drawn between moral relativists and moral objectivists. Objectivists believe that there are moral facts, and that the question of whether an act or a person is good or bad has a specific answer that is the same for every person. Relativists believe morality can vary between individuals or groups of individuals. There may still be answers to moral questions, but these questions can have multiple answers, all of which can be correct. At first glance this distinction seems to provide two obvious answers to the question of morality's role in society. The objectivist will presumably advocate morality being located firmly in a public sphere; a situation in which everyone can follow almost exactly the same moral code. In a world where some things are always right and others always wrong it makes little sense to allow an individual the opportunity to make a wrong decision. The relativist, on the other hand, will attempt to show that no individual or group has any claim to objective moral knowledge, and as such no individual or group has a right to impose their particular views onto others. An individual should remain free to develop his own style of morality, which has just as much claim to truth as any other moral theory.
Of course the distinction is not as simple as this. There is no necessary element in a belief in objective moral facts that states that all people must follow whatever the moral law dictates. Similarly there is no requirement for a relativist to reject the existence of all moral laws; he may still advocate a codified morality that is nothing more than an artificial construct. We will now address both these issues.
Although we can observe in almost all existing objective moral theories, particularly religious, an emphasis on encouraging other people to follow the same moral code, this is not a vital requirement. In fact we may easily imagine a set of objective moral laws that state it is wrong to interfere with another person's own investigation into their moral beliefs. In this case, the objectivist will adopt the view that morality should remain an individual matter.
Relativism faces an even more obvious problem. In order to advocate a belief that morality should be a purely individual affair, it appears the relativist must propose that it is an objectively good thing to do so. A relativist is perfectly legitimate in claiming that there are no objective moral facts, but as soon as he moves from this statement to advocating that morality should be an issue for the individual he contradicts himself. An easy solution to this problem lies in transferring our use of the word 'should' from being categorical to merely hypothetical. We can either say that something should be done simply because it is right, or we can say that whether or not something should be done depends on the goal we are trying to achieve. If we take the second, hypothetical nature of a moral claim and apply it to the issue of morality within society, then rather than being forced to say that individual moral freedom is objectively good we may say that it is simply the best way to achieve a specific aim. This aim may be anything from ensuring stability within a society to attempting to maximise individual happiness. The statements of the relativist are limited to the form of: 'if we want X, then we should do Y'. But are hypothetical statements moral statements at all? This may depend on the nature of the 'X' that we are attempting to achieve. Whether or not aims such as stability in society or maximised happiness can actually be distinguished from moral incentives is debatable and will be addressed later.
Our introduction of categorical and hypothetical imperatives allows for a new dimension to be added to the previously two-sided issue of public or private morality. We can now imagine a categorical and a hypothetical argument for public morality, as well as a categorical and hypothetical argument for private morality. At first glance it seems intuitive to say that the moral objectivist will rely on a categorical argument for public morality, while a relativist will point to a hypothetical argument for private morality. However, as we look at these arguments I will argue that in fact the most convincing argument comes to the conclusion that morality should be public insofar as it ensures the stability of the state, whose function is to protect the lives of its citizens and hence of humanity as a whole.
Let us first look at the two possible arguments for why morality should be public. The first relies on an appeal to objective moral facts which are true for everyone (categorical), and the second relies on using public morality as a means to a specific practical end, as in maintaining security within a society (hypothetical). I will discuss these in order.
The moral objectivist will claim that when two people disagree about a course of action one of them is simply mistaken. An action is either good or bad, regardless of what people think about it. It makes no sense in this case for morality to be left to the individual; they must simply be taught a set of moral laws by those who know them. A state's role is to educate the entire population so that everyone acts according to a particular, correct set of beliefs. Assuming the absolute efficiency of this state, moral disagreement would not arise. The problem with this view, of course, is where these moral facts come from and how we are to recognise them. An appeal to religion provides one answer to this question. The moral laws come from God and are passed to us through scripture or by some other means. We should obey them either because we want to go to Heaven (although this would be dangerously close to a hypothetical imperative) or simply because God says we should. But, as was discussed earlier, even here it is not immediately clear that moral decisions should be taken away from the individual. Unless one of the religious moral laws is something along the lines of "you must not allow any other person to be immoral" then of what concern is it to the pious man whether or not others are pious? This objection is also the basis for a possible categorical argument for the privacy of morality. An objectivist may argue that the objective moral truth requires that each individual discovers the moral truth by themselves. They may argue that an individual who has simply had beliefs and rules fed to him from birth is not truly moral.
If we remove religion as the source of our moral objectivity, then perhaps we can turn to our common humanity. There may be natural inclinations that all humans share to act in certain ways. The most obvious of these is probably our concern with self-preservation. Here we reach a central question: can the objective fact that all humans are guided by self-preservation provide the basis for a moral system, and would such a system rely on categorical or hypothetical imperatives?
In an appeal to our common humanity the objectivist may point out how cultures on different sides of the globe share at least some elements of a common morality, particularly relating to issues such as murder, and suggest this as evidence of the existence of moral facts. Why else would these apparently very different cultures have such a thing in common? But perhaps these two cultures have more in common than the objectivist will at first admit. Aside from their common humanity, on a most basic level they are both communities of humans that have survived for some time, and it seems likely that this survival depended on some sort of organised state stability. One of the most basic elements of this stability would be the prevention of arbitrary killing. If humans are guided by self-preservation, then a society will not last long if its members feel they are in more danger than they would be if left in isolation. Every world culture we can point to condemns killing precisely because if they did not then we would not be able to point to them. Any society that doesn't condemn killing will not survive for any significant amount of time. If this is the case then the condemnation of murder almost becomes a natural fact rather than a moral guideline. Just as an animal must eat if it wants to live, so a society, if it wants to continue to exist, must condemn murder in order to maintain stability. In such a situation moral issues such as these, if they can still be called moral, must be enforced throughout the whole society. If an individual is able to come to his own conclusion that murder is not wrong then he undermines the stability of the nation and it will not survive. As a consequence there must be public rules or laws that guide our behaviour with each other, and consequences for our failure to follow these rules. However, in such a situation the murderer is not punished because the act of murder in itself is seen as 'wrong' in an objective moral sense; only because his actions endanger the continued existence of the society.
So it seems that many apparently moral laws are not so much moral as pragmatic measures to ensure stability within a state. If we want our society to survive, we must structure it in such a way that arbitrary killing is not possible. In this case the objectivist must rethink his approach. He can no longer claim that it is an objective fact that murder is wrong. Instead he can claim that murder is wrong because it jeopardises the stability of society, and society presents the most efficient way to ensure our own survival. He has displaced the objectiveness of morality to the claim that it is a categorically good thing that we continue to survive as individuals and as a species.
Is it possible to justify this underlying moral assumption that ensuring human society continues to exist is a good thing? Firstly it is important to draw a distinction between the survival of humanity and the consequent leap to the survival of a state, particularly the modern conception of the nation state that we have today. Any argument about the importance of maintaining stability in a state for the benefit of its citizens relies on the assumption that the state is the best way to ensure these benefits. But of course this is an area of much debate, and there are plenty of people who are happy to advocate the destabilisation and destruction of nation states but that would not at the same time admit they want to jeopardise the future of humanity. Our notion of 'the state' must be as abstract as possible and encompass all communities of humans no matter how they are structured. Thankfully a belief that at least some areas of morality should be independent of purely individual opinions does not commit us to any particular political views.
For Hobbes the question of whether the continued existence of the state is moral is almost a contradiction because our entire notion of morality only exists within the context of human society. Hobbes suggests that morality is the result of the creation of human society, and human society is the result of a rational realisation that cooperation is the most efficient way of ensuring our own survival. The motivation for all of human action and civilisation is thus reduced to the same simple desire for survival that drives every other living thing. This fits perfectly with Hobbes's mechanistic view of humanity, but no doubt many will be unsatisfied with this as a justification for morality.
We have already seen that our common humanity is probably the only convincing thing the objectivist can point to as a basis for an objective morality. And probably the most prominent feature of this common humanity is our desire for self-preservation. As such, although still controversial, the statement 'it is categorically good that humanity survives' is certainly less controversial than the statement 'murder is categorically wrong'. From this basis the objectivist can attempt to develop a moral system consisting of hypothetical imperatives that begin 'if you want humanity to survive then you should...'. Such a moral system would be limited to rules that ensure the survival of the state, with the state being, as Hobbes believed, the most efficient way to ensure survival.
We must now return to the views of the moral relativist. In this case the only kind of universal moral statements we can make are hypothetical imperatives, and we have already seen that it is debatable whether these are moral at all. The relativist is able to make exactly the same kind of statements as the objectivist, statements such as 'if you want humanity to survive then you should not commit murder' (but in a much more sophisticated manner), but lacks the justification of the objectivist for the moral worth of the conditional 'if you want humanity to survive'. The relativist is unable to respond to anyone who simply does not want humanity to survive. And yet as far as hypothetical statements that have an affect on morality go, I can think of none that will gain as much assent among individuals as this one. In fact, if we imagine a statement such as 'if you want humanity to survive then you must agree that murder should be illegal' then the relativist who accepts the first premise must agree to this statement. Although he cannot agree that the murderer has done something objectively wrong, he cannot but accept that the murderer must be punished to prevent him doing it again.
It seems we are left in a situation where hypothetical imperatives based on self-preservation provide the basis for a moral system where those areas of moral action that relate to the security of the state must be publicly enforced and not left up to the individual. It also seems that this is a situation that both the objectivist and the relativist can agree to. Although the relativist would disagree that the rules enforced are 'right' in any objective sense, given that he wants to live in a stable society he is obligated to accept them. The issue now becomes one of which rules and actions are relevant to social stability, and which aren't. Those that are should remain in the public sphere and subject to official rulings, those that aren't can safely be left up to the individual.
All the comments so far have dealt with the typical example of a moral action: murder. The arguments for a publicly enforced morality have relied on the fact that an individual's decision to murder would be harmful to society. But what about the multitude of other actions that are regarded as moral but which do not affect society in such an obvious way? A distinction may be drawn between actions that directly relate to conduct within the state and actions that are generally regarded as private; marriage or religious practices for example. One traditional argument against any moral issues being private is that a shared culture, which includes shared private practices, creates a livelier sense of community within a society and makes it stronger as a result. The logical conclusion seems to be that all areas of life should be regarded as subject to public rules if it makes the state stronger. Contrasted to this is the liberal view that the private life of an individual is of no concern to the state or anyone else, regardless of their aims. In fact they may argue, as Mill did, that a sphere of individual freedom allows individuals the chance to develop in unique ways; and in ways which may benefit society as a whole far more than a constant uniformity of opinion. Here we can consider the obvious example of an eccentric scientist who, although isolated completely from the traditional views of society, is able to allow his genius to develop precisely because of the freedom allowed by this isolation. It can also be argued that states where every area of life is controlled, far from being stable, often end up collapsing under their own weight. So here we have two conflicting views about what makes a state stable. Conservatives argue that a shared culture makes a state stronger, while liberals argue that diversity within a state leads to progress and less risk of collapse.
If we cast a glance at the real world for a moment we can judge that most states strike a balance between these two extremes. This balance shifts constantly depending on circumstances both within and external to these states. We see how in Britain there is at least some tradition of respect for individual liberty, and yet in times of war freedom has been radically restricted in order to maintain security and stability. Of course this balancing act is an incredibly delicate affair. It seems all too easy for state structures to be for evermore tightening the sphere of personal freedom in the name of national security, and yet great effort is required from the population to claw back liberties that were previously taken for granted. We must also ask ourselves, as mentioned earlier, whether acting in the name of national security is legitimate at all. If national security is synonymous with the security of a state's individual members, then is there a point at which the extreme limits placed on freedom by state structures present more of a risk to the security of the population than any external threat?
To summarise, whether or not we leave morality to the individual cannot be easily split into an argument between objectivity and relativity. In my view the most plausible explanation for our moral behaviour is a combination of the two. There is common agreement and enforcement of certain moral laws, but these do not stem from objective moral facts but rather from an efficient method of ensuring our own survival. Whether we can provide a moral basis for our continued survival is another question entirely. As to whether this logical method of survival should extend into an individual's private sphere, I believe it should not. Enforced morality may be the most efficient way to survive, but if it is pursued to the exclusion of all other facets of human existence then the cost seems too high. We may accept Hobbes's mechanistic explanations for the creation of society but also recognise the side-effects of this creation; thought and action that are worth more than simply survival for the sake of survival.