In this essay I will first briefly explain the nature of indexicals and demonstratives. I will then show why they are important for a theory of sense before outlining some of the problems they cause.
An indexical is a word that, when used in a sentence, can cause the truth value of that sentence to change depending on the context of utterance. The context of utterance includes the person who says the sentence, the time or place the sentence is uttered and the actions of the person using the sentence. For example, when I say "I am fat" it is false, but when a fat person says "I am fat" it is true. Even though the sentence is exactly the same, because of the inclusion of the word 'I' the meaning of the individual utterances is different. It is different because the context of utterance was different in each case: two different people uttered the sentence. It is the word 'I' that causes the meaning of the sentence to change, because it always refers to the person making the utterance. Its reference is fixed by the actual event of the utterance happening.
Demonstratives play exactly the same role as indexicals, but require a demonstration (or an intention on the part of the speaker, see below) to fix its meaning in any particular utterance. For example, to use the demonstrative 'that' requires my demonstrating which object I am talking about, by pointing for example. This is contrasted to indexicals which gain their meaning automatically. I do not need to demonstrate which 'I' or 'today' I am talking about; they are automatically fixed by the context.
Indexicals and demonstratives are important because they seem to resist any attempt to be easily subsumed into a theory of meaning. Although it seems intuitive to suggest that they are simply an efficient way of shortening sentences and making communication easier, as we shall see later they cannot simply be replaced by definite descriptions. This implies that they are more than simply abbreviations and that our ability to think about a place requires words such as 'here' and 'now' as well as simply descriptions.
One obvious problem we must face when dealing with indexicals is how we decide which words fall into the indexical category. We have seen some obvious ones like 'I' and 'today', but what of 'left' or 'rich' or 'bald'?
The truth of the sentence 'the window is to the left of the door' varies depending on which way you are facing the wall. Similarly, the truth of the sentence 'Fred is rich' seems to vary depending on the context you place Fred in. He may be rich compared to his friends but veritably poor compared to the set of all company chairmen. The different contexts change the truth value of the sentence so 'rich' must be an indexical. However we can, and perhaps should, use the word 'rich' as part of a two-part sentence, such as 'Fred is rich for a teacher'. When we say simply 'Fred is rich' we are leaving off the second half of the sentence; the part that prevents it from being an indexical. We could perhaps claim the same thing is true when we use the word 'left'. Instead of the above statement, we should say 'the window is to the left of the door if you are standing in the room looking out'.
This suggests that depending on our interpretation the same word can sometimes act as an indexical and at other times not. In the above examples, the words 'rich' and 'left' appeared to be indexicals in the shorter sentences, but in the longer sentences they were bound to a quantifier that will stay the same regardless of the context of utterance. As another example, we can see that although the phrase:
contains the word 'his' (usually a demonstrative), it is necessarily tied to the 'a man' in the first part of the sentence. Regardless of the context of utterance the word will always refer to the same thing and is therefore not an indexical or demonstrative.
Again, consider the statements:
and
The word 'local' is really a two-part argument of the form 'y is local to x'. In the first statement the utterance of 'local' refers to a place near the speaker and so is fixed by context, while in the second statement it refers to a place near x where x is a blind man. The word is bound to the quantifier 'blind man' and so is not affected by context.
The word 'know' presents a similar problem. We may be happy to admit that the statement 'Fred knows he is holding a ball' is true in normal circumstances, but in the context of a discussion about scepticism, we may say that this statement is false or at least questionable. Similarly the word 'bald' is a notorious example of a vague word. Does this mean it is an indexical? Someone who is considered bald in one context may not be considered bald in another, meaning that the meaning of the word has changed depending on its context of utterance.
The existence of vague words (bald) as well as words that appear to need quantifying (rich) has lead some to suggest that almost every word can act as an indexical. Stanley and Szabo write that our use of quantifier phrases means that different utterances of a single statement can quantify over different domains. For example 'every student is present' may refer to every student in the school or just those in a particular class.
What of words such as 'here' and 'now'? Although the word 'now' always refers to the present time, and as such should be an indexical, consider the difference in its meaning in the following two statements:
The expanse of time referred to in each of these statements is very different. In fact the expanse of time that 'now' refers to depends on the intention of the speaker, and hence the word becomes a demonstrative rather than an automatically fixed indexical. Similarly, the word 'here' can refer to the area of this room, or the whole of the country depending on my intention, and as such appears to be a demonstrative.
If 'here' and 'now' are demonstratives they introduce a further problem: they do not seem to require any actual demonstration to fix their meaning. Previously we had assumed that demonstratives were fixed by a physical action such as a pointing, but we don't need someone to outline a boundary with their arms when they say 'it is cold in here'. If this is the case and a physical demonstration is unnecessary then how are the references of demonstratives fixed? The answer may lie in the intention of the speaker. The demonstration is only an externalisation of the intention that the speaker has, and it is this intention that fixes the meaning of the word. A problem with this view arises in cases where a speaker has two or more conflicting intentions. For example I may say 'he is over there' and believe that my use of the word 'he' is referring both to Fred and to the man I am pointing to, whereas in fact the man I point to is not Fred. Alternatively, Wettstein suggests that the referent of a word like 'that' could simply be fixed by the cues that a reasonably intelligent person who is paying attention would pick up on the speaker using. However this view still does not take account of the possibly conflicting cues given by a confused speaker as in the above Fred example.
Kaplan suggests that every indexical has two sorts of meaning. The first is simply the linguistic meaning of the sentence, while the second is the meaning of the proposition, or content of the sentence. The first meaning remains fixed regardless of context while the second meaning is decided by the context of the statement's utterance. The meaning of the proposition 'I' is the result of a relation to the context C in which the utterance takes place. The constituents of C include the identity of the speaker as well as the time and place of the utterance and so on. For example the content of sentence 'I am fat' consists of the identity of the agent in context C as well as the property 'is fat'. The content of the sentence has a truth value within the context C. So while the sentence 'I am fat' may be true at context C in which the agent is fat, it could be false at context C* in which the agent is not fat. As well as this, the truth value of the sentence can change depending on the world W in which it is uttered. This means the sentence is 'doubly-relativised'. For example, while 'I am fat' may be true at context C in world W (a world in which the agent is fat), it may be false at context C in world W* (a world in which the agent is not fat). The context stays the same while the world changes. Kaplan believes that indexicals are rigid designators. Once the context of utterance C has been established and fixed (the speaker, time, place etc) then the word 'I', within that context C, always refers to the same object in all possible worlds. He also believes that the content of an indexical with respect to a context C is simply the object it refers to in C: there is a direct reference, not a descriptive condition.
The content of the statement 'the inventor of bifocals' is the same in all contexts, but it's referent changes depending on the context C and the world W. Conversely, the content of the indexical 'I' varies from context to context, but given a specific context C will always refer to the same agent in any world W whatsoever.
One problem with Kaplan's view lies once again in the possibility of a speaker being confused. Imagine an elaborate situation involving curved mirrors in which an agent is able to say with genuine belief:
Suppose also that the agent is in fact pointing to the same person twice. This means the agent believes that the same person is both fat and not fat, and yet no rational person can believe a contradiction. Frege's theory of sense perhaps provides a solution to this problem.
Frege believes that utterance have both a referent and a sense. The sense of a sentence is a thought that the agent believes to be true when uttering the sentence sincerely. Frege also believes that the sense of an utterance that contains an indexical can be expressed by a definite description that contains no indexicals itself. The definite description would produce the same mental effect, in the agent, as the indexical. Thus when the agent says 'you' in the above mirror example, the sense of the first 'you' could be replaced by 'the person who is fat' while the second by 'the person who is not fat'. This means that the agent is actually saying
This is not a contradiction and so seems to avoid the problem that Kaplan faced.
However there are problems with Frege's view. The idea that indexicals can be replaced by definite descriptions is controversial. It seems that no matter how detailed a description we can possibly give of a certain situation, another situation could also be taking place that matches our description exactly. Kaplan raises another objection to Frege's view. He writes that if we replace the word 'I' in the sentence 'If I exist then I am speaking' with 'the person speaking' then the sentence becomes 'If the person speaking exists, then the person speaking is speaking'. This second sentence is a necessary truth, but the first isn't. Therefore something is lost through our translation from an indexical into a definite description.
Indexicals are significant because they cannot be easily incorporated into a theory of meaning. They are particularly controversial for a theory of sense because it appears they cannot be replaced by definite descriptions and retain the same sense.