Commercializing a new invention or a new technology, never invented before, requires a deep understanding of drivers which lead to a successful commercialization. Such factors can be complex (e.g. the transfer of technology, the team building processes, the project evaluation). Several theoretical frameworks of commercialization potential facilitate the evaluation of an innovation. In this paper, we have chosen to critically discuss one of those theoretical frameworks called WIN2 (Udell 2002). That discussion will be based on a new technology or invention, which is not yet in the market. However, we deliberately exclude arts, paintings and fashion.
WIN2 develops an evaluation criterion which follows 5 generic steps that we will review individually:
In this paper, we have assessed the commercialization potential for a new invention that does not exist yet. We did this assessment by using Win2 framework and, throughout the report, we found some strengths and weaknesses of this framework for a new invention. To summarise, Win2 offers a clear list of steps to evaluate an innovation idea. Using that list helps greatly to think about important commercialization issues in general. The exceptions for a brand new invention have been discussed above. Win2 helps inventors to think about the society impact before trying to run complex exercises to find suitable markets. However, the list of steps cannot be linear as there are strong mutual relationships between different steps like the barrier for acceptance and the impact on society for a new invention as reported above. Finally, several steps like "financing" in Win2 depend on timing issues. For example, the major operational challenge for the biotech manager is the timely acquisition of downstream capabilities. Hiring a Sales force too soon has financial consequences which are as dire to a small company as hiring one too late (Fildes 1990).
Despite these limitations, Win2 framework is definitely very useful to assess a new technology, not yet in the market.