Entrepreneurial Finance is about data (collecting information) and cash (raising funds), about asking the right questions among which: what's attractive for investors? How to improve our business to raise sufficient money for our investment?
The manager has to be in control of the balance going from Goals and Products/Services to the 5 year strategy plan, via 2 routes:
However, Finance is NOT about crunching numbers. To assess a business, any manager should know what to expect from the calculations before doing them.
Businesses are not stand-alone entities. They are part of a wide network called market. Decisions within businesses cannot override the market rules. The market will remember any manager "cheating" it.
Before investing or exiting any business, investors need to diagnose a company. There are very thorough diagnostics tools but also quick ways to assess a business: SWOT analysis, Cash Flow analysis and Ratios analysis
SWOT analysis is the first and foremost way to have a good overview of the situations. The SWOT analysis must be done by looking at various functions: management, marketing, operations, finance For example, the SWOT can show that there is no backup (team) but one manager on which the success of a firm relies. To diversify risks, a life insurance must then be tied to the single manager.
Cash Flow analysis is crucial to decide on the health of a corporate. A quick way to assess the cash position of a business is to write the cash sources and uses, from which one can assess the most important source and uses. In CLC case, that pointed us towards Receivables and Inventory issues being financed by Account/Notes payables and Bank short-term loans. We must always base our analysis on cash flow, NOT accounting. Cash Flow analysis points directly to what's wrong in the business. By doing it, we can find another source of funding for long production cycle businesses: e.g. prepayments.
Ratios analysis is the third tool applicable. It allows to measure financial issues. However, it is important to know the standard ratios of the industry. In fact, diagnosing ratios (data) should drive our conclusions. There is no need to do ALL the ratios mechanically but one can focus on important and relevant one to provide evidences. Again, managers must know what to expect from those ratios even before running them. For example, a quick way to assess the ROI is to use the rule of thumb called "rule of 72". Also, one can focus on specific months where the balance sheet shows weakness and seek for precision: break down items like profits by unit (cars, seats etc) to better analyse the margins (yield management).
Once the diagnostic done, the next step can be valuing the business. It is very difficult to value a business. Again, there is no need to start with complexity. We can go for the "back of the envelope" calculations to value businesses as a first assessment. A simple valuation can be comparing with actual sales within similar industry. Academic concepts are important but in reality, the firm price is negotiated between the buyer and the seller.
At the Venture Capital cycle (early stages), we can look at revenues/EBIT multiples, even though this is much risky. These multiples are given by the market (2.5 to 7.5 in general but there are exceptions). Indeed, we must bear in mind that multiples are conversely proportional to debt costs and a smart seller will always try to maximise earnings before putting the firm on the market. From observation, the rule is simple for VCs: value =  * (multiple*EBIT). This is because only one out of 4 businesses will be successful.
At the Private Equity cycle (later stages), we can look at Adjusted Net Present Values. As operations (investments in assets) are different from finance (financing in liabilities), the discount rate is dissimilar: WACC for assets (NPV) and cost of debts for financing (interests rates). For the Adjusted NPV, we will use WACC. However, there is an issue with taxation: the tax is embedded in the interest rates and WACC. We must discount those taxes from the actual rates. Consistency is crucial to make meaningful figures in the business valuation: use WACC before tax and EBIT OR use WACC and EBIT minus Tax. Another issue lies on the residual values (equipments). These residuals must be considered with different options (price level, inflation impact, probability of occurrence). The rule of thumb is to double the value and discount with the relevant rate before tax.
As these valuations are based on future earnings or cash flows, any financial planning must be "reasonable", with a high-low band including a "most probable" scenario. We also need to include the funding level, the price changes (inflation). No matter how wide it is, the gap between budgets versus actual figures is not the best way to measure management qualities
This is the heart of Entrepreneurial Finance. Businesses should forecast when they will need cash long before running out of it. For investors, getting out (exiting or harvesting) is as important as getting in (investing). The exit (harvest) is as important as the entrance in any investment.
As fundraising never stops; to be successful, managers must hit their plans.
We must separate Short term and Long Term financing which have different objectives. While we aim to optimize for long term, we also aim to survive for the short term. There are exceptions but basically, long/short term liabilities respectively finance long/short term assets
A banker, bearing more risk to accept the loan, would generally add more covenants. Also, the receivables quality -on which a loan can be based- is linked to the client reputation. For example, the UK government would be more reliable than a small firm.
There are intangible guarantees like relationship. The track record, the relationship and the market status of the industry are important for Private Equity Firms. Seeking partnership is better than fostering competition.
Stopping the dividends payments is a must to convince the banker about the manager's commitment when the WC is strained for example.
Even lacking complete information, one can invest on a business by investing on the management. Management is key to any investment and is what's financed, not assets. Any single case of bankruptcy is caused by one person's control. Indeed, functions processes (management, marketing etc) are totally depending on companies' life stage and managers who understand that are those who are successful.
Managing growth, entrepreneurial culture implies knowing the drivers at different growth stages; e.g. a good manager is not always a good founder and vice-versa.
Management control of equity is not crucial indeed. The best example is that any reasonable person would prefer owning 1% of Google than 51% of a corner shop. If the reason for seeking control is to retain job, it is better to meet plan instead. Oddly enough, non financial factors can impact a firm; as managers get older (and richer), they tend to be conservative ("less hungry") and that affects their company's profitability. New management/strategy is critical to increase growth further.
Beside management, teamwork is very important. A great business opportunity involves having a team that have knowledge of industry and who have worked together before. A biggest mistake of managers: expect others to be like you. In short, keys factors are: strong team, good balance action/analysis and efficient diagnostic tools. They should focus on facts, not opinions. It's all about good people and managers should not economise on them but on other aspects of the firm. An excellent illustration is in Private Equity Funds businesses. Team members must be expert in a specific area (marketing, finance etc).
Good managers always consider the sequence in financing overtime (capital structure flexibility) and optimize costs overtime. Timing is one clear advantage than one can use to negotiate deals. There is no way to know where the market is going; therefore, we have to be cautious in the funding options, not to close future opportunities of financing.
The principle of timing in financing is similar, no matter the business type and size (dynamic financing). The common concept for all cases was about timing issues today: thinking overtime rather than at a specific point of time. Some scholars argue that issuing equity is negative for the company. It might be the last resort but is definitely better in some cases to "buy time", to breathe.
In conclusion, all concepts presented in this paper are important to grasp, no matter which role one person is fulfilling. All managerial decisions are linked to financing issues and that criteria cannot be ignored during the decision process.