With increasing competition in their home market, companies often strive to seek growth opportunities abroad. Establishing alliances with local partners is a common route of expansion, with joint-ventures as the favoured form of alliance (Lial. 2001). In this paper, we will analyse reasons why companies choose to establish International Joint Ventures (IJVs), the advantages of IJVs over other alliances forms. Given the high "failure" rate of IJVs, we will discuss the means to increase the likelihood of a successful outcome. Our focus will be on IJVs established in the 80s and 90s by Western countries in Asia unless stated otherwise.
Scholars disagree on many definitions and we will provide the definitions used for our report.
International Joint ventures can be defined as legally and economically distinct organizational entities created by two or more parent organizations that collectively invest capital and other resources to pursue certain strategic objectives (Pfefferal. 1976); one parent is headquartered outside the venture's country of operation (Geringeral. 1991).
IJV Performance: Scholars disagree on the variables associated with IJV performance (Geringeral. 1991) and are unclear about what an indicator of performance is ("output") and what a determinant of performance is ("input"). Employee satisfaction is often used as an indicator of a high performing organization (output) but others classify satisfaction as a cause of performance (input) and still others state that it is neither an input nor an output.(Anderson 1990).
For this paper, we will consider, like many executives, any package of inputs and outputs defined by a partner to evaluate its IJV performance, which is similar to the objective and subjective measures of performance (Glaisteral. 1998).
Success and failure: 'IJV success' is the accomplishment of the parent firm's strategic goals from the venture (Luo 1998). "Financial and objective measures may fail to adequately reflect the extent an IJV has achieved its short- and long-term objectives" (Geringeral. 1991). Despite poor financial results, liquidation or instability, an IJV may have been meeting or exceeding its parents' objectives and thus be considered successful by one or all of the parents. Conversely, an IJV may be viewed as unsuccessful despite good financial results or continued stability (Geringeral. 1991). 'IJV Failure' in the literature often means its dissolution. Even when the IJV is acquired by one partner, it has 'failed'. For this paper, we will use that broad definition as long as this acquisition was not part of the goals of the partner analysed.
Trust is Trust is the mutual confidence that no party to an exchange will exploit another's vulnerabilities (Sabel, 1993).
Alliances can come in a bewildering number of forms-including acquisitions, mergers, joint ventures, keiretsus, consortiums, minority holdings, technology transfer agreements, market development contracts, or other types of inter-organizational dependency that often stretch across national borders (Fedoral. 1995). Our purpose is not to contrast and compare each alliance with IJVs but to provide some key rationales and advantages of IJVs over any other alliance type.
There are many reasons why companies may engage in IJVs. We will group those reasons in two groups: Strategic and Economic. Unless the reason is also the implicit benefit expected from the firm, we will analyse the advantages for each reason.
Not only IJVs are caught in the competition but they also deal with parents' intervention and conflicts. To increase likelihood of success, parent firms need to work out the following areas linked to the IJV lifecycle.
IJV study is closely related to many factors like the period of observation, the location (e.g. emerging market or not), the industry (technological or not, capital intensive or labour intensive etc). All cited studies have their own limitations (industry range, performance definition, country studied, etc). Thus, generalising about the findings, as we did in this paper, limits somehow the validity of the arguments. Yet, scholars agree on requirements like due-diligence or trust to increase the likelihood of success.
In summary, any recommendation is valid in a context (period, country, industry etc). Companies do not need to follow all recommendations but seek for critical suggestions in line with their context and objectives.
Although there is no fool-proof method for creating joint ventures, the beforehand preparation, trust building, continued monitoring and creation of overseeing committees will increase the likelihood for success. The success or failure of any joint ventures ultimately rests with trust. Communication of the goals of each partner is an essential element in dealing with the pitfalls of joint ventures.
Since the late 1980s, IJVs and wholly foreign-owned enterprises (WFOEs) have predominated over all other types of FDI, accounting for approximately 80% of the total foreign capital inflows into China. From 1997, with the relaxation of government regulations, WFOEs surpassed IJVs in popularity (Deng 2001). Given the very recent trend showing Chinese or Indians firms acquiring foreign companies (Lenovo for IBM PC, CNOOC for Nigerian offshore oil, etc), it is too early to find literature studying why these companies choose WFOEs over IJVs. Future research would help to confirm the hypothesis that costs of IJVs outweigh the advantages exposed in the literature and that WFOE, wherever possible, are the best options in the new world.