In the late 1950s, the British economist A.W. Phillips demonstrated an inverse statistical association between annual changes in average wage rates and the unemployment. From the observation, Phillips found that one stable curve represented the trade-off between inflation and unemployment. During the late 1950s and the 1960s, many economists repeated Phillips's procedures examining inflation and unemployment data from a number of other industrialized countries, in many cases finding a negative relationship between the two variables. The negative empirical relationship between unemployment and inflation is known as the Phillips curve.
This essay examines the ideas whether an inflation- unemployment trade-off exists, according to some both UK and US data; and if some relations exist, its implications for macroeconomic policy.
Although there are different schools of though, we still can conclude that: in the short un, changes in aggregate demand will have an effect on output and employment; in the long run, changes in aggregate demand will have a smaller or even no effect on output and employment; expectations play a main role in determining the outcome of government policy changes. Almost all economists today agree that monetary policy influences unemployment, at least temporarily, and determines inflation, at least in the long run. This is all we need to believe to accept the inflation-unemployment tradeoff as a basic principle of economics.
To sum up, there has not been one steady curve showing the relationship between unemployment and inflation over the past thirty years. However, it appears that there are a number of curves showing a trade-off at individual periods. Philips Curve relationship nevertheless exists temporarily in the short-run despite the criticism on its break down in the 1970s. The length of short-run Philips Curve depends on inflation expectation and money supply. It is interesting to note that the curves becoming flatter in the recent period. This suggests that inflation is less volatile now therefore, for a given fall in unemployment, inflation rate would not increase as much as twenty years ago. As a result, it allows the economy to grow at a faster rate without experiencing inflationary acceleration.