Aggregate supply (AS) measures the quantity of goods and services produced within the economy at a given overall price level. It is determined by the supply side performance of the economy and reflects not only the overall productivity of the economy, but also the cost of production is each sector. Shapes of the AS curve are very different in Classical, Keynesian and New Keynesian models as a result of various assumptions and restrictions in each model.
The Classical model assumes that the AS curve is strictly vertical. The level of output depends on factors of production, i.e. capital, machines and physical work supplied by labour during the production of output. The only way to increase output is to increase the levels of capital and labour. For instance, firms could employ more workers or increase their investment to raise the capital stock. Therefore, AS can only be affected by the levels of capital and labour and is perfectly inelastic to the price level. In the labour market workers face the choice between leisure and the real wage. The real wage is rigid at full employment Nominal wages and prices are assumed to be flexible. Changes in the price would lead to relative adjustments in the nominal wage in order to keep the real wage constant.
Often, the government uses fiscal policy (its spending and taxation) in order to achieve certain economic objectives. A fiscal stimulus acts as an impulse on the demand. A low taxation increases people's disposable income and encourages spending, hence leading to a higher inflation. The excess demand would force the LM curve to shift upwards. In the labour market, increase demand for goods is accompanied by an upward shift in the labour supply curve because workers adjust their price expectations with respect to the actual price level. The price level and the interest rage go up, the real output, however, remains constant. The government spending is usually balanced via an increased interest policy (restraining money supply or setting interest rates) to control inflation. In the money market of a classical model, with a fixed money supply and rising price level, the supply of real balance decreases. Since the AS curve is vertical, the real interest rate must increase to restore the equilibrium. It is important to point out that the as the real demand for money falls, there is a change in the velocity of money circulation. If the government decides to increase money supply, this should be a reaction to an increase to price level only. Money is 'neutral' in the classical model, i.e. an increase in the price level is always accompanied by a rise in nominal money. A higher money supply ensures that the real output, real wages, real money and real interest rate are unchanged. Since savings and government spending are constant and real output is fixed, investment rate does not experience any changes.
The vertical AS curve in the case of Classical model proves the assumption that output is entirely determined by supply side. Therefore, any shifts in demand cannot cause a change in output. Only price will adjust to match changes in the nominal wage. On the same ground, any changes in government policies such as a decrease in spending or the money supply have absolutely no effect on both output and employment.
Fixed technology and capital and variable labour are also features of Keynesian model. However, here, the labour supply curve is based on the nominal wage due to the imperfect information of the workers about the price level. The labour force responds to nominal wages with relatively stable expectations concerning prices. It has backward looking expectations, i.e. expectations are very much dependent on past or current experience. Keynes believed that nominal wages are 'sticky' rather than flexible which means that if prices go up the nominal wage does not follow. The nominal wage does not adjust to return the economy to full employment. The actual level of employment is, therefore, determined purely by the demand for labour. As nominal wages are rigid and prices are flexible, firms choose the level of labour force they want to employ according to the price they receive for their output up to the point where the real wage is equal to the marginal product of labour, i.e. when the equation W/P = MPN holds. Thus, if prices go up, given a fixed nominal wage, the real wage decreases making the labour cheaper. Companies will hire more workers to increase revenues and profits. Output goes up. Hence, the Keynesian Model AS curve is upward sloping. There can be a situation in which the quantity of labour demanded at a rigid nominal wage is less than what the labour is willing to supply. In this case there would be involuntary unemployment. Keynes did not exclude the possibility of nominal wage ever adjusting back to equilibrium but "in the long run we are all dead".
In this model, an increase in money supply will shift LM curve to the right. If prices are fixed, then the output increases. If the output increases, the price level will rise. The effect of a price increase would be a reduction of money supply shifting the LM curve back. Output would decrease, but not entirely to the original level. Overall, an increase in the money supply shifts the aggregate demand (AD) curve up to the right as an increase in money supply causes the real interest rate to decline leading to an increase in investment. As if is a shift on AD curve, both output and prices increase. Given the backward looking expectations of the labour, as prices go up firms earn a higher profit and increase employment.
An increase in government spending shifts the IS curve up to the right. As prices are flexible in this case, a higher output leads to a higher price level which in turn will cause a real money supply reduction (LM will shift up to the left). Output will fall back a bit, but not to its natural level.
The belief of 'sticky' prices plays a central role in the New Keynesian model. Economists tried to explain the theory of aggregate supply and why it is that prices adjust slowly. The reason for nominal price rigidities is that adjusting prices immediately can be very costly. To change its prices, a company may need to send out new catalogs to customers, distribute new price lists to staff or print new menus in restaurants. As a result of those 'menu costs', it would be extremely expensive to change menus and catalogues continuously in response to changing prices. Moreover, companies may simply prefer to hold prices stable in order not to annoy regular customers. Some economists really doubt that menu costs can explain short-run fluctuations in the economy because those costs are usually very small and, therefore, not strong enough reason to explain recessions that are costly to the society. Others argue that despite the small size of menu costs it has a huge impact on the economy as a whole. For instance, a price reduction by one firm has externalities on the economy as a whole. For instance, a price reduction by one firm has externalities to the economy as the average price level would be lowered slightly. Hence, the real income would be increase followed by an increase in demand.
There are cases, when companies have to keep old prices because of fixed price long-term contracts. Before setting their prices companies usually take into account the expected price level. If it is high, they will set their prices high to compensate for the high price of inputs (e.g. raw materials). In case of overestimation, companies may simply produce more output as the profits for production is still high. When they choose their 'sticky' prices, they set them high to meet the high demand. The price level will increase. Therefore, a high level of output leads to a high level of demand, which in turn causes the price level to go up. Efficiency wage theory states that people tend to work harder with an increase in real wage. Higher wage will also attract more qualified labour. The overall productivity will improve. The relationship between output and real wage is procyclical, i.e. if output goes up, real wage will follow.
Mankiw argued that monetary policy is a more useful tool for stabilizing the economy as the lags can be very long in fiscal policy. 'Fiscal rules have to be well crafted. A balanced budget amendment that is too strict could be a disaster. At certain times, like recessions and wars, it is appropriate to run budget deficits. So any fiscal rule has to take into account those special situations where budget deficits are appropriate policy response. A fiscal rule by itself wouldn't be a bad idea, but it has to be well crafted and so far I haven't seen one that is.' With fixed prices, any changes in policies will cause the aggregate demand (AD) curve to shift either through the LM curve in case of changes in the money supply or the IS curve in the case of government spending. Nothing would be lost if price increases. However, the assumption states that the aggregate supply curve is horizontal. This would lead to situation of economic depression where increased output does not result in increases in prices or the nominal wage.
To sum up, the aggregate supply curve is perfectly inelastic in the Classical model, upward sloping in Keynesian model and horizontal (at least in the short run) in the New Keynesian model. The reasons for AS curves to take those shapes can be explained by the differences in the core assumptions of each model. The classical model assumes that the labour supply depends only on the rigid real wage while the price level and the nominal wage are flexible. A slight movement in the price level will cause a change in nominal wage. The output is determined by factors of production such as capital and labour. Development of new technology is a possible way to change output. Both monetary and fiscal policies have absolutely no effect on real output. Under Keynesian model labour supply depends only on 'sticky' nominal wage. Prices are flexible. Output depends positively on price level. The real wage is countercyclical, i.e. it moves in the opposite direction from output. There is a possibility of involuntary unemployment. Monetary and fiscal policies can affect output. New Keynesian Model emphasizes on 'sticky' prices. Nominal wage is flexible, labour market is competitive, and hence, there is no possibility of involuntary unemployment as workers are always on the labour supply curve. The real wage is procyclical, i.e. moves in the same direction as output. Monetary and Fiscal policies have no affect on prices, but can influence output.