Brenda Hagarty has been asked by Harold Gagnon to investigate three stocks. Harold would like to buy one of the three stocks to add to his portfolio but he's not sure which one. He is approaching retirement and already has a number of risky stocks in his portfolio. He is looking for a stock that performs well in both an up or down S&P 500 market, and has asked Brenda to perform a beta analysis on the stocks to work out which is the best stock to buy. Harold understands that the beta analysis will indicate the risks attached to each stock, and he's asked Brenda to calculate these beta values. He's also asked Brenda to prepare an explanation for him on how to interpret the beta values. He needs this information by tomorrow.
The relationship being hypothesised is that the change in the company stock price is related to the change in the S&P 500 stock price. The hypothesis is that the relationship between the two is sufficiently linear to be modelled using a linear relationship:
Company Stock Price = a + beta( S&P500 )
where the Company Stock Price is the dependent variable, and the S&P500 Price is the independent variable. The hypothesis is that the relationship is a positive relationship in that as the S&P 500 price rises, so does the company stock price. Likewise, as the S&P 500 price falls, so does the company stock price.
We hypothesise that a change in one variable (the S&P 500) impacts upon the other (the company stock price) and that the relationship is a simple linear regression.
Brenda has been asked to perform a beta analysis because this will provide an indication of the risk attached to each of the stocks. More specifically, the beta coefficient gives an indication of the sensitivity of each stock's return to that of the market (S&P 500) portfolio. A high beta coefficient value would indicate a high sensitivity and a higher risk.
If Brenda uses Excel's regression tool, the residuals, standardised residuals, residual plots and line fit plots would also be useful.
The line fit plot is a scatter diagram of all the company stock prices against the S&P 500 prices, with the line of best fit superimposed on top. The residuals, or errors, are scattered about the line. The extent to which they lie close to or away from the line is an indication of the strength of the linear relationship. The standard deviation of the residuals measures this dispersion of the points about the line. This residual standard deviation is useful as it measures the stock's company-specific risk i.e. the risk that is not associated with the S&P 500.
The residual plot is a plot of the residuals against the x-axis (S&P 500). This is useful for the same reasons as the line fit plot, but is even more useful in that the trend in the linear pattern is removed and our eye can focus on the residuals without being distracted by the linear pattern.
The standardised residuals are the residual values converted to standardised form. This is useful in that using the standardised residuals we can perform a quick check to determine whether or not the regression line is a useful summary of the relationship in the data. If more than 5% of the observations lie outside the range - 2 to +2 then this indicates that the regression line may not be a good summary of the relationship in the data.
Taking an average (mean) of the stock prices for Hilton, TI, and Giant, for each period, gives the following regression results, referred to as the "portfolio" results.
The main difference between the portfolio regression results and the individual company results is that the correlation coefficient is significantly higher in the portfolio. This indicates that the linear relationship is stronger and so the accuracy of predictions is greater. This means lower risk, compared to investment in one single company, in making predictions based on market fluctuations and is why investors develop diversified portfolios. This makes intuitive sense, because a portfolio including every single stock in the market would be the same as investing in the market as a whole, and so would move linearly with it.
However, the beta in this case is not lowered by investing in a mix of all three, indicating that risk due to market sensitivity is not necessarily lowered by developing a diversified portfolio.
TO: Harold Gagnon
FROM: Brenda Hagerty
DATE: 12 July 2006
SUBJECT: Appraisal of the use of Beta Coefficients in Risk Evaluation, including suggestions, based on three stock options: Hilton, Texas Instruments, and Giant Foods.