The structure of education has been shaped by many cognitive psychologists over the past century, including John Dewey, Arnold Gesell and Lev Vygotsky (Stone, 1996). However, it is Jean Piaget who has significantly influenced the structure of education, as mainstream educators have found his theory on child development more substantive and convincing (Stone, 1996; Kohlberg and Mayer, 1972; DeVries, 2000). Piaget's developmental theory is still widely applied to methods of teaching (DeVries, 2000). The premise of his developmental theory that is of interest here is that children's ability to assimilate experiences and consolidate knowledge is directly correlated to their age. The four stages of development, the sensori-motor stage, pre-operational stage, concrete operational stage and the formal operational stage are said to all occur within specified age brackets. It is also a domain general theory. Domain generality proposes that knowledge, once gained, can be applied across many different contexts and situations (Slater, Hocking and Loose, 2003).
Recently however, Piagetian schooling techniques have been challenged by the emergence of much new cognitive developmental research. Research done by, amongst others McCloskey (1985), Massey and Gelman (1988) and Rosengren, Kalish, Gelman and McCormick (1991) has suggested that the cognitive development of specific concepts in children emerge at different ages rather than by domain. This may serve as a more valuable guide to teaching science than the domain general Piagetian theory that has been used in the past. Furthermore, in recent years the age at which a child begins primary education has changed from the traditional age of five years old, to incorporate children as young as three and four years old into education. It was estimated that in 2004, 28% of three and four year-olds were being educated in primary schools, not just nursery schools (Department for Education and Skills, 2005). For this reason, four year-olds will be considered in the assessment of the science curriculum, as it is possible that it will need to start accommodating the needs of younger children.
The young age at which children are being entered into primary education, coupled with the rapid developments being made by cognitive research (Oschner and Lieberman, 2002), indicates that it may be necessary to alter the way in which children are taught. The main focus of this essay is to explore whether research into the cognitive development of specific concepts of primary school aged children can feasibly be incorporated into the science curriculum, so that the correct scientific concepts are taught at the correct time. It is also to examine whether this method of teaching could be a more appropriate alternative to the Piagetian, age-centric, domain general learning approach.
Each one of Piaget's stages is intended to serve as a framework, which illustrates the principles, capabilities and constraints for the mind as the child matures. Each stage characterises the nature and progression of the child's development (Feldman, 2004). Piaget's pre-operational and concrete operational stages, which encompass the development of children in primary school, propose that the child becomes better at centration as they progress from the former stage to the latter - they are able to focus on an aspect of the situation to the exclusion of all others (Slater, Hocking and Loose, 2003). This, in turn, aids their ability to learn new ideas. With regard to scientific concepts, a body of research exists which implies that the understanding of different concepts can emerge at different times, based more on what the subject topic involves specifically, than the child's aptitude for knowledge in general as it matures. For example, Massey and Gelman (1988) showed that four year olds are aware of whether or not different types of animate and inanimate objects could move up a hill by themselves. However, Rosengren et al (1991), demonstrate that at four, but more at five years of age, children understand how animate objects grow as they mature, and how inanimate objects do not.
Simons and Keil (1995), and Gelman and Wellman (1991), show that four and five year old children understand the differences that exist in how animate and inanimate objects are supposed to look on the inside as opposed to the outside. Krist, Fieberg and Wilkening (1993), found that capabilities in a task testing knowledge between distance and speed emerge later, at five- and six- years old. At this age, children were able to accurately apply some spatial knowledge to such situations, while ten-year-olds accurately link distance and speed in their explicit judgments. It is appropriate, then, to teach five- and six- year-olds the basic principles of speed, acceleration, force and energy. Inagaki and Sukiyama (1988), illustrate that in their sample of children aged from four to ten years, children become gradually more able to attribute human, animal and physical properties to the appropriate objects. This research indicates that even the simplest of abstract concepts about the world should ideally be taught when children are at the uppermost end of the appropriate age bracket and can produce more accurate attributions. It also shows that an understanding of the differences between the living and material worlds exists from an early age, and that an altered science curriculum incorporating these findings could build a foundation for when the child learns more complex things, for example the differences between the respiratory systems in plants and humans.
Such research indicates at what age a child best understands scientific rules involved in separate disciplines in science, namely biology and physics. It also demonstrates that concepts are, in fact, comprehended at different ages. For example, one would assume that the experiments of Massey and Gelman (1988) and Rosengren et al (1991) are linked, as they both entail a sound knowledge of the principles of biology, specifically features of animate and inanimate life. However, the onset of understanding occurs at age four in the former research but at age five in the latter, showing that cognitive development occurs more as a function of concept than of domain. This illustrates how the Piagetian premise of domain generality can work against the cognitive progression of the primary school aged child.
There is further research which demonstrates when a child should be introduced to certain scientific concepts. Hood (1995), on a task where the children were asked to drop a ball down a tube, showed that four-and-a-half to five- year-olds have a basic understanding of the laws of gravity, in that they understand where the ball will end up. This shows knowledge in this subject can emerge slightly before the age of five to six years old, as suggested by Krist et al (1993), again demonstrating how concepts even within the different disciplines of science can develop at different ages. With regards to teaching, the very basic and simplified principles of the laws of gravity could be introduced when the child first joins primary school. This can provide a foundation for when the child later learns about Newton's Law of Gravity. Strevens (2000), on a replication of Keil's (1989) study, where children are informed that the tigers in a circus are in fact lions in tiger costumes, demonstrates that even the youngest of children are aware of the discrepancy, showing that children display an early, explicit understanding of the differences between animals.
Research from Ahn, Kalish, Gelman, Medin, Luhmann, Atran, Coley and Shafto (2001) indicates that as the child gets older, from the age of about seven, it begins to establish a link between the appearance of parents and the appearance of their offspring. They understand about heredity, and that adopted children are more likely to look like their biological parents than their adoptive parents. Therefore, simple information about the biological structure of a family can be taught at this age, and can prepare them for much later in their school career where they learn about genes, genetics and the birth cycle. The experiment done by Krist et al (1993) also suggests that the knowledge and application of laws of physics is honed as the child reaches ages nine and ten. Thus, the research indicates that the understanding of the different elements of science only come together to form science as a subject as the child reaches the end of their primary school career.
With such clear findings about the development of a child's cognitive abilities, mainstream educators have reliable evidence on which to construct a new curriculum that can specifically instruct teachers on what should be taught and at what age.
This evidence illustrates that subject-specific knowledge could be a better basis around which to shape a science curriculum, rather than assuming the general themes of biology, chemistry and physics develop before specific topics within each subject. The science curriculum for primary schools in the United Kingdom has evolved markedly since the establishment of the National Curriculum in 1989 (Sharp and Bowker, 2004). There has been a shift in learning from focusing on specific topics towards a more general categorisation of scientific concepts (Watt, 1998). However, this shift may be to the detriment of the primary-school aged child, as the above mentioned research has shown that some concepts and subject knowledge can develop individually as the child grows up, rather than on a domain general basis.
As it stands now, the science curriculum is structured around learning scientific concepts rather than individual topics. While this is a more practical application of teaching in the primary school setting, it seems that subject driven teaching may produce better results in the pupils. The above research indicates that children can attend to things a concept at a time. It shows that the onset of the understanding of these concepts occurs at different ages in children. However, difficulties can arise with the introduction of this new kind of curriculum. The aim of the science curriculum after all, is to foster a broad, conceptual understanding which can be linked to scientific processes in the real world (Whitby and Hollis, 2004). Watt (1998), places emphasis on the fact that children should be taught science within an organised framework, and not just as isolated bits of information. While she admits that isolated knowledge is easier to teach, she believes it to be detrimental to the children's understanding and contextualisation of science in the long term. Oelkers (1998), stresses the importance of empirical research on the progression of education, stating that it is needed especially to promote public interest in education reform.
A shift in primary science teaching format does seem to be imminent, however. Shayer and Adey (1981), identify a struggle in organising which concepts should be taught to children, and when they should be taught to them, in order to best promote learning by corresponding with their level of cognitive ability. This observation has been supported by Clark and Kamii (1993). The findings of such research may call for a regression to the old science curriculum, which focused more on subject-specific knowledge. Shayer and Adhami (2003), report a survey which showed that less than 20% of the population, by the end of their adolescence, had reached the cognitive level considered normal by Piaget. Houde (2000), too, deems the structural progression of cognitive development too simplistic, and calls for the reappraisal of the teaching format in primary schools.
There is little doubt, then, that cognitive research has more than exemplified at what stage children learn scientific concepts and corresponding cognitive skills.
This evidence should have an impact on the way children are taught science. Conclusions are that subject-specific learning would follow the grain of the child's cognitive progression, as research has amply shown. Practically, however, it would be unrealistic to implicate this sort of primary school curriculum, given the intention of the government to keep science as a concept-based subject. Conciliation between the findings of cognitive research and the intentions of directors of education seems the best solution. However as an overhaul of the primary school teaching format is such a big consideration and a major challenge, it will indeed be a progressive process rather than an immediate one.