The New Deal implemented changes in American society that appeared radical and progressive in the 1930s. In reality, however, Roosevelt's policies were "fundamentally conservative," rendering their impact limited and greeted with opposition and criticism. Though the "chaos of experimentation" did revitalise the economy, reduce unemployment and go some way to helping minority groups, it was not the "radical, ambitious" programme that was intended to solve America's problems. Roosevelt was able to bring optimism back to the American people, but his policies really only "acted as a painkiller rather than a cure for the nation's economic ills;" in the end it took the Second World War to rejuvenate the economy, reduce unemployment to acceptable figures and stabilise American society.
The "New Deal" is a term "taken from Roosevelt's speech whilst accepting the 1932 presidential nomination." Though Roosevelt has taken the credit for the policy, it was admitted by Tugwell, one of the architects of Roosevelt's policies of the 1930s, that the President "extrapolated [the New Deal] from programs that Hoover started." Enacted during the first three months of 1933 (Roosevelt's "Hundred Days"), it established such agencies as the Civilian Conservation Corps and the National Recovery Administration. Later, in 1935, the Second New Deal established the National Labour Relations Board, the Works Progress Administration, and the social security system. Though these policies ensured that "big government," like big business, was to have an impact on the American future, they did not solve the inequalities in the society or end the Depression.
One of Roosevelt's primary objectives of the New Deal was to rebuild the economy and restore peoples' faith in it. His initial policy was to declare a national ten- day bank holiday, purportedly "in order to give inspectors time to review their solvency." When they reopened, the American public entrusted them with their money once more, rendering them solvent at no expense to the bankers or the government. From 1933- 1939, "GDP increased by 60%, the amount of consumer products bought increased by 40%, whilst private investment in industry increased by five times." Roosevelt's policy, therefore, did encourage an economic upturn. It did not restore the American economy to its pre- depression strength, however. Though this has been attributed to the failure of Keynesian- style economics, it is more likely that it was the half- hearted nature and lack of commitment to his policies that resulted in the poor result. Keynes argued that intentionally unbalancing the budget would boost demand to the point where recovery would take place. Roosevelt was reluctant to accept any increased deficit spending, however, to prevent mass suffering. Only when the Second World War increased production and forced an unbalanced budget on the scale that Keynes advocated did the depression end. Therefore though Roosevelt did encourage an economic upturn, his policies were too conservative to enable a full- scale economic recovery.
Failure to ensure full economic recovery, along with badly planned New Deal policies, also meant that American businesses faired poorly. The Federal Securities Act, for example, required full disclosure of information on stocks being sold which was "not pleasing for businesses." The National Industrial Recovery Act was also particularly unsuccessful and later declared unconstitutional. Formed to boost declining prices, it did stop the tailspin of prices for a short time. Many businesses felt that the codes were too complicated and the NIRA too rigid, however. Additionally, when higher wages went into effect, prices rose and consumers stopped buying. This "continuous cycle of overproduction and under consumption put businesses back into slump." In the long term, therefore, businesses did not benefit from Roosevelt's New Deal.
In addition to trying to rejuvenate the American economy through businesses and banks, the New Deal intended to resolve various problems in American society, such as unemployment. When Roosevelt came into office, 25% of all Americans were unemployed with Fortune magazine estimating that 28,000,000 had no income. Unemployment in 1939 had been reduced to approximately 10% (9,000,000) through such agencies as the Civilian Conservation Corps, Works Progress Administration, and the Tennessee Valley Authority. The latter, for example, provided cheap electric power and flood control as well as recreational opportunities to the entire Tennessee River Valley. For a leading industrialised nation, however, 10% unemployment is still indicative of a serious depression, suggesting that Roosevelt's "fundamental fiscal conservatism" rendered the policies less successful than they were portrayed at the time. Therefore though the New Deal did offer more employment opportunities, it was not until the War that the unemployment problem was completely solved, rendering the success of the New Deal limited in both scope and long term success.
A further problem in American society that resulted from the Depression was poverty. Roosevelt attempted to alleviate this through social security, the "cornerstone of his administration." As Leutenberg points out, however, this "was an astonishingly inept and conservative piece of legislation." Essentially, through using the payroll tax to fund social security, Roosevelt was "taking money away from the people who most needed it and giving it back to them." Again, therefore, Roosevelt was not prepared to be radical enough to enable complete success of his policies. Failure to commit to either higher taxation for the rich or deficit spending meant that Roosevelt's policy on poverty was unsuccessful.
One of the groups in society who were struggling even before the Depression was the American farmers. Once again, however, the conservative nature of Roosevelt's policies benefited those who didn't really need the aid (the landowners) rather than the tenants. Roosevelt's key policy aimed at "countering the deep malaise that American agriculture had fallen into" was the Agricultural Adjustment Act. This required farmers to lower their output by destroying crops and animals in order to raise prices and "establish relative balance between agriculture and the rest of the national economy." As Leonard J Arrington later noted, "the prime goal would seem to have been the restoration of income for individual farmers rather than the achievement of a greater equality." It was a very unpopular policy, condoning the destruction of food when millions of Americans were starving. The AAA was later declared unconstitutional; again, though appearing progressive it was underlined by fundamentally conservative provisions, rendering its success limited.
It has been argued that Roosevelt's policies were particularly successful for black Americans. The decade became one of positive change despite discrimination for job places. Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, for example, was an active champion of black rights, and many New Deal programs such as the Civilian Conservation Corps prohibited racial discrimination. This resulted in many blacks switching their support from the Republicans to Roosevelt's Democrats, which has largely continued to today. The economic assistance, however, was far more limited for blacks than for whites, and discrimination was widespread. Blacks lived in substandard barracks whilst working for the TVA, and skilled jobs went first to whites. Blacks were 11% of the work force but only received 9% of the payroll. Furthermore, many of the policies were administered by the states, giving Southern states' governments enough power to ensure that more Federal aid "went to rural areas than to cities, and to whites rather than blacks." It was however, a start which blacks were grateful for; Charles Matthews, who became one of the first black democratic chairmen in Newark, stated that "discrimination or not, we were participating.... We were part of the economic and social fabric of the community [for the first time] we started working." Additionally, it should be noted that the discrimination was directed at whites as well as blacks; poor evicted farmers, for example, were despised and abused, and labelled as 'Okies.' The New Deal, though still discriminatory, is therefore seen as successful in its treatment of blacks because it went further than any previous administration in striving for equality.
Similar is true of other minorities, such as the Native Americans and women. As regards the former, the New Deal introduced the Indian Reorganization Act which ended the sale of tribal lands and restored ownership of unallocated lands to Native American groups. John Collier also attempted to reform Native American policy by re- establishing tribal self- government. The political structures that had previously governed them, however, were no longer there. The reform therefore failed, leaving a "new generation of Indians to define themselves." Women, on the other hand, were poorly treated by the New Deal at first; the Hundred Days did nothing for the 140,000 homeless women and girls or the 4 million unemployed. Later, however, Eleanor Roosevelt pushed for reforms. Initially, for example, she sponsored a White House Conference on the Emergency Needs of Women, resulting in 300,000 women employed within two months. Discrimination still existed; in the CCC, relief administrators "refused to allow women 'outside' work" and discrimination in salaries and all benefits continued. Furthermore, employment was slow, sporadic and inadequate; over three million women remained unemployed. Therefore, though the New Deal was unprecedented and an improvement on the preceding era, discrimination was still wide- spread for minority groups and many civil rights issues were not fully addressed.
One area that the New Deal was successful in was changing American politics; not only as regards the President's role and the scope of government in the country's affairs, but also regarding the outlook and support of the Democrat Party. Previously ill-favoured by minorities, the New Deal not only gained their support but also ensured that the Democrat Party was perceived as the natural party of government; as Badger asserts, it "fashioned the Democratic Party into the new national majority party," rendering it successful in following elections. The New Deal marked the end of laissez- faire policies and increased scope for the executive, with Congress "willingly delegate[ing] vast, unencumbered authority to the president." Though Congress soon began to reassert its rights by declaring parts of the New Deal unconstitutional and passing the 22 nd Amendment to prevent Presidents staying in power for more than two terms, the precedent had been set. In future matters, Congress "looked automatically to the executive for guidance." This implies, therefore, that it was the idea of a New Deal and its impact as unprecedented intervention rather than the actual policies that rendered the greatest success for Roosevelt.
Further to this, it is often stated that the character of Roosevelt, rather than the actual policies he implemented, created the greatest change in America. Roosevelt connected with the American people and encouraged optimism through "fireside chats," hundreds of formal speeches, 998 press conferences, and measures that encouraged citizens that something was being done, even if great change was not happening. The Social Security Act, for example, excluded many sections of the work force such as farm and domestic workers, yet it helped millions of Americans feel more secure. This was a "remarkable departure for an institution that had previously tended to deal with the public through respectful newsmen, handing written questions to the President's press secretary, to be answered at his convenience." Roosevelt's attitude more than his policies, therefore, counteracted the failure of many aspects of the New Deal and encouraged optimism in the American people which sustained the economy until the onset of the Second World War.
The New Deal was not entirely unsuccessful; it set precedents for equal rights among blacks, women, and Native Americans that were previously unheard of, and it did go some way to improving employment and recovering the economy. The impact of such measures, however, should have been much more obvious after almost a decade. Roosevelt's conservatism prevented greater success and encouraged opposition such as the American Liberty League. The New Deal, therefore, can be seen as largely unsuccessful and inconsistent; "expansionist and reductionist; conservative and progressive; deflationary and inflationary. It did not end the Depression, unemployment, or poverty." Due to Roosevelt's optimism, however, business owners, bankers, depositors, homeowners, farmers and ranchers still felt "a new sense of security and action replaced years of anxiety and political torpor." Roosevelt created previously unimagined changes to the role of the President and the relationship between the three branches of government which have continued to this day. He persuaded many American people that change was being successfully implemented, encouraging them to have optimism in their country and the economy. Therefore though the New Deal may have been unsuccessful, Roosevelt's portrayal of it and his impact on the American people meant that its success was perceived as much greater. This successfully sustained the country until the Second World War started and ended the American Depression.