If only statistics are considered, the British should have won the American Revolutionary War having "overwhelming military and naval supremacy" and superior financial resources at their disposal. The Americans, on the other hand, had only "a small, ill-trained army and little military experience;" even Washington could only explain the success as due to "Divine Providence." The Americans, however, had the advantage of European allies "marshalling against England," a stronger desire to win, and superior tactics. Additionally, they had stronger leadership than the British from Washington, Greene, Knox and others who, through innovative and imaginative planning, aided the American's victory. As Stephen Conway argues, however, Britain had the troops and financial resources to sustain a much longer war, suggesting that it was "not lack of manpower, logistical collapse or financial exhaustion" that led to American success but a "loss of political will to continue."
British military and political leaders were, compared to their American counterparts, unoriginal and lacked foresight. The traditional scapegoat for Britain's defeat is George III with some historians claiming that his "bungling and arrogance caused the friction in the first place.... Then his incompetence lost the war." The validity of this view is questionable, however; he was only responsible in that he supported his Parliament, a Parliament who, with the exception of the Rockingham Whigs, supported the war. It is more likely, therefore, that any responsibility lay with the Prime Minister Lord North who had "no foresight, no consistence, no firmness.... He miscarried all he undertook in America." The decision to end the war lay with him, with his lack of political will to continue concluding in his resignation a few months after the surrender of Yorktown. American leaders, on the other hand, were much more resourceful and inventive than the British commanders.
Where the Americans lacked money or resources they made up for it in strong leadership, whereas the British attempted to rely on brute force rather than military intelligence or ingenuity. Washington, for example, had a consistent lack of co- operation from Congress, could rely on no more than 5,000 regular soldiers, and suffered many defeats such as at Brandywine Creek in September 1777. Despite this he showed great determination, persistence and originality. For example, through Benjamin Franklin he set up one of the best intelligence services in American history, confusing the British by leaking "inflated reports on the strength of his army." In addition to Washington, "remarkable military" men such as Greene, Knox, Morgan and Arnold were supported by foreign volunteers such as Steuben and Lafayette. Together they ensured that the American army survived such hardships as the march to Quebec, the crossing of the Delaware, and Greene's forced marches in the southern campaign. British and Hessian commanders never showed the same skill or spirit.
Strong leadership in America motivated the American people to have a strong desire to win the war. The Americans had many reasons to dislike the British; "taxation... a 'standing army'.... The importation of tea.... [and] the Coercive Acts." This resulted in such protest groups as the Sons of Liberty. Thomas Paine expressed what many Americans were thinking in his Common Sense pamphlet declaring that British 'corruption' was "poisoning the New World." This instigated widespread discussion encouraging a defiant mood against the British. When the Americans were fighting, they were doing so to defend their families and homes, further encouraging patriotism and determination to succeed. The British, on the other hand, were fighting as professional soldiers for little personal gain. Additionally, they lacked widespread support back home as many British citizens were sympathetic to the cause of the Americans. Though a similar trend was apparent in America with a third of Americans opposing the Revolution and even, in 1779, more Americans fighting with the British (there were approximately 21 regiments of loyalists in the British army as opposed Washington's field army of 3,468) than their home country, the advantages that the Americans had fighting in their own country outweighed the opposition.
An example of this is the fact that the Americans were fighting in terrain that they knew, enabling them to formulate plans and react to situations based on more comprehensive knowledge than the British, who were trying to direct operations from a great distance, had. Additionally, the Americans were more used to the weather conditions and able to use it to their advantage to devise plans based on land and terrain. The British, on the other hand, had to rely on sheer numbers rather than extensive knowledge. Their maps were often inaccurate and communications difficult, especially for the messengers who were easy targets in their bright red uniforms. Furthermore, Franklin and Washington's intelligence service meant that the colonists often knew of the British plans before the British generals. Therefore by fighting in their own country the colonists were at an immediate advantage.
America used this advantage to make up for the British having superior numbers of troops. This was through the development of guerrilla warfare, based on knowledge of the surrounding land and terrain. They fought what military historian Russell Weigley calls "the strategy of erosion" which avoided set- piece battles. When the British turned their effort to the southern colonies where they had more support they suffered further defeat as the Americans, under Greene, combined small regular forces with partisan or guerrilla forces. Between them, they "demoralised the British forces without ever defeating them in a set- piece battle." Washington was a military conservative so his tactical innovations were not radical, the guerrilla warfare emanating more from "circumstances over which they had no control" than a product of design. As has been repeated through history (for example in Vietnam and, more recently, Iraq), however, it did ensure that the American troops had a higher chance of winning against greater numbers of troops.
The Americans did have outside help, however. At the beginning of the war this was little more than French aid such as money and supplies; most of the muskets, bayonets, and cannon used by the Continental Army came from France, for example. In the final stages of the war, however, they also provided military help. At Yorktown, the victory that won the war, Frenchmen "outnumbered Americans almost three to one." Additionally, the thirty- seven French ships- of- the line played a crucial role in trapping the 8,700 strong British army. Britain also had opposition from Spain who, as part of the Family Contract and also to obtain revenge declared war in 1779, and Holland who declared war in 1780 because the Royal Navy insisted on searching neutral ships. This was followed later that year by Prussia, the Holy Roman Emperor, the Portuguese in 1782 and, in 1783, the Kingdom of Naples. Though not all conflict was for the American cause, each caused distractions and diversions of British troops and supplies which would otherwise have been directed at America. Britain's search for an ally, on the other hand, was undermined in part by its own failures. "Political instability, urban and radical unrest, and mounting colonial problems" during the 1760s damaged Britain's standing in Europe. This encouraged what Samuel Adams described as "the marshalling against England of European powers." Despite courting Prussia, Austria and Russia- even offering Catherine II the Mediterranean island of Minorca in return for an immediate treaty, no attempt was successful, highlighting "Britain's diplomatic isolation." Though, as Scott points out, Britain was not defeated "because it lacked a Continental ally," the presence of allies on the American side was not only beneficial but also one of the deciding factors in their success.
The presence of an ally on the British side, however, would certainly have relieved some of the pressure on the British Government which was exacerbated by domestic problems. In 1770, for example, (the year of the Boston massacre) not only was there food shortages in Britain, but the year also marked a period of downturn in the economy leading to high food prices and riots. Furthermore, Lord North's government was troubled by affairs in Ireland in 1773 following the Dublin Parliament's proposition of an Absentee Land Tax. Additionally, following the establishment of Christopher Wyvill's County Association in 1779 North had to deal with the demands of the "English provincial country gentlemen" as well as the Gordon Riots of 1780. North's problems were aggravated by the arrival of the mass media with the major newspapers beginning after 1770. North's ministry was, therefore, the first to face the "full force of pubic opinion, opposition and criticism." This gave the public a voice of opposition against the war which could be expressed not only through politicians such as Fox and Burke. These domestic problems averted Lord North's attention from the American Revolution and would have contributed to the criticism that "He miscarried all he undertook in America."
It is likely that a key source of the British dissatisfaction with the war was the cost. Britain had to ship the largest army it had ever sent abroad, together with resources and supplies, 3,000 miles to America. This not only worsened conditions for the troops with reduced rations, but also cost the British Government a lot with the national debt increasing from 127 million to 232 million over the course of the conflict. Washington suffered similar problems with funding. Unable to tax, however, Congress "borrowed approximately $16 million, collected around $5.5million from the states, and printed some $240 million in paper notes" which soon became worthless. He was, however, able to secure loans at a "much lower rate of interest than were the Spanish and French governments." He also did not have the added debt of the Seven Years War. Therefore though both countries had financial problems, the British solution of raised taxes led to a growing mood of tax revolt, inspiring a nationwide protest movement in 1779.
Despite this, however, North could have continued the war. A larger number of troops than ever before were in British pay, and the money to prolong the conflict was forthcoming. Though French debt in 1783 was 62% of the British, for example, their interest payments "were 75% of the British." Britain's financial capacity to continue the war appeared "much greater than that of the Americans, the French, the Spanish, of even the Dutch." Furthermore, North's majority in Parliament granted him a political mandate so opposition from politicians such as Fox and Burke could, in theory, have been ignored. Fighting a war 3,000 miles away, however, with no allies, national newspapers publishing the disapproval of the public, and opposition in Parliament, put considerable pressure on the Prime Minister. The continuation of the war, which had already continued for eight years, did not bring with it the prospect of an outright win for the British with steadily mounting oppositional allies and growing unrest at home. Therefore it was not "manpower, logistical collapse or financial exhaustion" that led to Britain's surrender but a "loss of political will to continue the conflict."