Despite being described as "intrinsically implausible" by some, and continually debated even today- some four hundred years after it was first published, Locke's account of government by the consent of free individuals in the Second Treatise of Government "is the intellectual foundation of constitutional government and has provided the terms of discourse for modern discussion of legal and political obligation to the state." Forming the basis of the American Declaration of Independence which claims that all governments "derive[e] their just powers from the consent of the governed" as well as changing the scholar's understanding of the entire chapter of Locke's constructed state, the four paragraphs defining and addressing the status of tacit and express consent have become the justification for political authority. Despite building the foundations of the twenty- first century's largest superpower, however, there are serious flaws and omissions in Locke's theory which encourage the academic to question its validity.
Locke argues that consent, in effect, legitimises government. It "expresses the acceptability, or at least tolerability, of the government" whilst enabling people to create political allegiances without "awaiting the gradual emergence of bonds of community and reciprocity" and providing "deliberate control over the liability to legal duties." Locke believed, therefore, that it provided the foundations of his society, stating that "every man... [is] naturally free, and nothing [is] able to put him into subjection but only his own consent." To the question of exactly how citizens consent, Locke follows the ideas set forth in Plato's Crito which "introduces the idea that continued residence counts as some kind of tacit consent to obey." Locke extends this to include any enjoyment of the benefits of government, stating, "Every man, that hath Possession, or Enjoyment, of any part of the Dominions of any Government, doth thereby give his tacit consent, and is as far forth obliged to Obedience to the Laws of that Government, during such Enjoyment, as any one under it." Whether it is "barely travelling freely on the highway," therefore, Locke insists that that is consent. It is in this idea of tacit consent, however, that has formed the basis of many scholars' objections to the theory.
Often people are not aware that they are consenting. Actions such as "barely travelling...on the highway" are commonly undertaken by people without imagining that they will create obligations, and in circumstances in which they "have no feasible alternative." Though Locke would class this as "tacit consent"- people consenting through their use or enjoyment of a "Dominion of Government," it has been argued by many that it is unfair to infer consent when the citizen is themselves unaware. Such a system, if followed, would leave citizens open to abuse from those in power as Locke does not specify where the line should be drawn. It could be argued, for example, that if a British person was enjoying tea imported from China, then that person is in that action submitting themselves to the rules and laws of the Government of China. This would create a complicated, over- burdensome and unwieldy situation which would be entirely impractical.
Tacit consent assumes that the government was originally founded with fair consent and voluntary subjection of the people. Almost all administrations which presently exist, however, "or of which there remains any record in history, have been founded originally, either on usurpation or conquest." Violence and submission by necessity is, therefore, "all the original contract which they have to boast of." In the few places that consent has taken place, it has commonly been irregular, confined, and intermixed with fraud and brutality, rendering any claim to authority insignificant. Even the most plausible way "by which a nation may receive a foreign master, by marriage or a will," offers little solace to those citizens who it affects, treating them as a dowry or legacy rather than inviting them to be part of the contract and asking for their consent. If this so-called "original contract" is all that tacit consent has to rely upon, then it has sparse grounds for legitimacy.
If tacit consent is deemed implausible, express consent is little better. Express consent relies upon active citizens being able to, and themselves partaking, in such events as elections to give the government authority. Elections are, however, "either the combination of a few great men, who decide for the whole.... or it is the fury of the multitude, that follow a seditious ringleader." Legitimate elections therefore rely upon being, yet rarely are, open to all. Despite this, even the Republic of Athens, purportedly the most extensive democracy ever, did not allow women, slaves and strangers to vote. Even making the requisite assurances for these groups, the "establishment was not at first made, nor any law ever voted, by a tenth of those who were bound to pay obedience to it." To take a further example, Harry the IVth and Harry the VIIth of England held no title to the throne but a parliamentary election; odd, if the "only real foundation of all authority be consent and promise." Furthermore, elections should be participated in by all. It is unlikely that there has ever been an election, however, where every citizen has taken part- in the US today, for example, voter turnout for presidential elections barely tops 50% of the population. If express consent is dependent on open elections attended by all, therefore, full consent has never been given to a government.
Both tacit and express consent rely on the doctrine that everyone is free to leave the country they are in if they do not agree with the rules and laws set down by the Government. Often, however, people are unable to leave due to personal circumstances. "Poor peasant[s] or artisan[s]," for example, would be unable to leave the land they know to join one where they do not know the language, manners, or lives. Most would also be unable to afford such a luxury. This is increasingly in evidence in the twenty-first century with the increase of the media; starving third world citizens see the wealth of the Western world but are unable to access it due to lack of funds. Citizens often, therefore, stay where they are due to denial of alternatives rather than express or tacit consent.
Even if personal circumstances are satisfactory, however, the rules and laws of the land may prevent a person from leaving it. In Tiberius's time, for example, "it was regarded as a crime in a Roman knight that he had attempted to fly to the Parthians, in order to escape the tyranny of that emperor." The ancient Muscovites also prohibited all travelling "under pain of death." This again can be observed in today's society; restrictions on immigration prevent people from leaving a land which they do not necessarily consent to. Hence Locke in effect proposes an impossible situation; he claims that people consent to the government and its rules and laws if they stay in its country. This includes, however, consenting to laws forbidding them from leaving- consenting to their freedom to not consent being taken away.
Even if the majority objected to the government and withdrew their consent, there is little guarantee that this will affect those in power. Jefferson, drawing on the ideas of Locke, believed that if the established government failed "to provide the security which they were established to provide, we may withdraw our consent and set up another government in an effort to improve our lot." A country's citizens, however, are rarely able to co-ordinate their resources to overthrow a government or instigate a revolution. If the withdrawal is through express consent such as an election, it is again often unlikely that the turnout will reflect the public's opinion. Even if it does, there is no guarantee that those in power will not manipulate the election; Iraq in the 20 th century, for example, held regular elections but coerced citizens into voting a certain way. It could even be said that George Bush manipulated the US election results of 2000 to produce the desired result. Locke does not, therefore, offer a reliable method by which to withdraw consent.
Locke also fails to reconcile the inconsistencies associated with property. Locke's theory of consent is intrinsically bound up with the idea of possessions, claiming equally that people consent to government rule for the protection of said property, and that children accept the rules their father consented to when they "come of age" (aged 21) and inherit land ("property"). This method, however, forces consent on the second generation of a family. It also assumes that children will inherit land when they become adults. Though it is argued that, if inheritance laws of the 17 th century are studied this flaw is reconciled, Locke fails to state a solution himself. Furthermore, Locke ignores those that do not own property. This is because he never intended or expected that those without property would be in charge of civil society. In order for the system to be advantageous to those with property, whom Locke gives priority to, those without it must be excluded from its privileges although still protected by and subject to its laws. In effect, therefore, Locke ignores a section of society to further prove his theory of consent; thus manipulating the facts. By ignoring those without property, Locke creates a flaw in his own proposal.
The principle of consent, both express and tacit, is in theory the bases of all modern government. Were a citizen to claim in most parts of the world today, however, that "political connections are founded altogether on voluntary consent or a mutual promise," a court would soon imprison you as "seditious for loosening the ties of obedience." Hence consent appears today to be discredited in practice; express consent is rarely undertaken by every citizen, and most are unaware of tacit consent. If they are aware, there are often restrictions preventing their acting against that content. Locke's ideal, therefore, may have formed such doctrines as the American Declaration of Independence, but in truth is unrealistic and forms a weak basis on which to create government.