Once described by Epstein as the "evil[est]" in the Western Democratic world, parties in the United States have been criticised by political analysts and the public alike. It is certainly true that their traditional roles have been rendered almost insignificant over the past fifty years; as organisation in elections and in government, parties have become less effective and less dominant in the performance of functions such as "recruiting personnel to public office, linking voters to officials, and provoking the electorate with cues with which to differentiate candidates from one another." Parties have, however, continued to be institutions capable of "providing a unifying centripetal force" despite being unmentioned in the Constitution. Against a hostile environment produced by "constitutional and legal impediments and an antagonistic culture," they have adapted their policy position and responsibilities to appeal to a more volatile and demanding public. American political parties have modified their programs to "what was always a broad base of support for individualism and democracy," performing different yet still significant functions and continuing to play important roles in American society.
It is probable that the perceived decline in the importance of US political parties has much to do with the increased impact of the media in US society. With elections centred on television and newspaper coverage, and corporations such as CNN (who seek little more than increased viewing figures) deciding what is broadcast, individuals have become the focus and parties are no longer the "dominant communicator of political information." Combined with the effects of negative advertising, the public is subjected to consistent dismissal of various aspects of politics, in particular the parties. As one American citizen comments at , "I am sick and tired of the hatred and disgrace that they (news media) brings to the country and how they make us look before the whole world." The media often portrays issues unfairly or focuses on the topics they think will stimulate most controversy and debate rather than the political issues that are at stake. With such a loss of control of communication with the public, parties are often unable to project the desired image of a unified, coherent group despite still playing important roles in society. In short, it is likely that much of the decline in importance of US parties is perceived rather than realistic due to the adverse effects of the media.
With the increase of the media, so has come a shift in elections to become centred more on finance to promote the individual than on the policies of the party as a whole. Though this has encouraged a growing role for interest groups and Political Action Committees who are able, with the finance reforms of the 1970s, to raise more money than the party for a candidate, it has not rendered the party insignificant. Following the confrontation at the 1968 Democratic National Convention, reforms were undertaken to modernise the conventions and adopt a party character "to ensure fair and open party procedures." The result was that more people than ever before were able to take part in party decision making, rendering party nominations more competitive. The reforms, which were soon followed by the Republican Party, have transformed the political parties' roles in the US to provide organisational support through the National Committees. Not only do they design and plan campaign strategies, but they also encourage support through mediums which the media cannot put their own bias on, allowing the party to portray the image and issues they want people to see. By printing mailings and producing websites, for example, the parties can reach the public. Furthermore, they also provide media training to candidates and members, equipping them with the tools with which to portray the party. Though such work is often not as obvious as the work of political parties once was, it is nevertheless vitally important to the running of American politics, providing a solid base upon which the individuals can rely.
Additionally, the role of the party at state level has also "been revitalised" leading to a "more active role." Over the last thirty years, state parties have become more professionalized, bureaucratic and productive. Though McSweeney and Zvesper argue that organisational development is not necessarily synonymous with influence; for example in "presidential nominations state parties have effectively been removed as actors where once they played the leading roles," the parties have evolved to take responsibility for different yet still vital functions. The organisations engage in activities such as "opinion polling, fund raising and providing services to candidates such as research," for example. The official Democrat website describes such activities as organising a "National Organising Kickoff" on November 15 th in all fifty states, and the DNC organising a LGBT fundraiser in Los Angeles on October 27 th, which Governor Dean attended. Such events often do not attract nationwide or international attention, but are vital to ensure continued support from American citizens.
Despite serious challenges to the credibility of US parties, they have survived to today suggesting that they are more important in American society than may be assumed. Threats from third parties have never come to fruition, with the "two major parties...weather[ing] the most serious threat to their dominance... retaining their pre-eminent positions despite dissatisfaction and the effects of Ross Perot and his Reform Party to address perceived unhappiness." With 19% of the vote in 1992, for example, Perot still did not manage to win a single state, suggesting that a combination of the electoral system in the US and the public's ultimate faith in the parties has ensured that they continue to dominate. It should also be noted that the Republican and the Democrat Parties have both survived serious threats to their credibility; stories in the news since 1996 have included Whitewater, an ethics investigation into Newt Gringrich, questions over various Presidents personal ethics (in particular Bill Clinton), and "continual gridlock and partisan bickering in Congress." The public appears to be able to separate the individual's actions in his/ her personal life from their perception of him/her as a politician; even during the Clinton scandal, for example, his approval rating remained high. It would be assumed that if parties truly had significantly declined in importance, a scandal or a threat from a third party would have a more dramatic effect. The fact that is hasn't suggests a continued significance in American life.
Those who claim that political parties have declined in importance in US politics often comment on three key issues; firstly, party membership has fallen and those that do join are less active; secondly, less people are voting; and thirdly, non-party structures have emerged to take the role of political parties. These criticisms are certainly true; changing society, a "new technology of politics.... [and] an evolving electorate" has led to the development of issue politics which encourage American citizens to join pressure groups supporting one aspect of society rather than political parties which often try to cover all the issues yet none to a satisfactory depth. This is to disregard the fact that parties have at least attempted to define themselves more clearly and appeal to more people in recent years, however. Though getting the correct balance between gaining a broad support base and focusing on key issues has often meant that the parties have appeared to hold very similar beliefs, both major parties have tried to redefine themselves. Bush's "Compassionate Conservatism," for example, attempted to encourage less radical members of the public to support the Republicans, and Clinton's "Third Way" of 1998 tried to put a new image on the party to encourage more support. Though such changes have had limited effect, the parties are certainly becoming gradually more partisan and attempting to modify the effects of interest groups and third parties.
It is certainly true that, in some respects, US political parties have declined in importance; decreased party allegiance, the growth of Presidential primaries and the increased influence of the media have meant that the role of parties in certain aspects of political life has been rendered almost insignificant. Rather than accept defeat, however, they have altered their policy positions and reformed their party structures to adapt to a modern and more demanding society which is "placing new and unaccustomed demands on the party agencies." This often means that, though the influence of the party may not be immediately obvious, beneath the surface of media politics they still have a significant impact. It is not that they have gaining increased importance, however, but that their influence has remained constant yet adapted to become less noticeable. Contradictory to works such as Broder's "The Party's Over," therefore, it appears that the party never finished; the music was merely turned down.