In the aftermath of the Great Depression, historians saw the 1930s as a turning point in race relations; "black powerlessness decreased, white hostility diminished, and Negro expectations rose." With hindsight, however, the situation of most African- Americans barely changed. They remained a "submerged class, commonly discriminated against by industry." Whilst the Depression increased the unemployment and poverty of blacks, the New Deal meant "the same thing, but more of it," falling far short of its goal of promoting racial equality. Roosevelt was preoccupied with re-election and whites were too concerned with their economic situation to be willing to promote radical change for black Americans. By the end of the 1930s, the gap between whites and blacks in the workplace had widened even further; the period from 1930 to 1940 was "the only decade between 1890 and 1980 in which the ratio of black to white average earnings actually declined." Economically and socially, therefore, black Americans were worse off after the 1930s.
Black attitudes, however, did change. Charles Matthews, who became one of the first black democratic chairmen in Newark, stated that "discrimination or not, we were participating.... We were part of the economic and social fabric of the community." The 1930s signalled "the emergence of a new type of faith," with an increased willingness of many in the black community to use "confrontational tactics to achieve broadly agreed- upon goals." Though "white racism endured [and] black political victories often did not," the real victory was that there was any success at all. By the end of the 1930s, black expectations had risen and powerlessness decreased. Therefore though their economic situation may have worsened and treatment by the government and white Americans barely improved, the change in black attitudes towards their situation had an impact on their future for decades to come, and signalled the beginning of an increased drive for equity.
The Depression's initial impact was less dramatic, though ultimately more damaging for minorities in America than for whites. This was due in part to the minimal impact that the "Roaring Twenties" had on marginal groups. Though the traditional view minimises its bleak side, many did not partake in, and even suffered from, the boom. Immigrants were discriminated against by the McCarran- Walter Act, for example, and women found themselves "losing many of the gains they had won.... during the First World War by entering the work force and forging careers for themselves." Racial incidents, such as the New York draft riots of 1863 and the Detroit race riots of 1919, had been taking place throughout the United States long before the 1920s. During the boom, however, the lynching of African-Americans in the South reached such a peak that "even the white majority outside the South was forced to pay attention." Many minorities such as blacks were therefore brought up surrounded by discrimination and racism. "Born in depression," they "scarcely noticed a change at the beginning of the 1930s." Over the course of the decade, however, the attitudes of the American people regarding employment, spending, unions and law- making as well as discriminatory government policies ensured that blacks and other such minorities increasingly suffered more than the whites.
Blacks, even prior to the Depression, were discriminated against by employers. This, as explored by William Sundstrom in his extensive study, "Last Hired, First Fired? Unemployment and Urban Black Workers During the Great Depression," was heightened during the Depression. Differences in the backgrounds of whites and blacks, for example, ensured that blacks suffered "disproportionately from the severe labour market dislocation." By the end of the decade, blacks were 11% of the work force but only received 9% of the payroll. Education and experience played important roles in the justification of discrimination against blacks by employers. As a result of poor education and upbringing, blacks were often less skilled than whites, and during the Depression less skilled workers were frequently the first to be sacked. Though in the North they may have been better educated, they were often the most recently employed so least experienced. Additionally, a large proportion of skilled black workers were concentrated "in certain building trades such as bricklaying." When the construction sector collapsed during the 1930s, such trades suffered. Large- scale manufacturing industries such as steel and automobiles, which many blacks in the North were employed in, were also affected disproportionately. Interestingly, for the country as a whole "unemployment rates were somewhat lower for blacks than whites." This, however, was because the majority of the black population was concentrated in the South, where unemployment rates for either race "were considerably lower than they were in the North." Racial differences in background and "occupational distribution," therefore, accounted for much of the racial difference in employment rates.
"Discriminatory employment policies" and outright racism still accounted for much black unemployment, however. Described as the "last hired, first fired" principle, a series of reports on black employment issued by the National Urban League (NUL) supports the theory. They cite various reports of employers "replacing black workers with unemployed whites," such as a black laundry worker complaining to an interviewer from the League of Woman Shoppers; "If there's a vacancy.... They give it to a white girl." This is likely to be due to a number of factors. Firstly, racist attitudes are believed to harden during depressions, encouraging the replacement of black workers. Secondly, as noted by the NUL, the displacement of Negro workers "occurred primarily in the 'Negro jobs'" such as waiters and domestic servants. This was because they were often on casual labour contracts ensuring fewer restrictions on the employer. Additionally, the service nature of many 'Negro jobs' often involved close contact between employee and employer or customers. "Shifts in public sentiment and social pressures to reserve jobs for whites," therefore, would have been felt particularly strongly in these professions. Paradoxically, historian Myrdal suggests, the lack of blacks in the North prevented the creation of "Negro jobs" and may have discouraged such racially- motivated dismissals. In the South certainly, however, discriminatory employment tactics were widespread.
New Deal schemes heightened the black employment crisis and, whether intentionally or not, had an adverse effect on the employment opportunities of less skilled workers. The flagship of the New Deal, the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA), for example, was nicknamed the "Negro Removal Act." Higher wages enticed white people to jobs that previously would have been only socially acceptable for blacks. As a direct result, between 30,000 and 50,000 workers, primarily African Americans in the South, lost their jobs "within just two weeks of the activation of the Fair Labour Standards Act (1938)." New Deal policies also made it harder for employers to hire people. Between 1933 and 1940, Roosevelt "tripled federal taxes....[and] Social Security excise taxes on payrolls discouraged employers from hiring." Furthermore, New Deal security laws made it "harder for employers to raise capital," and New Deal antitrust lawsuits harassed "some 150 employers and.... industries." Roosevelt was meddling with private sector employment despite a median employment rate of 17 percent. The Agricultural Adjustment Act had a similar effect on black farmers. It aimed to cut farm production to force up food prices. Less production, however, meant less work and the "displacement of thousands of blacks from their tenant farms." Powell estimates that sharecroppers' annual income fell from $735 in 1929 to $216 in 1933. The TVA, touted as "a bold experiment," flooded approximately 730,000 acres of land behind its dams, forcing 15,654 people out of their homes. Whilst farm owners received cash settlements for their condemned property, "tenant farmers- a substantial number of whom were black- got nothing." Though they were offered employment by the scheme, blacks often lived in substandard barracks whilst working for the TVA. Schemes such as the Agricultural Adjustment Act and the Tennessee Valley Authority, therefore, often prohibited racism in theory yet in practice rarely enforced it. New Deal policies increased unemployment for blacks who were already suffering from the effects labour market discrimination and unequal opportunities due to their background.
New Deal intervention in unions further aggravated black unemployment. The National Labour Relations Act (or "Wagner Act") had a particularly adverse effect, making it harder for blacks to become involved in their union and influence their employers. Introduced in 1935, it resurrected section 7(a) of the recently defunct NRA, returning its collective- bargaining provisions previously declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court on "Black Monday." This "granted monopoly bargaining power to unions selected by a majority of employees" and meant that "unions representing a minority of workers were [not] permitted." This "raised the number of insiders who had incentive and ability to exclude outsiders." Though originally drafted with a provision prohibiting such discrimination, the American Federation of Labour successfully lobbied against it. "Routinely celebrated as a milestone for the American worker," many black Americans protested against its implementation. The NAACP's publication "The Crisis" (written in 1934 after the formation of the NRA but also applicable later to the Wagner Act), for example, "decried the monopoly powers granted to racist unions by the NRA," noting that "union labour strategy seems to... close the union to black workers." Though the constitutionality of the NRLA was questioned by the Supreme Court in National Labor Relations Board v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp. in 1937, the Act was upheld. It continues to this day under different premises such as the Taft-Hartley Labour Act of 1957 and the Landrum-Griffin Act of 1959. During the early years of the Depression, therefore, the New Deal made little effort to prevent blacks being discriminated against not only by employers, but also by the unions that were meant to represent them.
Despite this, black union membership did improve throughout the decade so that by the end of the thirties a "former major antagonist had become an ally in of this civil rights movement." This is not credited, however, to the New Deal or the influence of any government body. Sitkoff, in "A New Deal For Blacks,"
 names three factors influential in involving blacks in unions; the activity of "leftist cades in many of the organising drives," the conflict between "craft industrial unions and the novelty of labour leaders having to vie for black support," and, in particular, the Congress of Industrial Organisations "required the backing of black Americans to succeed." Though initially adhering to anti- black tradition, justifying themselves by citing the role of blacks as strike breakers (though they never constituted the majority), inclusion and acceptance came gradually. As one black commented at the formation of the Southern Tenant Farmers Union in 1934, "If we're chained together on the outside we ought to stay chained together in the union." This attitude spread throughout the 1930s. Prominent leaders such as Randolph had a particularly significant impact. In 1937, for example, Randolph's persuaded the Pullman Company (one of the nation's most powerful corporations) to sign a contract with the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters; the nation's first Black Union. This brought "some two million dollars in income to the porters and the families," and was a concrete victory for the black movement.
Increased black union membership was, surprisingly to many of today's Americans, encouraged in particular by the communists. No group within the Congress of Industrial Organisations (CIO) "crusaded for racial justice more" than them. They helped to promote civil rights through their union newspapers and workers' education programs as well as "consistently [pushing] progressive resolutions.... at conventions." Though this was not entirely due to selfless willing to promote civil rights- the large numbers of blacks in industry made their unionisation imperative, it nevertheless gave them access to the unions. This enabled blacks to have more influence on their employers as well as helping to educate them in political skills and tactics. It also encouraged them to realise the importance of mass action. Although unemployment levels barely decreased despite increased union attendance, the gradual involvement of blacks in unions did have a beneficial effect on the civil rights movement.
Involvement in unions encouraged black activism, which increased throughout the 1930s. The Depression engendered a dramatic change in the nation's political climate, with an "unprecedented degree of grass- roots activism and [activism] organized nationally, including the South." Simultaneously, the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP), led by Charles Houston, initiated its legal campaign against unequal education. Black protests, especially when coupled with union support, produced some victories. A protest by the Urban League in 1933 questioning why so few blacks with college degrees obtained employment with the Home Relief Bureau, for example, resulted in the replacement of the Mayor and more blacks being hired. Later, in 1938, Randolph successfully organised a march on Washington to put pressure on Roosevelt to end discrimination in the employment of blacks in the federal government. Such protests brought black issues to the public eye. They were, however, still only small victories, and despite an "activist black and leftist political community that protested inequality at every point," public aid continued to fail blacks. Therefore though the 1930s successfully encouraged the growth of the civil rights movement, it was not until after the Depression that significant victories, such as the case of Brown vs. Board of Education in 1954, were won.
The black civil rights movement was made increasingly difficult by Roosevelt. Though often portrayed as supporting the black movement, on close examination of New Deal policies the President appears to have been more concerned with winning votes than promoting equal rights. "Deferring to the sensitivities of Southern congressman" whose votes Roosevelt needed for the New Deal and who were "more valuable.... Than a disenfranchised and relatively disorganized minority group," he refrained from supporting anti- lynching legislation and efforts to restore black voting rights. Furthermore, such policies as the TVA and the CCC preserved Jim Crow practices throughout the 1930s. The majority of New Deal spending went to Western and Eastern states where previous elections had been close. This was illustrated by the Indiana Democratic county chairman VG Coplen, who told Roosevelt's 1932 and 1936 campaign manager James Farley, "use these Democratic projects to make votes for the Democratic Party." Roosevelt did make some effort to offer blacks equal opportunities; he desegregated federal buildings in Washington and "appointed some blacks to respectable offices" for example. It is possible that this was only due to his wife's persistence, however. Eleanor was a strong campaigner for minority rights despite what her husband, who once described Italian Americans as "a bunch of opera singers" thought. Regardless of this, however, Roosevelt still only passed one significant concession to black protestors- the 1941 Executive Order against discrimination in military industry. Even this he was forced into against his will following A. Philip Randolph's March on Washington Movement. Furthermore, the desegregation of the armed forces was not granted until three years after Roosevelt's death, and it has been argued that "wartime shortages alone might have forced employers to drop all the racial barriers" anyway. Despite often being portrayed as the "champion of the underdog," therefore, Roosevelt's personal contribution to the civil rights movement during the 1930s was poor.
This situation was worsened by the system of implementing New Deal policies, which resulted in a clear North/ South divide. Many of the policies were administered by the states, giving Southern states' governments enough power to ensure that more Federal aid "went to rural areas than to cities, and to whites rather than blacks." Furthermore, Southern states, where the nation's poorest citizens lived, received "less New Deal spending than comparatively richer states." It has been suggested that this was because the Southern states had dependable Democratic voters, who Roosevelt did not need to focus on to win the next election. The bulk of New Deal spending went to Western and Eastern states where previous election returns had been relatively close. This suggests than Roosevelt was more interested in winning elections than helping the blacks, despite the negative result it may have had on minorities.
The Executive is not the only branch of Government able to influence civil rights, however. The Judiciary had a significant impact on the black movement. The Supreme Court's decision to uphold laws such as minimum wage and hour legislation along with the Labour Relations Act, for example, is argued by Bunch to have done "more to better the condition of the Negro than the broadest conceivable decision of his equal rights." It is also argued by historians such as McMahon that the Supreme Court was "constructed to be instructed by the executive branch on race," setting the path for the case of Brown Vs. Topeka. Eight of Roosevelt's nine Supreme Court appointees were "liberal progressives with new Deal sympathies," five of whom voted with the majority in Brown. Furthermore, the Civil Rights Section of the Roosevelt Justice Department "worked closely with the NAACP and other civil rights groups on cases dealing with police brutality, lynching, and voting rights abuses." Therefore whilst the President's actions may have been focused on the forthcoming election, the Judiciary is unelected so was able to focus on issues, to the benefit of black Americans.
Further to political developments, a variety of scientific and intellectual advances in the thirties "incremented the aid given to the black struggle." In particular, research undertaken by biologists, psychologists and social scientists "undermined the shibboleths long used to rationalise second- class citizenship for blacks." Research by Franz Boas, for example, led to a rejection of black inferiority. By the end of the Depression it had become "axiomatic among many educated Americans that race did not determine intelligence or personality." Other scientists such as Klineberg followed up Boas's research, all concluding that the "only differences [between races are] caused by educational, cultural, economic, and other environmental determinants." This view was encouraged by Nazism which gave racism a "bad name," further discrediting genetic concepts of race. This advance provided scientific backing for the civil rights campaign. During the 1930s, however, it had little effect on the majority of the Americans. Therefore whilst science may have encouraged acceptance of blacks in intellectual circles, it did little to change the mind of the average American or increase the rights and treatment of minorities.
Public aid and New Deal policies, therefore, continually failed blacks. Due in part to higher unemployment and widespread discrimination, throughout the 1930s their living conditions were consistently poorer than the majority of whites. As previously discussed, blacks were treated unfairly even prior to the Depression; during the "booming" 1920s, for example, many private services refused any aid to blacks. In the whole of New York City, "only five institutions for juvenile delinquents accepted blacks." As black journalist George S Schuyler commented, "the Negroes have been in the Depression all the time." Once the country- wide Depression started, living conditions decreased even further. Deterioration in city housing because landlords could not afford the upkeep of their properties, for example, was exacerbated by families moving into smaller apartments with more overcrowding to cover costs. Additionally, people were literally starving, partially due to the destruction of food for the AAA. Poor nutrition and mortality rates remained high as a result of these inadequate living conditions. Despite the best efforts of the black protest movement, therefore, the living conditions of blacks barely improved.
There were, nevertheless, some social improvements. Though financial help was low, for example, it did keep thousands from starvation and eviction and was often "no worse than the meagre earnings families had managed on in times of national prosperity;" certainly more than they had ever previously received from the government. Projects "built better roads and drainage systems, new housing and other facilities, and brought day care, health, educational, and similar services to local residents." Education levels increased. Though black mortality stayed high, clinics were more available enabling regular health care. Furthermore, social services provided children with constructive activities off the streets when no parent was at home. Blacks also become more visible in the musical and artistic worlds of the thirties; sculptors and artists such as Richard Barthe and Aaron Douglas gained increasing attention, and black opera singers such as Florence Cole Talbert and Lillian Evanti achieved recognition and were invited by the Roosevelts to sing at the White House. Blacks came to "constitute nearly half the social scientists employed in the.... Carnegie Corporation and American Council on Education research projects." A number of Negro scientists, such as Percy Julian and Herman Chase "won the esteem of the academic community." There was, therefore, a mixed social record for blacks in the 1930s. This was summed up by the Urban League's findings: "black professionals served their communities with greater commitment than before, children remained in school longer, blacks received better medical care, and government aid was easier to obtain; but there was more overcrowding and more husbands deserted their wives."
Despite this mixed record, the 1930s is still often typified and generalised as having had a positive impact on black people. This is partly because their reaction to Roosevelt's Democratic Party, and hence satisfaction with the decade, is normally gauged by the switching of voting allegiance. Typically supporting the Republican Party, by the end of the Depression it is said that a large majority of blacks were voting for the Democrats. This conclusion is not entirely accurate, however. During the 1930s, the majority of blacks lived in the South and could not vote. It was previously mentioned that the majority of New Deal spending went on the North, suggesting that the common conclusion is reached by following the voting records of blacks mainly living in the North. The response therefore has to be measured using different scales; Davis, in "The Civil Rights Movements," suggests combining voting results with black participation in the Roosevelt administration and "lobbying efforts on the part of black organisations such as the NAACP." It is true that some blacks rose to prominence within Roosevelt's administration, though they amounted to little despite Eleanor Roosevelt's efforts. More importantly, black activism certainly increased. Houston, a NAACP legal counsel, for example, "responded to the increasing activism evident in black communities throughout the South," laying the groundwork for the civil rights movement. His successes included a Supreme Court ruling in 1938 that black man Gaines should be admitted to Missouri Law School because no law school for blacks existed within the state. Within certain sectors of the black community, therefore, the 1930s had a positive impact.
This impact, however, was not as widespread as many historians have assumed. Blacks were still widely discriminated against, particularly in the South, and unemployment levels remained high. Furthermore, their housing, health, and welfare were continually lower than that of white people. Advances in the civil rights movement were often due to factors unrelated to the Government and the New Deal, such as the Unions' need for unity to achieve success and the coincidence of Nazism reinforcing scientific discoveries. Furthermore, any acceptance of blacks appeared to disappear as soon as the Second World War began; the conflict increasing racial tensions and white violence against black Americans. During the summer of 1943, race riots "swept across Los Angeles, Mobile, Detroit, New York, and Beaumont, Texas." Howard Odum warned that "rising black expectations.... And increasing white determination to maintain the status quo were fuelling an increasingly explosive situation." The 1930s certainly did not convincingly change peoples' attitudes towards black people.
The Depression did "sow the seeds" of the black civil rights, movement, however. Whilst they remained a submerged caste "commonly discriminated against by industry, the labour movement, and government at all levels," their input in politics was gradually increasing. Political activism was rising and black leaders, who were to later impact the civil rights movement, were emerging. Much of the disappointment felt by blacks about the New Deal was also felt by whites. Roosevelt's conservatism prevented greater success and ensured that the New Deal was largely unsuccessful and inconsistent; "expansionist and reductionist; conservative and progressive; deflationary and inflationary. It did not end the Depression, unemployment, or poverty." Furthermore, it even encouraged racism towards whites as well as blacks; poor evicted farmers, for example, were despised, abused, and labelled as 'Okies.' Though the New Deal did fall far short of its aim promote racial equality and the majority of blacks continued to live in poverty, however, it did go further than any previous administration in striving for equality; "negro expectations [rising and] black powerlessness decreas[ing]" as a result. As Robeson said, "Change was in the air, and this was the best sign of all."