The concept of "business cycles" predicts that a three year recession occurs every eleven years in a capitalist economy, leading Nobel Laureate Robert Lucas to state, "business cycles are all alike." The length and severity of the recessions, however, does vary with the Great Depression of the 1930s being particularly severe. Though Liberal historians would find Hoover and Roosevelt at fault, it seems more likely that it was, as Bernstein believes, "the interaction of cycle and trend"- the combination of the business cycle with structural trends in society just after World War one, exacerbated by individuals' actions, that resulted in the severity of the depression.
World War One can be cited as the stimulus for the Great Depression, affecting not only the economy but also the international relationships between countries involved. With the end of the First World War came a growing dependence on the United States, both politically and economically. American banks were ill- prepared to become the world's chief creditor after the war, however, so leant heavily and unwisely to borrowers in Europe, in particular Germany, who later had trouble repaying the loans. This resulted in making "the international banking structure extremely unstable by the late 1920s." With countries, Germany in particular, already indebted to the United States the recall of loans to US banks spread the depression, creating an international rather than just an American depression. Insular economic policies with high tariffs alongside foreign loans and attempts to export products, in particular by the Americans but later copied by European countries, put further pressures on the economy. In America this was exacerbated by the new spending trends, with consumers using credit and bank loans to pay for goods. Additionally, the First World War inadvertently prolonged the depression as it led to political mistrust. International action to halt the depression, therefore, was impossible to achieve. However, as Peter Fearon argues, the war "only exacerbated and accelerated economic problems." Therefore though it may have been the driving force to the depression, there were a number of other trends which, over time, were likely to have led to the depression even without the war.
This is indicated when examining American society. The period preceding the Great Depression is often perceived as the "Roaring Twenties." The social situation, however, was anything but that for many sections of American society, with over half of all Americans too poor to take part in the boom. In 1929, for example, 0.1% of Americans had a total income equivalent of the bottom 42%. Farmers, who accounted for a quarter of the economy, were experiencing a depression in the 1920s following overproduction resulting from World War One, leading to falling prices and farmers' debt. Government policies such as prohibition and high tariffs meant that not only were they restricted in what they could grow, but also where they could sell their produce. Industrial workers were also only ever on the fringes of the boom, with wages rising by 8% compared to 80% rises in profits, and two million unemployed throughout the 1920s. Therefore though the Depression's severity is viewed with surprise by some, if the preceding social situation is examined then it becomes apparent that the foundations of society were never strong enough to uphold the boom for a prolonged period.
In addition to this, social trends resulting from World War One increased the severity of the Great Depression, particularly in America. After the war, consumption trends shifted to new patterns of spending as a "direct result of the secular rise in national income during the 'New Era.'" The shift was taking place when the crash intervened, which blocked the economy from sustaining the transition. Additionally, the transition resulted in the development of new industries such as chemicals and processed foods and the weakening of others such as textiles, iron and steel. The uneven growth of American industries forestalled economic recovery during the Depression, and so increased its severity. Furthermore, Hoover's belief in laissez- fair meant that in 1929 Americans had no unemployment insurance or government welfare payments. When the depression began, therefore, Americans were hit harder than citizens in most European countries due to the social situation in their country at the time.
The prolonging of the depression, however, was the result of individuals' actions in the economy; in particular Hoover and Roosevelt. Though accused of "laissez-faire" policies, Hoover did attempt to stop the depression with policies such as the Smoot- Hawley tariff, though these often did more to hider than help the country's recovery. As later admitted by Tugwell, one of the architects of Roosevelt's policies of the 1930s, the President "extrapolated [the New Deal] from programs that Hoover started." Therefore though often presented as the saviour against the sinner, in reality neither Hoover nor Roosevelt ensured economic recovery; primarily because they failed to adhere to Keynesian economic policies. Keynes argued that intentionally unbalancing the budget would boost demand to the point where recovery would take place. Roosevelt was reluctant to accept any increased deficit spending, however, to prevent mass suffering. In the long term, however, this only "acted as a painkiller rather than a cure for the nation's economic ills." Only when the Second World War forced an unbalanced budget on the scale Keynes advocated did the depression end. Therefore the actions of individuals prolonged, rather than alleviated, the severity of the Depression.
Ideologies and ideas, therefore, had much to do with increasing the severity of the depression. In the 1920s, for example, the ideas of Strong and Norman held interest rates in America artificially low, causing hidden inflation from borrowed money. This was exacerbated during the Depression by Hoover who, as a Republican, believed in the policy of laissez- faire so had not implemented unemployment insurance or government welfare payments in America. Britain, on the other hand, had and so not only delayed the depression but also was not affected as severely as the USA. Roosevelt's policy of intervention, extrapolated from Hoover's ideas, was also ultimately disastrous creating a "Depression within a Depression" with the stock market crashing nearly 50% between August 1937 and March 1938. The only ideas which it is likely would have helped, Keynes's, were ignored with predictable consequences; increasing the severity of the Depression.
Furthermore, it has been argued that it was an "idea" that caused the Depression. Ada Redford, writing for the Georgia Writers' Project, brings the concept of government conspiracies into the Depression by questioning whether the Wall Street Crash was planned; a "Republican trick" because "Millionaires were made over night from the life savings of others." This was certainly true; emphasis is often put on the Wall Street Crash causing poverty and bankruptcy, but its cause was shrewd investors selling shares and making money. It is unlikely that Hoover and his Republican Party were the sole cause, however, as the progression of a crash and following depression is often hard to control and rarely, if ever, the consequence of one person, or a group of peoples', actions. If anything, their influence may have speeded its progression. As a concept it will be impossible to ever prove or disprove, though as a theory it is interesting to consider when discussing the Depression; introducing the idea that the severity of the Depression was increased by the greediness of Republican party members.
Taken individually, it is doubtful that any of the factors detailed previously would have led to such a severe depression by themselves; for example high tariffs may have worked if the First World War had not severed much of the co- operation between countries that existed previously. Chance, therefore, plays a part in bringing all of the constituents together. In this respect, the severity of the depression was also increased due to the chance of it happening when it did. From 1934 to 1936, there were three record droughts in America, accompanied by severe storms, blizzards, tornadoes and floods throughout the decade. In January 1933, for example, a dirt storm killing much of the wheat was followed in February by a frost with temperatures dropping seventy four degrees in eighteen hours in Boise City. 1938 even brought "snusters" (a "mixture of dirt and snow reaching blizzard proportions") to the mid- West USA. Meteorological chance, therefore, along with the "dust bowl" effect caused by over- cropping, increased the severity of the Depression by making crops even harder to grow and increasing the plight of the farmers, and by consequence all American citizens who relied on farmed food.
It is important to note, however, that the Great Depression was not severe for all, and for some Americans suffering in the 1920s it marked an improvement. Blacks, "born in depression," scarcely noticed a change at the beginning of the 1930s, and the decade became one of positive change despite discrimination for job places. Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, for example, was an active champion of black rights, and many New Deal programs prohibited racial discrimination, in particular the Civilian Conservation Corps. Other minorities, such as the Native Americans, were treated similarly. Discrimination, which still abounded, was directed at whites as well as blacks; poor evicted farmers, for example, were despised and abused, and labelled as 'Okies.' Therefore whilst discrimination was still wide- spread, for minority groups it was an improvement on the preceding era and is an indication that in some areas, the Depression was not as severe as often assumed.
The severity of the Great Depression can be seen in terms of the long- term consequences as well as the immediate effects, giving an indication of its severity. No other depression, for example, has lowered the prestige of liberal democracy, caused a turnaround in economic theory and government policy, and strengthened extremist forces; ultimately leading to the Second World War. Interestingly, however, it was by this very product, with extremist forces in both Germany and Japan, that the Depression ended; "killing one evil with another"- the Second World War thereby rendered a result as well as a saviour of the Depression. The severity of the long- term consequences it likely to be due to the nature of the Depression; prolonged and widespread, as had never been experienced before or since.
The Great Depression of the 1930s was the severest ever seen, affecting the majority of America (though some states did experience an upturn in the economy) and Europe. This was due to a combination of factors combining at one time to produce bankruptcy and poverty. The severity of the depression, therefore, cannot be blamed on one factor; the First World War, the unchangeable business cycle, consumer trends and individuals' actions all played a part. The prolonging of the severity, however, was increased "not by the free market, but political bungling" by Hoover and Roosevelt which ensured that the Depression continued until it resulted in the Second World War.