(From 'The Social Contract' Part 8: The Civil State)
The passage from the state of nature to the civil state produces a very remarkable change in man...
He substitutes justice for instinct in his conduct, giving his actions the morality that they formally lacked
He consults his reason before listening to his inclinations
He deprives himself of some advantages he got from nature, but gains in return others so great, his faculties are stimulated and developed, his ideas extended, his feelings ennobled and his whole uplifted
Natural liberty - bounded only by the strength of the individual
Civil Liberty - limited by the general will
(From 'Discourse on the origins of inequality')
Rousseau doesn't share Hobbes negative conception of the state of nature. He believes that on the principles that Hobbes lays down, he (Hobbes) should have said that the state of nature, being that in which the care of our own perseveration is the prejudicial to that of others, was consequently the best calculated to promote peace and the most suitable for mankind. (Rather than the opposite) (Part 2)
The body of the savage man is adapted for survival, whereas use of technology, weapons, tools etc has weakened the body of civilised man. (Part 1)
By becoming domesticated animals lose a degree of their vigour, bravery and strength. In the same way by becoming sociable and a slave, man grows weak, timid and servile; his effeminate way of life totally enervates his strength and courage. (Part 1)
The natural infirmaries of man are, Infancy, Old age, Illness. The first two of these are common to all animals. The grater part of mans ills are of his own making caused by excesses of food and drink, extreme idleness or over exertion. We might have avoided them nearly all by adhering to that simple, uniform, solitary manner of life which nature prescribed. In the state of nature man is faced with only a few causes of sickness and as such no need for remedies. (Part 1)
Inequality of man is hardly felt, that is its influence is next to nothing in the state of nature.
(Rousseau's man in the state of nature
Without industry, speech or home
An equal stranger to war and to all ties
Neither standing in need of his fellow creatures nor having any desire to hurt them
Not distinguishing between other men
Feeling only natural necessities)
In civil society inequalities develop. Cultivation of the earth brought about its distribution. The strongest men did the most work, natural inequality developed. Men's possessions became as burdensome to them as their wants, leading to a wretched situation of conflict. (Part 2)
The eternally fixed laws of property and inequality subjected all men to perpetual labour, slavery and wretchedness.
Division of man into different communities - national wars, battles and mass bloodshed.