Figures have shown that the amount of time children spend watching television has increased (Hamilton, 1998; Brown and Cantor, 2000; Bushman and Anderson, 2001). Children are considered inhabitants of a world inundated by mass media (Brown and Witherspoon, 2002). A controversial issue is when the content of the viewed material contains violence and aggression. The frequency of this content in television programmes and in films was quantified concisely by Browne and Hamilton-Giachritsis (2005). Results from the UNESCO Global Television Violence study show that 61% of programmes investigated contained violence, 55% of which portrayed violence in a realistic setting. They also report that in 71% of these instances, characters showed no remorse for their actions and received no criticism for them. 42% of aggressive acts reported were associated with humour. Over 1000 violent murders, rapes and assaults are shown on television each year (Brown and Witherspoon, 2002).
These statistics are worrisome when viewed in light of two theoretical approaches. The first is Bandura's social learning theory, which has given impetus to the television violence debate. Bandura hypothesised that behaviour can be learned through observation, particularly when the behaviour is aggressive. He believed the child's attention to be specifically captured by the violent act, leading them to retain it for the future and to conclude that this aggressive behaviour is acceptable, based largely on whether or not the character is punished. (Bandura, 1973). Viewed in this light, the statistic that characters receive no criticism for their actions 71% of the time becomes dangerous. The concept of learning aggression by observation holds important and worrying implications for this debate, as it suggests that children have the potential to imitate anything they see on television. The second theory is the principle of operant conditioning first investigated by Thorndike (1911). Operant conditioning suggests that positive and negative reinforcements following behaviour will accordingly increase or diminish the chance of a behaviour being performed again. The above statistic again becomes worrying, as it suggests that if aggressive acts are not always chastised, children will believe them to be acceptable modes of behaviour.
The exposure of vulnerable and inexperienced young audiences to aggression has been cause for concern (Brown and Cantor, 2000). This, coupled with the theories mentioned, suggests that it is necessary to examine the relationship between viewed aggression and aggression in action and cognition. Research on violence in the media and its effects has been ongoing in the United States and England since the mid-1950's (Murray, 1998, p.415). Since then, a plethora of research has attempted to link television violence with aggression in real life, with children being a focal point of study (Coyne, Archer and Eslea, 2004; Hogan, 2000; Kiewitz and Weaver, 2001). This view has also been opposed - some researchers dispute any real life consequences of viewing aggression (Hamilton, 1998; Browne and Hamilton-Giachritsis, 2005; Bushman and Geen, 1990). Methodological concerns about this research have also been raised (Savage, 2004). These contrasting findings illustrate the contention surrounding this area but also suggest a possible basis for concern. This essay will take the form of delineating and examining research which does and does not link violence on television and films to the cognitions and behaviour of children, in order to determine whether concern over this issue is justified.
Many studies suggest strong links between viewed aggression and aggressive tendencies. A primary concern is the affect of the media on the cognitions of the child. It is feared that consistent exposure to violent media will numb the child to the consequences of aggression, desensitising them to the real world (Nias and Phil, 1979). Brown and Witherspoon (2002), examined the effects of television violence on adolescent cognition, and identified a model of adolescent media practice. The main assumption is that teenagers interpret what they are seeing based on who they are and their interests. This makes the viewed media personally relevant to the teenager, increases the chances of them using it as a guide for real life. As such, Brown and Witherspoon (2002) believe that viewed aggression can effect the teenager's perceptions of personal safety, desensitise them and incorrectly promote violence as a way of resolving conflict with minimal repercussions. Brown and Cantor (2000) studied eight to eighteen year - olds and concluded that they see the media and television as a definite influence on their socialisation and cognitive development. Taking a wider view, they suggest not only violence, but the effects of substance use and materialism could have damaging effects on the child's behaviour and cognitions. Furthermore, influence is not just exerted by television and films, but also by video games, which are seen as a source of encouraging aggressive behaviour, hostility and negative thoughts (Gentile, Lynch, Linder and Walsh, 2004; Uhlmann and Swanson, 2004).
A secondary concern is that viewed aggression will cause violent behaviour, in line with the work of Bandura (1973). Research has tended to focus on the general effects of viewed aggression on real life aggression (Wood, Wong and Chancere, 1991), establishing general links between media violence and increased aggression in the child's unconstrained social behaviour. However, other research uncovers the influence of individual differences such as gender, socio-economic status and personality traits on how young children perceive aggression on television and in the media, and how they subsequently act. This research helps to dispel the vague claim that all children's lives are always influenced by televised aggression - this is not always the case (Carruthers and Taggart, 1973; Drabman and Thomas, 1994; Jenkins, 1999). It examines what can specifically make viewed aggression demonstrate itself in behaviour. For example, research has been conducted on the relationship between trait aggression and viewing aggression on television and in films. Bushman and Geen (1990), studied 50 children aged seven to fifteen years-old. They were given personality questionnaires, and viewed a series of violent film excerpts on which they were asked to comment. Children rated high on measures of irritability, proneness to verbal hostility, and in screening or blocking out aggressive stimuli made more violent comments than children who were rated low on these items. In addition, children consequently behaved in a more aggressive manner. This demonstrates that whether or not violent images produce violent tendencies can be contingent on the traits of the individual child.
Kiewitz and Weaver (2001) support this. They found that children who displayed high trait aggressiveness displayed more antisocial and violent behaviour after viewing aggressive material than children with low trait aggressiveness. Further, they state that aggressive dispositions influence the impact of violent imagery and the likelihood of the child generalising this imagery into real life circumstances. Similar studies reiterate these findings (Bushman, 1995; Valkenburg, 2000). More specifically, some illustrate sex differences, and have evidence for the higher susceptibility of males to subsequent aggression after viewed aggression than females (Kiewitz and Weaver, 2001), in some cases by up to three times (Rich, Evans, Wood and Durant, 1997). This suggests that aggressive imagery watched by young boys could potentially be a larger cause for concern than that watched by young girls.
Such evidence does suggest that concern should be shown about the relationship between viewed aggression and aggressive behaviour. While it illustrates the short term effects of children viewing aggression, other studies have implied that negative consequences in the long-term are more a cause for concern. There have been two influential studies investigating these consequences. Johnson, Cohen, Smatles, Kasen and Brook (2002), found a significant association between viewing aggression in adolescence and the likelihood of aggressive behaviour in later life, including robbery, threatening aggression and antisocial behaviour in general. In the second study, Huesman, Moise-Titus, Podolski and Aron (2003), longitudinally examined the viewing patterns of children aged six to nine, and found that fifteen years later, exposure to violence and aggression on television in youth leads to such behaviour in later life. This evidence implies that aggressive imagery on television can have more serious ramifications for the future. Aggressive behaviour can lead to delinquency at a time of life when employment, familial responsibility and chastisement by law are salient concerns. This evidence puts the effects of viewed aggression into context in the larger sense, showing its potential to affect the child in later life. Moreover, it provides an experimental basis for Bandura's social learning theory.
Evidence exists which negates the need for concern over aggression shown on films and television. Savage (2004) highlighted the problems that arise when one is too quick to blame the media for aggressive behaviour in children. While she admits that research has shown links between violence on television and violence in real life, she believes many of these links to be correlations rather than causal effects. Savage argues that children with aggressive tendencies prefer violent programmes, and states that effects of television are hard to measure. They can occur in subtler ways in later life, which may be difficult to observe in overt behaviour. Finally, she states that the role of the child's parents, peers and school life as well as biological factors are more likely to be the overriding factors that contribute towards displayed aggression. Savage places the effects of media low on the list. Jenkins (1999), supports this, and states that real life will always have a more profound effect on behaviour than television will. Hodge and Tripp (1986) believe that television can not be solely blamed for aggressive behaviours in children, and that it is imperative to consider socio-economic status and situational factors, challenging the somewhat reductionist social learning approach. They reason that children perceive television as a mode of entertainment, not as a source of information about the world. They argue further that what a child views is not infallible - it has the ability to be corrected and put into context by others, namely through socialisation with parents and peers. Hamilton (1998), supports this view, stating that television only exacerbates other more influential factors, rather than having its own direct effect.
The research discussed above by Bushman and Geen (1990), Kiewitz and Weaver (2001) and Wood, Wong and Chancere (1991) shows a flaw in the media violence debate. Though children who score high on higher trait aggressiveness are more prone to violent behaviour after watching it on the television, this simultaneously demonstrates that children with more violent tendencies watch these sorts of programmes. Not only does this accentuate the controversy over whether evidence is due to correlation or whether it is causal, but it places emphasis on the root of the development of such traits. Social factors and the importance of parental responsibility and control over what their children watch must be considered. Furthermore, Savage (2004) suggests that violent or antisocial traits can occur as a result of neglect, and believes a shift in research from the media violence "blame game" to the causes of childhood aggression and neglect may be more useful. Potter (2003) agrees with the need for such a shift, and suggests that the on-going war between the public, policy makers, researchers and producers only serves to complicate and distort the issue. This, in addition to Savage's argument, indicates the difficulties associated with proposing a link between viewed and displayed aggression, making the question about need for concern even harder to answer.
Savage implies the difficulties with conducting this research. Most evidence is collected using qualitative methods, which comes with its own set of caveats. Obtaining evidence by means of a questionnaire, in the manner of Bushman and Geen (1990) for example, is not always the most accurate way to obtain results. Also, the subject of the research focuses on testing children, who may not always treat scientific experiments with the appropriate respect and seriousness. The question of indirect aggression, whether in the form of verbal insults or more subtle antisocial behaviour, has also been studied. This type of behaviour can have just as much of an impact on behaviour as overt aggression (Coyne, Archer and Eslea, 2004), but can be harder to observe in behaviour. This can confuse the research, leading to an inaccurate picture of events. The question of indirect aggression can seem to be the beginning of a slippery slope argument, as one may wonder how far the criticisms of television content will expand in the future. It is also worth noting that much media is allocated an age suitability rating, showing the role taken by the industry to reduce the affects of aggressive imagery on young children in particular.
The answer seems to be that awareness rather than concern is appropriate. Research does not suggest a clear link between viewed and displayed violence and aggression, therefore there is no need to be particularly worried at present. It does, however, highlight what to be aware of when embarking on this debate. Firstly, suitable parental control and the discouragement of violence can combat the imitation of aggression by children displayed on television and in films, in line with the theories of Bandura (1973) and Thorndike (1911). Such theories should serve as warnings for the possible consequences of violence on television. Secondly, research demonstrates that aggressive images in the media and on television in particular can not be attributed to one cause - socio-economic, biological and familial influences must be considered first and foremost, not to mention proposed sex differences. Lastly, public opinion and inconclusive research can tend to distort the issue, and not give due attention to the influences of real life on the behaviour of children (Bushman and Anderson, 2001). Public health reports suggest multidisciplinary approaches to research, incorporating neuroscience, sociology, child development and economics (Brown and Cantor, 2002), can establish a clearer state of events.
Research suggests that exercising caution over the viewing habits of children without exaggeration is prudent. An extensive incorporation of the media and its effects into the school curriculum has also been proposed (Potter, 2003; Hogan, 2000). It is only through the means suggested that the relationship between viewed aggression and antisocial behaviour and cognitions can be better understood.