Popularity is often seen as the essence of a president's success; granted few tangible Constitutional powers and dependent upon media interest, he has little to rely on except dashing looks and a jolly smile. Popularity (defined as "being liked or supported by many people") is ultimately determined by a president's personality, and can go some way to ensuring elections are won, economic growth is encouraged, and misdemeanour is forgotten. Roosevelt, for example, is famed for his "fireside chats" during a period of economic turmoil and Clinton's presidency continues to be celebrated by many despite personal and political problems. In the short term, therefore, character determines popularity and hence how successful a president is perceived to be due to media influence and interaction with the public. Yet popularity alone does little to explain the prevalence of presidents such as Washington and Lincoln, whose personalities are long forgotten, in twenty-first century rankings of successful presidents. Nor does it explain why some presidents, whose popularity was high throughout their time in office such as Theodore Roosevelt, are little- known for being great today. It appears that popularity, therefore, is a fickle measure of success, dependent upon "current political issues, differing perspectives on historical eras, and historical scholarship." When determining presidents' accomplishments in retrospect many scholars have argued that, rather than popularity, "the bottom line of the presidency is effective governance." "Effective governance," however, relies upon one thing; appropriate situations, over whose occurrence the president has little or no control but which he has potential to manipulate using his personality. Character therefore continues to be the determining factor of a president's success, but certainly not in relation to popularity. With long term perspective it appears much more likely that it is the president's personality (which does not necessarily render him popular) which manipulates chance events and situations which thus determines a president's success.
Despite being dependent upon character and fortune, numerous scholars continue to state that "in order of priority, effective governance ranks first"- meaning, by "effective governance," how much legislative success they have, how they treat the economy, use the veto, and so on. Even Pfiffner who writes that "presidential character is manifestly important" later concludes that "policy leadership is the sine qua non of a successful presidency," ranking personal appeal behind both moral leadership and effective governance. Such categories, however, can be seen to comply with a stereotype of what citizens would like to believe the man supposedly "deciding the fate of their country" has the most control over, and over which he should be judged. In reality, however, the views of scholars such as Neustadt who concludes that "we now are... dependent... upon the mind and temperament" of the president are more pragmatic. A president's personal impact on the occurrence of events is minimal; once in office, the elected president finds himself at the centre of a mass of bureaucracy, surrounded by many with more experience than him and presented with problems about which he can do very little. Furthermore, the president is granted very few Constitutional powers. Despite requiring him to swear to "preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States," the actual powers the document grants him go little farther than giving him the opportunity to appoint certain officials, fill vacancies and grant pardons- though even these often require Congressional approval. Effective governance is certainly important, but is impossible without certain character traits. Despite some public and scholars' (such as Pfiffner) expectations, therefore, most problems in the US such as poverty and the economy are unlikely to be affected, let alone solved, by one person, however "powerful" he is perceived to be. The most he can do is hope to face situations which can be presented in a favourable manner to the public, hence achieving perceived success despite having very little influence upon such events himself.
The president's influence on the economy certainly falls into such a category. The economy is often used when judging presidents' success; Hoover, for example, is consistently derided for purported mismanagement of it which supposedly led to the Great Depression. Quite apart from the fact that it is impossible to judge an administration's effect on the economy until at least five-ten years after they have been in power, it is questionable how much influence any one person, or even group of people, can have on the economy. Often affected by events (such as September 11th 2001 which "severely damaged business and consumer confidence initially" and prompted the government to "shut down financial markets... for a week") that are out of the government's control, or even strengthening or weakening apparently upon a whim, it is the most that a president can do to take credit when the economy is strong and reassure or create positive spin when it is not; in effect, using his personality encourage popularity by presenting a favourable picture of his presidency, whilst in reality he has affected very little. In the long term it becomes apparent that presidents have little direct effect on the economy, relying upon chance, or fortune, to prevent a depression. Clinton provides a perfect example. The man who proclaimed "it's the economy, stupid" and was fortunate to preside whilst the market was strong continues to be feted and ranked in the top ten most successful presidents. Today, however, he is seen by scholars as controlling an administration which had a disastrous effect on the financial system. Though the economy may be used to judge a president by many, therefore, in reality an individual can affect very little whilst in power but seek popular acclaim for favourable conditions, and create positive spin on negative circumstances.
Policy leadership presents a similar situation. Once again, expectations are high for a president to get legislation through Congress and improve, or change, situations within the country, despite him having very little real power to push laws through. In theory a president and his administration must form "policy, domestic and foreign, for the country." This is not such a simple task, however. To succeed, the president must often mobilise public support and attempt to "gain the upper hand with Congress," utilising the infamous "power to persuade" which "amounts to [much] more than...[just] reasoned argument." Even with a popular or persuasive president, however, Congress still may not pass the legislation. Andrew Johnson and Richard Nixon, for example, found that their heavy-handed approach was unsuccessful. Though presidents may blame their lack of legislative success on a Congress whose majority is not in favour of his party, such sentiment does not always hold. Bush Senior achieved much legislative success "even though the opposition Democrats controlled both houses of Congress," for example. Conversely, Bush Junior should have found passing legislation easy as, for the first time since 1957 both Houses are Republican. It has not been that easy, however, and Bush has struggled to push all of his agenda through. Just this month, for example, "House Republican leaders... abandoned their efforts to win approval of a budget for the coming year after they were unable to bridge widening differences on fiscal policy in their party." It is up to the president to create the image of a united administration. Once again, it becomes apparent with long-term perspective that any legislative success is due to the president manipulating chance circumstances. Bush, for example, was able to push through controversial anti-terrorist legislation such as the Patriot Act following the attack on the twin towers. Once again, therefore, the character of the president is essential in working around chance circumstances to paint a favourable image of a potentially unsuccessful administration and manipulate chance events to attempt some legislative (or economic) success.
If personality and the reliance upon fortune is key for perceived economic and legislative success, then a president's relationship with the media is of vital importance; perhaps more important than any legislative action he could attempt. Since Kennedy used television to craft his image with the first presidential news conference in Washington's State Department auditorium, presidents' actions have been closely tracked by television, radio and newspaper (and now also the internet). Becoming increasingly hostile and cynical over the years following events such as Watergate, Vietnam and the Clinton impeachment situation, it is important for the president to build a rapport with the media early on to encourage them to present unfortunate news with a positive spin. Though Bush is much derided by some members of the public for saying or doing things which make him appear unintelligent, he does have a very good relationship with the media. Once again fortune played a part, as he had the good luck to enter office after a president whose administration had be berated by the media towards the end of its term with scandals about pardons and the pricey New York office space. "By comparison...[Bush] had to look good, at least for a little while." Bush does also have a certain amount of skill when interacting with the media, however. He uses techniques such as giving nicknames to reporters and questioning them on their family life and children. A "personable person... he does try to relate to reporters one on one." Though this may not change the way that the media views his policies, if he gives press conferences early and often, and comes across in speeches as informal and amiable, then much of the (uneducated) public will look favourably upon him. Presidents also tailor their speeches and schedules to suit a media which cares more about the sound bite and quirky news story than in-depth coverage and analysis. At Thanksgiving, for example, the president is guaranteed news time by the gimmick of pardoning a turkey. It could even be claimed that a president could be seen as successful even if he never had a single piece of legislation passed and the economy was in tatters. As long as he was telegenic and created enough interest for the media to write unusual stories, then the majority of the public would not realise as the media tends to focus on sound bites and quirky news clips rather than in-depth analysis. When Clinton was flying to California to talk about the budget, for example, it was his haircut that was the focus of the news bulletin, whilst the budget barely received a passing comment. When it later becomes apparent that administrations are based upon lies and spin, the president can only hope that chance events ensure his presidency is reflected positively, and that the media continues to focus on favourable events. A good rapport with those who present the president to the public can therefore dramatically affect how successful his administration is perceived to be.
A president's personality and reaction to the media can (or even, in today's society, is certain to) mean the difference between whether a candidate becomes elected to Presidency or not. Though in practice the media may only sway a minority of uncommitted voters, it is vital in order to get a potentially previously unknown candidate recognised at the very least. With advertisements and campaigning costing millions of pounds and sound bites lasting an average of seven seconds (despite once having been forty-five), it is almost impossible for a candidate to get his policies and beliefs presented to the public. Even if he was able to, candidates today appear very similar; even more so than their parties that they represent, who at least differ on moral viewpoints. It therefore comes down to the candidate who can best present himself in photos and on fliers, who can get the media's attention, and who is the most eye-catching in the short sound bite. Such importance is clarified by the example of the Kennedy-Nixon Great Debate of 1960. During the first ever televised presidential debate, the seventy million viewers who tuned in saw Kennedy as a young, energetic candidate whilst Nixon was underweight, "arrived at the debate in an ill-fitting shirt, and refused make-up to improve is colour and lighten his perpetual 'five o'clock shadow.'" Though in substance the two were evenly matched and those that heard it on the radio pronounced Nixon the winner, those that watched the debate declared Kennedy the victor by a large margin. When the time came to vote, "more than half of all voters reported that the Great Debates had influenced their opinion [whilst] 6% reported that their vote was the result of the debates alone." Needless to say, Kennedy won the 1960 election. The effect of personality on popularity is therefore not only essential to a president when he is in power, but also before he is elected. This is confirmed by the tactics of today's candidates who often attack each others' character through negative campaigning and investigating each others' history (in short, attacking the one tool they are both reliant upon) rather than their policies. Once in power, it is the use of this strong personality to manipulate the media which is essential in presenting chance events positively, thus creating the enduring perception of a successful president.
The importance of having a skilled personality to encourage popularity by influencing the media and promoting acclaim for events which are merely due to chance comes to the fore most obviously when facing crises. Though appearing incongruous with what the leader of a country should feel, there is evidence to suggest that presidents hope for disasters because in reality people look to a leader in emergencies. Previous accusations are forgotten, and the president is given the chance to appear as the figurehead, and defender, of the people. Presidents have been made by crises and equally unmade by the "misfortune" of not being presented with such situations. Theodore Roosevelt, for example, "may have risen to genuine greatness [but] never gained the opportunity." Despite having "personal vigour and belief in the strenuous life.... His opportunities were few and his actions were less impressive than the noise accompanying them." Though still recognised as a successful president, if asked, few Americans could pinpoint why he was great yet would be able to talk avidly on Reagan, Franklin Roosevelt, Lincoln, and so on (all who led the country through times of great difficulty). As noted by Grant McConnell, "it was his misfortune not to be a war president." This comment suggests an important idea: that it is not merely fortune across the spectrum of the presidency, but the "good" fortune to face a crisis- in particular a war, which aides a president and gives him the ideal opportunity to manipulate events using his personality.
Statistics certainly appear to support this premise, with presidents rated as more successful both during conflicts (certainly if they are rapidly concluded), as well as in the long run. In a poll conducted in 1970 by Maranell and Dodder of 571 historians about the accomplishments of administrations, the presidents that had taken part in a war had a higher average ranking (13.06- 1 being the highest) than those who had not faced conflict (21.2). The only non-war president who even made the top ten is Theodore Roosevelt- a President who was nevertheless exceedingly successful in foreign affairs with his quest for the Panama Canal, and was even awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his part in settling the Russo-Japanese War. Even if he did not preside over actual conflict, his activities in foreign affairs set him apart from all other non-combatant presidents. If the poll is extended to include presidents up to the present day, the results are similar; 16.9 against 25.89 for non-conflict presidents (from a survey of 85 "prominent professors of history, law, political science and economics" conducted in 2005). This concurs with surveys conducted by Arthur Schlesinger in 1962, The Siena Research Institute over various years spanning 1982-2002 and the Chicago Tribune in 1982. Though the publics' view tends to fluctuate more due to the constant revision of opinion on various character traits and events, the "top- and bottom-ranked presidents have remained a fairly stable group" which is consistent with the views of scholars; Lincoln ( American Civil War), Reagan (bombed Libya and seen as "ending" the Cold War), F Roosevelt (World War II and Great Depression), and Washington (American Revolution) always in the top five. Though historical perspective certainly has an affect on public opinion, with Kennedy currently placed top in Zogby International's poll and Clinton sited higher than scholars credit him, the premise remains; those who presided over the country's participation in warfare are perceived as more successful. There are certainly exceptions such as Harding and Buchanan who both presided over conflicts but are consistently ranked bottom. This appears to be due to weak character traits rendering poor leadership skills or corrupt administrations, hence presenting conflicts unfavourably; in other words, the presidents failed to successfully manipulate potentially fortuitous events. The majority of presidents, however, appear to have mastered the skills demanded of the position. With surveys done by C-Span showing presidents who showed great crisis leadership skills to also be ranked highly in economic management, international relations and so on, the implication is that participation in warfare ensures perceived success in other areas of management and, in short, is regarded as being beneficial for the nation. Presidents who preside over conflicts, therefore, are perceived (by the public at least) as being successful in all areas.
Despite this commonly held belief, however, war is not beneficial for countries. Many reminisce about the days of a strong economy and plentiful employment during the two world wars. Certainly for certain sectors it is "very good business indeed." Companies such as Northrop, General Dynamics and Lockheed Martin, for example, thrive on the prospect of future conflicts whilst diversifying between wars; General Dynamics "is pushing armoured vehicles to local police... at $200,000 plus" whilst Northrop, inventor of the Global Hawk, "is projected to earn $26 billion in revenues this year." Wars are even credited with pulling America out of the Great Depression of the 1930s. Though they "lag... behind the huge profits paid to American companies," even in Britain businesses profit from conflict. "Since coalition forces toppled Saddam Hussein," for example, "businesses have profited by at least 1.1bn." Amec (a construction firm), the top earner, "has made an estimated 500m." As one commentator on antiwar.com claims, "I do not believe our economy can survive [without conflict]" having been "in a continual state of war for the past sixty years." The "opportunity cost" is what is lost, however. America currently "spends in excess of $465 billion each year, or $1.2 billion a day...beyond the $355.5 billion military budget;" just one "month of military spending would wipe out California's catastrophic budget deficit." Conflicts ensure a massive re-assignment of the country's resources, rendering some products or systems seemingly unimportant and so abandoned. From 1942-1945, for example, "production of civilian cars was essentially shut down." Furthermore, strict controls were placed on fuel so movement was restricted, and choice was limited through rationing. Additionally, 407,000 Americans died because of the conflict. In terms of "the real amount of goods and services available to people," war restricts prosperity and hinders innovation in the majority of sectors of society. War may be beneficial to big business and a president's success rating, but it certainly is not beneficial to a country's citizens.
It is questionable why wars almost automatically render presidents as being perceived as successful if conflicts have such a detrimental effect on the country. There are two answers to this: character (or more specifically, machismo) and the media. It is almost certain that a president's characteristics will be tailor-made to suit a war situation; it is unlikely that anyone else would even attempt gaining power, let alone win an election (which in effect is little more than a head-to-head battle itself) if they did not have a personality which strives for and enjoys conflict. Once elected, however, the president has little opportunity to display such qualities. A war gives a president an opportunity to display his strongest personality characteristics. The media aides and abets such an image. Whilst a downturn in the economy might mean the destitution of thousands of families, it is much less unlikely to be reported on than a conflict which is guaranteed to produce exciting daily stories and which, more to the point, present America as the "saviours." Despite some such as Dr Drolesky of the Christ or Chaos magazine stating, "To believe in the 'superiority' of the American system is the political equivalent in believing in the horoscope or the tooth fairy," political culture ensures (whether correctly or not) that many Americans consider their form of democracy superior to all others. When conflicts arise, therefore, rather than protest at the injustices of human liberty, they often herald the American government as having "saved" another corrupt country. Iraq, for example, was not developed enough for democracy, so by America forcing their "superior" form of governance upon them the country is now in the early stages of a civil war. Despite Bush claiming "he does not believe Iraq has descended into civil war," the country's former interim minister Iyad Allawi "has told the BBC fifty to sixty people were dying every day." Once again, therefore, the manipulation of the media ensures that crises give an opportunity to presidents to create the perception of a successful and strong government by pandering to the notion of American superiority. With hindsight it becomes apparent that conflicts are entirely chance events, which can only (if at all) be affected by key character traits. Johnson, for example, may have been seen as the more successful president of all time if he had been more successful in Vietnam. Conflicts give the president a unique opportunity participate in events that will be remembered for centuries, whilst giving him the chance to appear as a figurehead and claim successes based on human life and liberty whilst in power, though the reality may be completely different.
Due to the combined effects of presidential spin and the ineffectiveness of the media, the detrimental effects of conflicts therefore appear irrelevant when assessing presidents; mere participation in warfare during Presidency ensures perceived success, whether the country benefits or not. The conflict does not even necessarily have to be won; Truman and Clinton, for example, were both disastrous in handling foreign affairs, yet continue to be seen as successful presidents as their characters ensured they were able to put positive spin on negative events. Similar is true of Prime Ministers in England; the Falklands War was quite insignificant when seen against other wars, for example, but was presented as an important conflict and hence had a positive effect on Margaret Thatcher's popularity. Those that appear weak in the face of conflict, such as Jimmy Carter "who was reluctant to use American force" and even Blair who is increasingly presented as having a weak character that panders to Bush's whim (contributing, if not being the source of, public dissatisfaction of his actions regarding the Iraq War- despite the actual conflict being an initial success) "[are] ridiculed." It appears, therefore, that positive presentation of participation in warfare ensures that a president is seen as more successful than might actually be true. This hypothesis certainly seems to be believed by President Bush. Herskowitz, who worked with Bush on a ghost written memoir, claims that the President stated before he was elected in 1999, "One of the keys to being seen as a great leader is to be seen as a commander-in chief.... If I have a chance to invade... I'm not going to waste it." This concurs with Herskowitz's belief that "no president could be considered truly successful without one military 'win' under his belt." Interestingly, campaign staffers later "took his [Herskowitz's] original tapes and notes," suggesting many were worried about people knowing Bush's true ideas. Today, the President claims "I didn't want war. To assume I wanted war is just flat wrong... No president wants war." If the original statements are true, however, they prove that those striving for greatness realise the importance of conflict (if Bush realises then it is likely that previous presidents also have). Such beliefs are supported by Bush's popularity ratings. As the graph (left) from The Political Arithmetik website reveals, with no new conflict on the horizon Bush's approval rating is dramatically falling. Statistics and surveys appear to prove without doubt, therefore, that crises- in particular, wars- are the most influential factor in evaluating a president's success, both long term and short term.
Such a premise only holds true with short-term conflicts, however. Upon examining the perception of presidents' success through long-term conflict, it becomes apparent that personality is not enough alone to hold the perceived success rate high, suggesting that character is not the reliable tool that some assume it is. This has become particularly noticeable more recently with advances in the media ensuring not only that photos and stories emerge in the media instantaneously, but also that statistical evidence about a war is readily available for public consumption. As first seen in Vietnam and as is beginning to be seen with Iraq, though conflicts are initially beneficial for a president's success, when the novelty becomes extended reality their popularity begins to drop. Such a premise is supported particularly strongly by Bush's current popularity ratings. With the Iraq conflict in its third year and with more than 2,300 US soldiers killed, a poll conducted in March 2006 "showed his personal rating at 36%, compared to 57% a year ago." The graph below, from the BBC website, further supports this, showing how the approval of Bush's actions has dropped over the last three years. Such a dramatic change in popularity is despite his "likeable" personality remaining consistent. Though it can make a significant difference, personality is obviously not enough to base success upon during a president's time in office. During as well as after power, therefore, chance is key. If Bush, for example, had the good fortune to end the Iraq conflict and withdraw American troops within a year then it is likely that his approval rating would still be high and he would be perceived as a highly successful president. As it is it would be impossible for him to withdraw troops now without receiving international criticism. A president therefore relies upon fortune to start a crisis, and fortune once again to end it swiftly before too much pressure is placed upon a personality covering an administration of little real substance.
The fallibility of character as a measure of success is further confirmed when it is considered that presidents such as Washington and Lincoln continue to appear in lists of the most successful presidents as "reputations fluctuate over the years depending on current political issues, differing perspectives on historical eras, and historical scholarship." In other words, when character is no longer remembered, it is questionable what makes such leaders stand out. The answer returns to the chance event of favourable crises and the response of the media in the following years. Though pre-world war one America was considered isolationist so the country had few conquests or battles overseas, it did have problems on its own land. Lincoln, for example, was fortunate enough to be on the winning side during the Civil War whilst Washington rode on the victory following the War of Independence. Jefferson was able to take credit for writing the draft of the Declaration of Independence, and also achieved success during crises by fighting the Barbary pirates in the Mediterranean and acquiring the Louisiana Territory from Napoleon. No doubt each president also faced problems during their terms in office- inevitable given their position, but the good fortune of positive historical portrayal (particularly favourable in regard to the Founding Fathers) ensures that the victories are forever remembered whilst the loses (such as Jefferson's unpopular reaction of "an embargo upon American shipping" to the threat of the Napoleonic Wars) are gradually forgotten as those who they affected pass away. Substance may have been more important in elections then with very little media to speak of, but today their perceived success has much more to do with a few key victories than consistent achievements whilst in office. Despite being almost impossible to visualise their personalities, therefore, all presidents viewed with hindsight are judged by criteria outside of their control; "chance" events which conclude (or appear to conclude) favourably often irrespective of the president's actions.
Personality is certainly of importance. If a successful personality is understood to render a popular president, then it is almost certainly the deciding factor in elections- both for the power to persuade people to donate money to the candidate's cause as well as appeal for votes. Once in office it then becomes the measure of his perceived success. As Peggy Noonan, President Reagan's speechwriter pointed out, "In a president, character is everything. A president doesn't have to be brilliant; Harry Truman wasn't brilliant, and he helped save Western Europe from Stalin. He doesn't have to be clever; you can hire clever... but you can't buy courage and decency, you can't rent a strong moral sense. A president must bring those things with him." Such characteristics present a strong candidate and sustain his administration. They also affect how he is perceived when viewed with hindsight, as personality to some extent affects legislative and economic success which his overall success is often judged on. Personality is a dubious measure of success, however. Though Pfiffner claims that "there is widespread consensus in American politics that presidential character is as important as intellect, organisational abilities, television presence, or effectiveness in public speaking," when judging the success of a range of presidents over a period of time personality is certainly, as has previously been suggested, a fickle friend. Not only is "the desirability of many character traits depend[ent] upon the historical circumstance," but personality is often forgotten or distorted over time, particularly when considering the earlier presidents who have less documentary and media coverage. In the long term, therefore, character is an unreliable measure of success, dependent upon personal opinion rather than statistical evidence.
With historical perspective, popularity resulting from personality is forgotten or distorted. All that is remembered are specific events and situations recorded in documents and memories, which are presented favourable or critically dependent on the character of the president.. These "events and situations" are all the result of chance which, it appears, is the most important factor when judging a president's success. With few powers (possibly the reason why American presidents have to reply on character and good fortune so much) once in office, a president can do little except hope for such favourable opportunities and situations. Though good fortune also encompasses factors such as the economy and legislative success, there is barely a situation which alone has the potential to affect a country's economy, morals and very infrastructure more than a conflict.
Character is therefore essential to determining a president's success before, during, and after he has been in power. Whilst in power, it determines popularity. As it is the perception of success which is important to both president and public, popularity is therefore the oft-used measure of success whilst a president continues to preside. Yet views of popularity are a personal judgement; short-term, unsustainable, and certain to fluctuate. Success should be determined in retrospect, as with hindsight comes reality. Though fortune appears little better than popularity; illogical, and completely out of a president's control, with perspective it becomes apparent that it is the impact of character upon fortuitous events- in particular, the fortune to face a crisis, which determines a president's success. Pfiffner's "effective governance" may be important, but to those judging presidents it is conflicts which appear to have most affected the country, and hence over which their success is measured. Though it is more than a little extreme to state that President George W Bush breathed a sigh of relief when the planes struck the twin towers, the correct sentiment is implied; as supported by statistical evidence from polls questioning both scholars and the public, when presidents are judged with fairly and with hindsight the impact and result of certain character traits both upon, and resulting from, conflicts is rendered the measure of success.