"Traditional" implies longevity= first clue: these sports were pursued over many centuries
Key principle= variety
Most involved animals
Often played as part of festivals/ annual holidays
Lot of forms of football and athleticism. Most developed, however, was cricket.
All sports were disorderly and riotous and often violent
Has been suggested that by the 2 nd quarter of the 19 th century a thriving sporting culture persisted only among the landed elites
PRESUMPTIONS (Malcolmson) vs REALITY (Tranter)
Industrialisation( restraints: people moving into the cities, working day lengthening, urbanisationlack of space, and impoverishment
BUT Overestimating the number of people working long hours
1851, only minority of males in factories whose working hours increased
Even factory workers could still play football- e.g. 1835, Blairdrummond estates vs. Deadston cotton mills
ALSO Cunningham: population growth as likely to encourage as discourage popular sport.
Religious revival- initial hostility between religion and sport
SOME validity
Wider acceptance of Enlightenment, Evangelical and Methodist values repugnant to unnecessary violence and cruelty meant that animal blood sports and other disruptive past times did decline (growing desire for respectability)
BUT 
limitations: most sports were shared with the elite or were no disrespectful
Political campaigning against sports and games: middle- class rulers didn't tolerate it, animal rights campaigns, corruption calls for abolition
BUT Pre-occupation with "brutal" sports
More detailed analysis shows that the only working-class sports that definitely declined were blood sports involving animals- even these survived more than was presumed. E.g. badger- baiting and cock- fighting in London during 1 st half of 19 th century
Re. other working- class sports: evidence suggests growth or, at least, stability
E.g. sculling/ rowing- lots of participants, prize fighting- no decline until the 1840s, Scottish curling clubs increased, athletics soared 1750- 1860, potshare, bowling, wrestling.
Horseracing, cricket and football survived outside the elite private school more extensively than assumed
THEREFORE many have overlooked the growth/ stability of many sports by concentrating on brutal working- class sports
Establishment of more effective ways of policing- growing use by local authorities
BUT ineffective methods of policing
normal methods of policing were ineffective to remove speedily and completely aspects of sport that the working class wanted to retain
E.g. no one succeeded in stopping much street football until the 1850s or 1860s
E.g. 2. The street football at Derby and Newark-on-Trent was only stopped in the late 1840s by the army and special constables
Widespread withdrawal of aristocratic and gentry patronage
BUT too little evidence about patronage to guess overall trends
DID reduce support of animal blood sports BUT continued to support other sports- boat racing, cricket, curling, etc.
Even if was a decline, patronage may have been filled by other groups- e.g. publicans