In determining whether or not a physically identical world would have consciousness let us take the arbitrary identity statement 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' as Kripke (1980) does. 'Pain' is used to represent an aspect of consciousness in our world and 'C-fibre stimulation' is taken to be the physical aspect. We are assuming that both 'pain' and 'C-fibre stimulation' are rigid designators insofar as pain and C-fibre stimulation are fixed by the current context (i.e. this world). This means that in evaluating them in terms of another world, one that is physically identical, we are asking whether or not consciousness exists in a world where the meanings of the terms are fixed by this one. The identity is arbitrary in the sense that pain might not be C-fibre stimulation but for the purposes of the example it is, as Kripke points out:
For example, Maxwell (1978) uses 'pain 39' and 'b 76' as rigid designators; 'just in case 'C-fibre stimulation' is not a rigid designator'. (1978 [2002]; 343), thus 'pain 39 = b 76'. Furthermore, Maxwell emphasises the need to talk of mental and physical events, as opposed to states, which he finds is 'more in line with Kripke's main example' (1978 [2002]; 343).
In answering the above question we need to determine what relation holds between 'pain' and 'C-fibre stimulation', i.e. if it is a true identity statement. If it is a true identity statement then there could be no physically identical world in which there was no consciousness as wherever there was C-fibre stimulation there would necessarily be pain. If there is no relation of identity between the two then it possible for there to be a physically identical world in which consciousness does not exist.
Kripke compares 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' to 'heat = molecular motion', which he takes to be a true identity, and so we can say that if 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is a, similarly, true identity statement with two rigid designators then it is not possible that there is another physically identical world in which consciousness does not exist. Conversely, if 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is not a true identity statement then it could be possible that consciousness does not exist in a physically identical world. This is what appears to be the conclusion from Kripke's argument as 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is not a true identity statement as 'heat = molecular motion' is.
'Heat = molecular motion' is an a posteriori, necessary truth, according to Kripke. It is necessarily true across all possible contexts of evaluation but its truth is only discovered through empirical research. This conjunction of necessary and a posteriori goes against the traditionally held Kantian and Descriptivist views of the time, which commonly lumped analytic, a priori and necessary together on the one hand and synthetic, a posteriori and contingent on the other. However as Soames points out:
A metaphysically possible world-state is one in which a set of 'maximally complete properties' (2006; 3) is instantiated. In other words, taking into consideration the way this world is we can see how things must be in all possible worlds, for example, assuming that 'heat = molecular motion' is true in this world it must be true across all worlds. A world-state in which '(heat = molecular motion)' is metaphysically impossible; it just cannot be. An epistemically possible world-state is a way that the universe can be conceived as being, it is weaker than the metaphysically possible world-state and as such has a wider scope. Soames (2006; 5-7) argues that the greater our knowledge the more we narrow down the amount of metaphysically possible world-states that we know can be instantiated. We can still conceive of world-states that have properties that contradict ones found in this world, they are just not metaphysically possible given the actual state of this world.
To relate this to the question, if we assume that 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is true then is there a metaphysically possible world-state in which its negation is true? If there is then its truth is not necessary. As we are also assuming that 'pain' and 'C-fibre stimulation' are both rigid designators and as all such identity statements are necessary if true then we can conclude that 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is not a true identity if it is not necessary. Consequently we can assert that it is metaphysically possible that there is a physically identical world in which there is no consciousness.
Kripke asserts that 'heat = molecular motion' is a true identity statement because there is no possible world in which its negation is true. Kripke claims that there is an 'illusion of contingency' that makes it look as though the negation of identity statements is metaphysically possible. This occurs when the determiner of the designators coincides for both sides of the identity statement. In the case of heat and molecular motion, the referent is, originally, fixed by the sensation of heat S. When we feel S we can say that there is heat present and/or that there is molecular movement present. It is, of course, contingent that when we feel S there is heat, we can conceive of heat existing in situations where people cannot feel S and we can imagine situations in which S is produced in other sentient beings by streams of light and not molecular movement. This is, however, to say that '(S = molecular motion) or (S = heat) is metaphysically possibly false', which is true. It is not to say that 'heat = molecular motion' is metaphysically possibly false, which is what is needed in order to prove its alleged contingency.
Kripke then goes on to argue that there is not a similar explanation for the illusion of contingency for 'pain = C-fibre stimulation'. Fundamentally, this is because we originally determined 'heat' by the sensation it creates in us, there is no analogous argument for 'pain' for pain simply is the sensation of pain. There is no situation in which one could be in pain without feeling pain. The identity theorist must account for the illusion of contingency of 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' else we must dismiss it as false as it would not be 'scientific identification of the usual sort' (1980; 150).
Maxwell (1978) argues, in response to Kripke, that the illusion of contingency can be explained through his distinction of causal networks and causal structures. There could be a metaphysically possible world in which the causal structure between mental and physical events is different yet the network is the same (1978 [2002]; 346). The mind-brain identity thesis is a thesis concerning the relation between the mental and the physical; the network. Maxwell claims that Kripke takes the mind-brain identity thesis to be concerned with the causal structure of mental and physical events (1978 [2002]; 347), which is wrong. Maxwell argues that the illusion of contingency is explained because 'God...made the contingent decision to give pain 39 the causal role that is indicated' (1978 [2002]; 348); it could have had a different neurophysiological role or no such role at all. The identity of 'pain' and 'C-fibre stimulation' is necessary yet the causal role is where the contingency is introduced. Similarly 'heat' may or may not produce sensation S but 'heat' is still identical to 'molecular motion'.
The parallels with 'heat = molecular motion' are thus; in some possible worlds there is no heat and there is no molecular motion, just as in some worlds there is no C-fibre stimulation and no pain. Similarly, in some worlds there is heat, and in those where there is heat, there is necessarily molecular motion, and in some worlds there is pain, and where there is pain there is necessarily C-fibre stimulation. 'Heat = molecular motion' is a necessary identity insofar as when there is heat there is molecular motion (and vice versa), but it only contingently applies to any possible world, as there could be a world in which there is no molecular motion and thus no heat. 'Pain = C-fibre stimulation' is exactly the same; it is a necessary identity but it only applies to possible worlds in which there is pain and C-fibre stimulation.
To further clarify this point, in any possible world where there is the planet known in this world as 'Venus', the identity claim 'Hesperus = Phosphorus' is true. In any possible world where the planet known as 'Venus' in this world does not exist the identity statement 'Hesperus = Phosphorus' is still true, it just does not apply in that context of evaluation.
The Kripkean may reply to this by saying that Maxwell is showing an illusion of contingency in the 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' claim by appealing to the causal role of pain and C-fibre stimulation when Kripke explicitly blocks this move when he says:
The implication of this seems to be that Kripke does not want the mind-brain identity theorist to appeal to causality in order to explain the illusion of contingency, rather he must appeal to an 'intermediary between the external phenomenon and the observer' (1980; 151) as Kripke himself does in appealing to the sensation of heat S in explaining the illusion of contingency of 'heat = molecular motion'.
It does seem, however, that depending on how one reads Kripke's argument one can reach different conclusions as to exactly what he is doing when explaining the illusion of contingency in 'heat = molecular motion'. Surely Kripke wishes 'heat' and 'molecular motion' to be identical and necessarily co-occurent and so he must, too, be forbidden from appealing to the causal powers of either in explaining the illusion of contingency. At first glance, Kripke does indeed explain this illusion by demonstrating the intermediary between heat and the observer, namely sensation S, but a more careful look shows that he invokes strong causal language in describing this illusion:
It seems that Kripke is guilty of precisely what he forbade the mind-brain identity theorist from doing, Kripke's illusion of contingency in 'heat = molecular motion' comes from them producing the sensation of heat. Maxwell's explanation of the illusion of contingency in 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' comes from a similar causal role. Maxwell is perfectly correct in drawing out the contingency of the causal properties of 'pain' and 'C-fibre stimulation on the one hand and 'heat' and 'molecular motion' on the other whilst emphasising the actual identity of 'pain' with 'C-fibre stimulation' and 'heat' with 'molecular motion'. 'Pain' and 'C-fibre stimulation' have contingent causal properties in Maxwell's account, as do 'heat' and 'molecular motion' in Kripke's account of their illusory contingency.
Let us consider a distant world w1 in which 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is true for sentient beings x. Suppose also that whenever an x is pain she raises her left arm; movement M. It is perfectly believable that in the developing neuroscience on w1 the scientists realised that whenever there was pain there was M, and similarly, whenever there was C-fibre stimulation there was M. Just as on this world sensation S was produced by heat and molecular motion, so on w1 movement M was produced by pain and C-fibre stimulation. Just as similarly, as we can conceive of situations in which S is caused by streams of light or that there could be a being that did not feel S in the presence of heat, so the scientists on w1 can conceive of situations in which a being does not do M when in pain and also situations in which M is produced by streams of light falling on a being. Just, then, as we say that 'heat = molecular motion' is actually necessary; it just appears contingent because of the way in which the referents are originally determined by a coinciding contingent causal property, so w1 can say that 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is actually necessary; it just appears contingent for exactly the same reason.
It seems, then, that w1 has proved the necessity of 'pain = C-fibre stimulation', and the related illusion of contingency, in just the way that Kripke has proved the necessity of 'heat = molecular motion', and its related illusion. Specifically, as in Maxwell (1978), the illusion of contingency of 'heat = molecular motion' is not explained away by demonstrating the intermediary between the external phenomenon and the observer, as Kripke believes, but rather it is explained by the contingent causal properties of the phenomenon in this world. As pain does not appear to have the same kind of accidental properties, nor the same kind of intermediary, as heat it appears that it is not subject to the same kind of identification with C-fibre stimulation as heat with molecular motion. However, it is perfectly possibly that pain and C-fibre stimulation could have had (epistemically possible) the same kind of accidental property and intermediary that heat does have, i.e. w1 where it has M. As such, 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is exactly the same as 'heat = molecular motion' according to Kripke's argument. As Kripke goes on to argue from his epistemically possible world-state that 'heat = molecular motion' is necessarily true it is thus true metaphysically, i.e. from it being coherently conceivable as necessarily true to it must be the case that it is, we can thus conclude that 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is similarly necessarily true.
It seems then that there could not be a physically identical world in which consciousness did not exist. Kripke's conclusions in Naming and Necessity would suggest that it is possible, but in analysing his argument we can see that the connection between the mental and the physical in 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is the same as 'heat = molecular motion' and that the illusion of contingency can be explained in precisely the same way for both. Kripke seems to hold that coherent conceivability of something can be a guide to what is metaphysically possible but, to borrow Soames' (2006; 21) example, I can coherently conceive of not having come from a sperm and an egg; I may have been manufactured from dandelions for example, but this does not mean that it is metaphysically possible for me to have not come from a sperm and an egg. As pointed out earlier, coherent conceivability has a wider scope; contains more possible world-states, than what is contained within the set of strict metaphysically possible world-states. Kripke's advocacy of coherent conceivability as a guide to the metaphysically possible is also in stark contrast with the illusion of contingency that he is trying to explain away. The reason that we think that 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is contingent is precisely because we can coherently conceive of possible worlds where this identity does not hold.
Kripke's arguments suggest, contrary to intention, that 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' is metaphysically necessary and so there cannot be a physically identical world in which consciousness does not exist. I think, however, that this conclusion is far from evident and that problems of multiple-realisability present a strong challenge to the mind-brain identity theorist and, if 'heat = molecular motion' is the same as 'pain = C-fibre stimulation' then it inadvertently presents a challenge to the Kripkean notion of scientific identification as well. That one can coherently conceive of sentient beings that feel pain without the apparently necessary C-fibres, or that C-fibres may play another role in a different species mental activity has an intuitive appeal to it, that, through equivalence, seems to undermine Kripke's notion of the necessary, a posteriori status of identity statements.