There are many problems associated with God's spatial and temporal transcendence. Many wish to maintain that a God that is personal and interacts with the world must be located, in some way, within space and time, whilst others claim that the classical qualities of omnipotence and omniscience are compromised when God is bound, and arguably limited, by temporal and spatial constraints. In particular, arguments for the existence of God that posit an unmoved mover, first cause and omnipotent creator of the universe, arguably, require that God is not limited by spatial and temporal constraints; as this may limit His creative abilities enough to postpone the creation of the universe, and thus His existence. On the other hand it is not clear that is possible to create something if one has no spatial or temporal precedence over said creation.
I hope to show that these conflicts can be resolved and that we can be left with a notion of God as metaphysically within time and space, yet transcendent of the traditional four dimensions we occupy. As such, God is transcendent of our time and space but not transcendent of time and space qua time and space. God is thus epistemologically transcendent, conveniently explaining our difficulties in discussing Him.
Firstly, let us sketch some arguments for God's transcendence. Leftow (1997) argues that a temporally bound God would be less than perfect as he would be limited:
The other limit that Leftow alludes to is a beginning and an end of a life, but we shall assume here that God is eternal and so has no such limit. Now in the case of an imperfect being, that the past, present and future are segmented can be a bonus; we can forget mistakes we have made in the past and remain oblivious to the dreadful things fated to us in the future. In the case of a perfect being, however, such a segmentation is a hindrance to perfection; God is totally perfect, by not currently experiencing past and future perfections, the presently perfect God is not as perfect as the God that experiences the whole of His life at once:
From Leftow's argument we can conclude that God either transcends time, or else His present is infinitely long, not the instantaneous now that we typically associate with 'present'.
There is an association with time and change; for things change within a time frame and different time frames are signified by changes in objects, which leads to an argument for God's timelessness from Bertocci:
Bertocci concludes that God does not change and many theists maintain that a changeless God is a timeless God. It is, however, altogether possible that God is changeless and yet within time; the association with change and time is not a necessary one.
To turn our attention specifically to transcendence and creation; God must be temporally transcendent if He is to create the universe, for if He is within time then He must be infinitely extended within it. However, if God is infinitely extended within time then the Augustinian question of 'why did God choose to create the universe when he did?' arises, and in answering such a question we must be considering changes within God, which Bertocci (above) forbids. Alston (1989; 133) concludes that '...if we are to defend the classical doctrine of creation we must come to think of God as nontemporal'.
It seems that God must be transcendent of time, or at least He must possess an infinitely long present and be capable of creating the universe without changing in anyway. There are, however, reasons for believing that God must be within time and space, and to these we now turn our attention.
The argument from omniscience (presented in Taliaferro; 1998) is essentially that if God is outside of time and had knowledge of time it would be knowledge of time as a 'B-series' and as such He would have no knowledge of what moment is present, even though He would know what all events were and in what relation they stand to other events (before, simultaneous with, and after). He would know that the event at t1 happened before the events at t2 and t3, but He would not know that it is presently t1. Although God would know everything, He would not know when 'now' is, God must therefore be within time in order to preserve His omniscience.
However, this can be dismissed by relativising the present, i.e. if I occupy t1 then t1 is the present time, if I occupy t2 then t2 is the present time, and so on. God can thus know that for individual x at time t2 that t2 is present, t1 is past and t3 is future. He can also know that for individual y at time t3 that t3 is present, t2 is past and t4 is future.
'Now' is thus relegated to the same relative status as 'here'. Some would not allow this move; Gale (1968; 215) argues that although it makes sense to ask 'Where are you now?' and receive an answer of 'here', the same cannot be said of 'When are you now?'. To ask 'When are you now?' simply makes no sense. Now it does not seem that 'When are you now?' makes no sense, it just seems that it is entirely pointless to ask the question, just as if we shared our spatial location with Bob and asked 'Where are you now?'; we clearly know the answer; 'here'. That our temporal location has so far been determined and that we are always in the same present as other objects is why 'When are you now?' appears meaningless. Suppose we can travel through time, suddenly 'When are you now?' is not so meaningless as time-travelling Bob can reply 'now' meaningfully, if not informatively. If we allow the possibility of time-travel as we do spatial-travel then 'now' has as much significance as 'here' our current, fixed view of 'now' as privileged and granted is subjective and not the objective given that Gale assumes; 'now' is not necessarily now, 'now' could just as easily have been then, it is as subjective and relative as 'here' is.
Another argument that suggests that God is within time is the argument from simultaneity. Essentially the argument is a reductio ad absurdum; if we grant that God is transcendent then he must exist at all instants in history. Now if t1 is simultaneous with t2, and t2 with t3, then t1 is simultaneous with t3; simultaneity is a transitive relation between events/times. If God timelessly exists at all instants then the past event, e1, is existent simultaneously with God. A present event, e2, and a future event , e3, are similarly simultaneous with God's timeless existence. E1, e2 and e3 are thus simultaneous with each other and so the past, present and future are all co-occurent. As the past, present and future are not co-occurent God cannot be transcendent of time and must, therefore, exist within time.
If we are to refute this argument and allow God to be transcendent we must either reject the transitive nature of simultaneity, or else allow God special privileges that mean His simultaneous present with events is a different kind of simultaneity that is not transitive in nature. This is precisely what Stump and Kretzmann (1981; 443) do when they introduce eternal simultaneity, or ET-simultaneity. Past, present and future events can all be ET-simultaneous with God, but this simultaneity is not transitive and so the past, present and future remain distinct from one another. This train of thought will be picked up later in the essay.
One last argument as to why God must exist within time is the argument from causality; it is simply not possible to create temporal and spatial objects when one is outside of time and space. Taylor (1974; 107) claims that creation essentially means dependence and not, as is supposed here, creation in time or space. The relationship between creator and creation is thus one of dependence and not of cause and effect. Taylor also says:
It may seem strange that an essay considering transcendence and creation would admit of the possibility of the universe existing eternally and thus not having a point of creation, but this is precisely the direction in which this essay shall turn.
It seems that a temporally bound God is limited and less than perfect (Leftow; 1997) and that, even if God were to exist within time, he must be changeless (Bertocci; 1951). Alston (1989) claims that the creator must be nontemporal in order to avoid the Augustinian 'why create then and not at some other time?' yet if creation involved cause and effect, then surely God must be within time. There are also problems with the transitivity of simultaneity with a transcendent God.
Fortunately, we can present a view of transcendence and creation that meets all of these points. We have been assuming creation of the universe within the human-observable four dimensions; three of space and one of time. There is nothing to stop us positing as many dimensions as we like, indeed current string-theorists posit about eleven (Smolin; 2003). As contrary to Ockham's Razor as it may appear, we only need two more dimensions to explain the creation of the universe.
The fifth dimension is a spatial one, God exists in it, yet it is unknowable to humans; it transcends our understanding. The sixth dimension is a second temporal one and is similarly unknowable. God also transcends 'our' four dimensions. To clarify the metaphysical and epistemological status of these dimensions: God exists in the fifth and sixth dimensions and yet we know nothing of these domains, the universe exists in the first four and we only have knowledge of these dimensions.
Now, the problem of simultaneity dissolves. An event at time t1 in the first dimension of time can be simultaneous with God's existence in the second dimension of time, as can event t2. t1 and t2 are not simultaneous. This is really an explication of Stump and Kretzmann's (1981) ET-simultaneity. The transitive nature of simultaneous relations only holds within a dimension, not across dimensions. T1, in dimension (i), is simultaneous with God in dimension (ii) and t2, in dimension (i), is similarly simultaneous with God in (ii), yet t1 and t2 are not simultaneous in virtue of them being simultaneous with God in another dimension alone. The transitivity of simultaneity does not transcend dimensional boundaries.
God is also changeless, thus preserving His perfection. The Augustinian question of 'why create at time x and not at any other time?' is avoided if we assert that both the universe and God are eternal, as Taylor (1974) suggests. All six dimensions are eternal and the creative relation between God and the universe is a relation of dependence, not of cause and effect. That the universe is eternal is compatible with recent scientific thought. Steinhardt and Turok (2004) present a cyclical life for the universe in which a Big Bang occurs and the universe expands, gravity then pulls the universe back in again ending with a Big Crunch. Once the universe collapses into a Big Crunch it is followed immediately by another Big Bang and the process repeats ad infinitum. Here we have an eternal universe and an eternal God and so we have no need to ask the question 'how did God cause the universe to come into being?' as we cannot even ask 'when did God create the universe?'.
God's existence in other dimensions can explain many of the problems associated with a transcendent God and also avoid the difficulties presented to a temporal and spatial God. Leftow's (1997) concern that a temporally bound God is limited and less than perfect can be addressed if we allow that God exists in an everlasting present in the sixth dimension. As such, His life would not be divisible, either actually or potentially. If the structure of the sixth dimension was such that there was only a present moment then God's life would be whole. He can also enjoy an omniscient view of 'our' temporal dimension; viewing it as a B-series of events. God would also know what moment was present. Reality as viewed from the sixth dimension would mean that everything was present, yet the fragmented view of past, present and future viewed from our temporal dimension also exists and God would know, through his omniscience, that a certain time in our dimension is present for a certain person whereas another time is present for another individual. As such God exists in the sixth dimension yet has knowledge of our temporal fourth dimension, as well as the sixth, whereas we exist in the fourth and have epistemic access only to the fourth.
Although God's existence in an extra two dimensions can explain most, if not all of the problems presented in considering transcendence, there is one problem that is decidedly more problematic than the others. It remains to be seen whether or not God, in residence in two dimensions, can be in a causal relationship with the other four, distinct dimensions. As alluded to in footnote 10, the universe may have to exist in the extra two dimensions in order for God to have any causal powers over the other four; we just do not have epistemic access to these two extra dimensions. If we view a cube head on, it appears to us as a square despite it having a third dimension; depth. Also, if we cannot gain a change in perspective the cube will appear to us as a square and, as such, we will be unable to determine if it is a cube or a square. There is nothing incoherent with positing extra dimensions that are epistemically inaccessible.
A three-dimensional object can cause changes to a two-dimensional object, we can imagine a cube striking a straight line and causing it to bend. However, the dimension that is influenced is the dimension shared by both objects. God may thus have to share the same four dimensions that we exist in; in order to exert any causal power over them. It remains to be seen whether a God transcendent of these four dimensions can have any causal authority over them, although if we see the universe as dependent upon God rather than existing in a causal relationship then this problem does not arise. It depends on whether we wish to view Biblical stories of an interactive God as literal or metaphorical.
It must also be noted that finite objects can only affect other finite objects in the same, shared dimension, an infinite being such as God may well be perfectly capable of asserting Himself upon dimensions in which he transcends.
This essay has hopefully shown that we can have a view of a God, in which He transcends our space and time, yet exists in space and time qua space and time. God's transcendence is likely to be an epistemic transcendence rather than a metaphysical one and although the extra dimensions posited above may create more problems than they solve, it does seem as though progress can be made on the issues bought to light in the essay.