Ebbinghaus can be credited as one of the founders of modern psychology, he was the first psychologist to study memory experimentally and he showed that associative processes could be studied and measured in a laboratory, and henceforth lead the study of memory to a scientific, rather than philosophical path (Ebbinghaus, 1964). Sir Frederick Bartlett however states that remembering is not the re-excitation of dull fragmented traces as Ebbinghaus would suggest, but that it is an imaginative active reconstruction based on past reactions and experience, which are constantly developing (Bartlett, 1961) . Bartlett viewed memory as a semantic process whereby we store knowledge of the world, he developed the concept of a schema or knowledge structure, that captures the subject's knowledge and assumptions about the world (Baddeley, 1999) .
Several elements of Ebbinghaus's research were ahead of his time, firstly he abandoned the method of introspection and instead he created 'nonsense' syllables, constructed of a vowel between two consonants - to rid the data of meaning, which he considered a confounding factor. These he described as being relatively consistent with one another, 'uniformly unassociated' and virtually unlimited as a source of new combinations - to be memorised and tested in a laboratory. He tested the retention of this quantatively with statistical and mathematical models, and criticised the established laws of association (Ebbinghaus, 1964).
Ebbinghaus used himself as the only participant in all his experiments and he taught himself these nonsense syllables by reciting them aloud at a rapid rate, he then scored the number of recitations taken to learn each test, or to re-learn it after a delay had caused him to forget it. Ebbinghaus discovered the 'total time hypothesis' that the amount learned directly reflects the amount of time spent learning the data (Baddeley, 1982).
Ebbinghaus found that the rate of forgetting, unlike the linear relationship between learning and memory, was rapid at first, but gradually slows down and tails off. He was the first psychologist to systematically plot this 'forgetting curve' which he did this by learning lists of 13 syllables, which he repeated until his recall was perfect, he then retested himself after intervals of 20 minutes up to 31 days and from this he was able to estimate the amount of forgetting that had taken place (Baddeley, 1982). From his studies of memory Ebbinghaus made several further deductions, firstly that the longer the syllables are, the longer they take to learn, and that the quality of retention is greater when the number of repetitions of the data during the learning phase is increased (Ebbinghaus, 1964) .
Although this theory appears to have stood the test of time, as it has been applied to a wide range of materials and learning conditions, some subsequent research has show that forgetting does not always take the shape of a curve, particularly when the data has meaning (Gleitman, Fridlund, Reisberg, 2004). For example Bahrick carried out a series of studies (1984) to test Ebbinghaus's findings, whereby he found that the rate for forgetting names and faces was approximately linear rather than in a curve. Fleishman and Parker (1962) carried out a study testing continuous motor skills (riding a bike, driving a car), and found a dramatic absence of forgetting, he also found that forgetting can be minimised if the subject is given a warm up trial previous to the retention test. Therefore what can be concluded is that many real-life skills are a mixture of several types of skill and knowledge, and the rate at which these are retained and forgotten vary accordingly (Baddeley, 1999).
Ebbinghaus suggested that there are different ways in which we forget, 'normal' forgetting is concerned with trace decay (memory traces are eroded by the passage of time) and interference. There are two types of interference, proactive (prior to learning) or retroactive (later learning) interference, but either way it occurs when two sets of similar information competes with one another, causing one to be 'overwritten' or physically destroyed (Twining, 2001). Although alternative figures of forgetting have been proposed since, it is widely acknowledged that interference between memory traces is an important factor in the rate of forgetting, but whether this is because one is overwritten, or whether it is a question of competition between two traces is still unsolved (Baddeley, 1999).
Throughout Ebbinghaus deliberately avoided the natural complexity of memory in order to demonstrate that it could be studied objectively, hence he placed great importance upon the careful and controlled measurement of simple memory tasks. Advantages of this method are that it minimises the study of complex memory systems into manageable sizes. This was a crucial development for the empirical study of memory, and without this very little progress could have been made. However, the problems with such methods, are that we are leaving out important aspects of memory - meaning, which is arguably the very essence of human memory; and that the elements which are most relevant to everyday life are not likely to be our knowledge of our ability to memorise lists of nonsense syllables. Aside from these reasons, Bartlett points out that the studies of 'nonsense syllable learning' can only tell us about repetition habits and may not apply to more complex stimulus. He also states that the oversimplification of the stimuli by using 'nonsense' syllables, is pointless as it is impossible to rid stimuli of meaning, as long as it is possible for them to arouse a human response (Baddeley, 1982). Throughout Bartlett's experiments he tried to avoid the artificiality as he viewed it, of Ebbinghaus's nonsense syllables by using material which was normal, meaningful and interesting enough for the participants to not be reduced to using unusual methods of observation and recall. Bartlett's willingness to take the study of memory outside of the laboratory, and to study the effect of meaning in memory provided a less rigid alternative to Ebbinghaus (Bartlett, 1961) .
Bartlett proposed that subjects remember new material in terms of schemata, these are existing organised structures, that capture our knowledge and expectations of some aspect of the world based on our previous experiences and environment. He proposed that we have some basic biological schema drives such as food-seeking, sex, sleeping as well as various instincts (assertiveness, submissiveness and danger reactions). Then these basic schemas are supplemented by the individual's life experiences, this together with social conditions constitutes 'character'. The complexity of these schema formations means that objects/stimuli/reactions get organised into different 'schemes', so that when they recur, they offer a framework of knowledge and organising influence, which can be used as a guide to reaction (Bartlett, 1961) .
Bartlett viewed memory as an active process, a function he named 'effort after meaning'. He believed that we apply schemas to information, as this aids individuals to understand the meaning of the information (Baddeley, 1999). The information however, is interpreted along these schemata, regardless of whether they are consistent, therefore what is retained is a schematised version of the original material and this is used in an attempt to reconstruct the original - because of this our memory of events can be suspect (Gregg, 1986).
Bartlett explored 'effort after meaning' by presenting his subjects with unfamiliar items, for which they would have no relevant schemata, such as the North American folk tale 'the war of ghosts'. He found that participants attempted to rationalise the story and relate the elements of the stories to various aspects of their existent knowledge framework (Baddeley, 1999). This although helping the individual's recall to a certain extent, made it difficult to realise which elements were associations, or true parts of the story, and this is what produced the memory errors. So when recalling the story the participants omitted features that did not fit in with their prior expectations or schemas, and distorted other features. Bartlett concluded that people remembered accounts far better if they involved a well structured narrative story with a clear plot, rather than a strange jumbled account of a cricket match, because the data has meaning. Bartlett's studies have been replicated and extended, and they have similarly found in accord with Bartlett, that memory is strongly affected by an individual's conceptual framework (Gleitman,al. 2004).
Bartlett also assessed memory using visual tests as well as the abstract accounts mentioned above. In the visual tests he found that participants sometimes suffered conflict between what the image looked like and what they judged the image ought to resemble. Hence his findings from his studies of perception and recognition support his view that when a specific event occurs some trace is made and stored in the mind, later a stimulus can re-excite the trace, and hence the individual recall it (Bartlett, 1961).
However Bartlett's studies, as well as Ebbinghaus's are open to some criticism, some psychologists argue that 'the war of ghosts' is not a 'well-formed' story, as it includes a number of strange features and that there is a general lack of connections between the features. Some also state that the concept of schemas are too vague, however since Bartlett's studies, schemas have been redefined: as constructions embedded within one another, which are not mutually exclusive (e.g.: the schema of a face can be contained within the schema of a body), that they represent knowledge at all levels of abstraction, as well as experiences rather than definitions and abstract rules (Baddeley, 1999).
Bartlett's influence to the theorems of memory is a widespread one: it is generally accepted that a person's knowledge of the world and of his mental processes, plays an intimate part in learning and remembering - it is hence impossible to isolate cognition from the study of memory. Nevertheless, the methods introduced by Ebbinghaus, remain influential whenever an objective and empirical study of memory is employed. In fact Ebbinghaus's influence may be accredited that from time to time psychologists remind one another that you cannot 'decouple' memory from other mental functions (Gregg, 1986).