The Gamma ray is a high-energy form of electromagnetic radiation and often occurs as a product of radioactive decay. This experiment uses a radioactive source that emits these rays, and other pieces of equipment to study the various properties that gamma rays possess. To begin with, we obtain a spectrum of the radiation from this particular source to study its features and explain them scientifically. Secondly, we scatter the gamma rays upon electrons to examine a common property known as the Compton Effect, and then finally observe the effect of absorptive materials upon these rays.
Before any measurements could be taken it was necessary to calibrate the channels to correspond to energies to give the results meaning. The high voltage supply that powers the detector, must be set to 800V and switched on before any readings can be taken. We leave the detector to record a spectrum of the Caesium 137 () source (that should resemble Figure 5) and locate the photopeak. The monitor will display the live, real and dead time counters, and each 'count' will be recorded as a point on screen. We then place another radioactive source Americium 241 () in front of the detector and once again leave the detector to record these counts on top of the previous spectrum. It should be clear that there are now two photopeaks, one corresponding to 662keV of the Caesium, and the other 57.5keV that we are told is the energy of the Americium 241 source. By setting the software to 'calibrate' and determining, as accurately as possible, the corresponding channel for each photopeak we assign each channel a given energy to take measurements from in later sections.
This experiment proved well the statistical nature of radioactive decay, and Poisons statistics demonstrated that the error in a reading could be given by its square root and that results would improve in accuracy if left for longer and more data recorded. The spectrum obtained by the detector fitted well to theoretical predictions as did its features, and the characteristics of the detector were able to tell us limitations in the method so that we could account for them, e.g. with the absolute detector efficiency , energy resolution RE and photopeak efficiency .
Both the Compton energy and the Cross-section as a function of angle were in good agreement with theory within experimental error, but various aspects of geometry could be improved. The various measurements and corrections that needed to be made added a great deal of error into some values. Also, determining the photopeak and also the background radiation was always quite difficult due to the operation of the detector as explained in the primary sections, so a more efficient detector would always be beneficial. Finally, the attenuation coefficients were found successfully and also agreed well with data but needed many more evenly spread readings in order to confidently predict a relation with scattered energy, as four points could agree with a many theories. Overall, further and longer readings would help to confirm many of the results found here but this experiment was very useful in statistically verifying the various properties possessed by gamma rays.