2.) The TRIPS Agreement came into force on 1 st January 1995 and represents the most comprehensive international instrument on intellectual property rights (IPRs) and sets forth minimum standards to be applied by all WTO members. Intellectual property relates to creations of the human mind, which are protected by legal instruments such as copyrights and related rights, trademarks and related marks, trade secrets, industrial designs, patents and geographical indications. Global brands such as Microsoft and Apple are examples of how this form of property is of huge value to them, when it is protected by IPRs, since these ensure that the creator of a valuable piece of information enjoys exclusive rights to its use. However, since the protection afforded to brands such as these is not as extensive in the developing world, practices such as counterfeiting are rife and represent a significant leakage from these corporations' profits. Therefore, these corporations are less willing to supply their technology to developing nations and so theses nations cannot reap the benefits of new technologies. Therefore, greater protection of IPRs is certain to make corporations richer, but whether it will be detrimental to developing countries is a more complex question.
Economic theory suggests that increased protection of IPRs may stimulate economic development in developing countries in a number of ways. For example, firms are more likely to introduce costly yet efficient organisational structures when the risks of unfair competition and trademark infringement are small (Maskus, 2000, p.147 ). Also, entrepreneurship would be encouraged since creative ideas would be protected by IPRs. In terms of international transactions, developing countries would attract inflows of advanced technology which was previously withheld because of a weak IPR regime. This diffusion of technology would decrease firms' production costs and increase productivity in firms within developing countries. The sophistication of the technology would depend upon the exporter's view of the strength of the IPR regime within the developing country.
However, (Maskus, 2004, p.30) argues that other policies have to be considered too: 'It is important to recognise that strengthening the IPR system alone, while bearing some potential for expanding access to trade, FDI and technology, is liable to be of little value unless done in a coherent framework of broader policies...for example...liberalisation of commercial policies and pursuit of appropriate competition policies... education and training...fair contracts...joint ventures and mergers.'
Foreign direct investment, joint ventures and licensing contracts are other methods whereby technology can be transferred overseas. Maskus (2000, p.151) states that 'empirical work demonstrates that the strength of IPRs and the ability to enforce contracts have important effects on MNC decisions on where to invest and whether to transfer advanced technologies.' The secondary effects of MNC location could be massive for the wider community. Higher employment and wages as well as the introduction of minimum working standards and the spreading of knowledge and MNC organisational structures would be beneficial for those employed as well as the wider community (assuming MNCs do not abuse less stringent employment laws). There would also be increased contract certainty between enterprises and suppliers. Maskus, (ibid) states that 'enterprises would be willing to train workers because they would feel more pressure not to misappropriate trade secrets.' However, the likelihood of an MNC locating itself in a country without a basic level of infrastructure is unlikely, so middle and high income developing countries are more likely to benefit compared to the least developed nations. Thus, MNCs would help to stabilise the economy within which it locates, by increasing its productive potential, thereby creating economic growth and increased living standards: 'In general, developing economies with a good basis in skills, a competitive economy, good growth prospects, effective infrastructure and the like are more likely to see these [international technology transfer] flows increase.' (Maskus, 2004, p.40 )
On the other hand, countries with weak IPRs will not benefit from inflows of modern technologies and so they may try to develop their own technical knowledge. However, these countries only have a fraction of the capabilities of developed countries in R&D, so this problem is both costly and slow and contravenes the law of comparative advantage. The resultant technologies would lag behind international norms and there would be fewer spill-over benefits.
In countries with inflexible labour markets, unemployment would rise because stronger IPRs would create higher product prices thus decreasing demand, and there would be no alternative employment for the unemployed. Maskus, (2004, p.40) states that 'a large increase in prices could be seriously detrimental to the very least developing countries... The LDCs are likely to find relatively little expansion in inward technology flows for some time to come.' This would occur simultaneously to the LEDCs incurring the large costs of implementing the agreement itself: 'One primary implication of implementation and enforcement of the rules, disciplines and procedures called for in the TRIPs Agreement will be the direct costs of generating or improving administrative mechanisms.' (United Nations, 1996, p.19)
To conclude, the implementation of the TRIPS Agreement has affected different countries to varying degrees. It is difficult to assess the overall effect of TRIPS because there are multiple external factors, such as fluctuating oil prices and wars which have affected the economic development of countries over the last eleven years. That timeframe itself is also relatively short in order to make definite conclusions as to its success. Maskus (2004, p.29) concludes that 'among the more important factors [that determine technology flows] are the local investment climate, market competition, governance policies, openness, proximity to markets, human capital (engineering and management skills) and labour mobility... and the extent to which foreign governments choose to place into the public domain the results of publicly funded research.'
The TRIPS agreement does not appear to have taken into account the varying stages of development of the countries that it affects, thus only those that already had a reasonable level of IPR protection appear capable of benefiting from it. Since TRIPs inclusion to the GATT treaty in 1994 was the result of intense lobbying by the United States, supported by the European Union, Japan and other developed nations, it seems that it may have been borne out of desperation by rich countries who accounted their declining competitiveness to the losses from overseas piracy and counterfeiting activities. (Correa, 2000, p.4) 4
Critics of the TRIPS agreement would argue that the WTO's Council for Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights decision (following a decision reached by member governments on 29 November 2005) to allow least-developed countries an extension until 1 July 2013 (from 1 January 2006) to provide protection for trademarks, copyright, patents and other intellectual property under the WTO's agreement, illustrates how harsh the original timescales were and that the timing of the agreement was premature.