The objective of this assignment is to investigate the determinants of examination results. To do so, we are given data that contains observations on econometrics students' survey responses, across 3 years (2002-2004).
I plotted a scatter graph showing the relation between qtmark and hrsqt (Graph 1; appendix p1). From the graph, we can see that qtmark and hrsqt have a poitive relationship, with students doing better the more time spent on statistics. The variable, hrsqt shows a positive skew with students spending on average 3.6 hours a week on statistics. As it is a positive skew, most of the data lies on the left hand side of the graph (more students spend less hours on statistics).
I also plotted a scatter graph to analyse the relation between the qtmark and the proportion of classes attended (attc) (Graph 2; appendix p1). Graph shows that most students attend most of the classes as the most of the data is grouped on the right hand side of the graph. As the graph is only mildly upward sloping, the relationship between qtmark and attc is not very strong. From the correlation calculations, we find that the correlation is only 0.18, which shows that it is only slightly positively correlated.
From the correlation tables, we can see that the strongest correlation is between qtmark and attl, where the correlation of results and the proportion of lectures attended is strong and positive (0.3739). This reading should be somewhat expected as students who attend more lectures will naturally attain higher results during examinations. The strongest correlation is between attc and attr (0.74998). Such strong correlation between the two may be a sign of imperfect multicollinearity and should not be taken together when running regressions. This is because it becomes increasingly harder to identify their separate effects and one of the variables should be dropped.
(table 2.1, appendix p2)
The C value in table 2.1, 64.73999 shows the average mark in first year statistics exam (percent) obtained by students when ATTR (proportion of revision lectures attended) is zero.
The coefficient of ATTR, b = 0.002263%. This is means that there is a 0.002263% increase in the mark obtained for every 1% proportion of revision lectures attended.
The t-statistic of the coefficient of ATTR is, t(b) = 0.0129684
Probability of observing a t-statistic as big as the one observed (0.129684) under the null hypothesis H 0:
(table 2.2; appendix p2)
The coefficient of attr, 0.105949 shows that the average mark will increase by 0.105949% with every 1% point increase in proportion of revision lectures attended (compared to 0.002 in the bivariate model). From the data we also obtain the coefficients for abilty and hrsqt. The coefficient for ability shows that qtmark will increase by 0.849900% with 1 unit increase in ability. While for hrsqt, qtmark will increase by 0.417658% with a 1 unit increase in the average hours spent per week working on statistics during the year. The t-Stat for attr in this model is  5.356408(> 1.96) and therefore, we reject the null hypothesis, H 0:  = 0, as compared to the t-Statistic in table 2.1 where we are not able to reject the null hypothesis. This shows that the attr coefficient in the multivariate regression model is now significant, having the additional variables, ability and hrsqt.
At 5% significance level, critical value = 1.96
(table 2.3; appendix p3)
I have ran a regression based on hrsqt divided into three subsamples, between 0 and 3 hours a week (hrsqt2), between 3 and 6 hours a week (hrsqt3) and more than 6 hours a week (hrsqt4), taking hrsqt4 as the default. By observation, we can see that hrsqt2 and hrsqt3 are both negative numbers and as hrsqt3 (-2.13) is less than hrsqt2 (-1.82), we know that it is downward sloping. However, hrsqt4 is zero as it is a default and will cause the line to move upwards from -2.13. This is evidence of nonlinearity
(table 3; appendix p3)
Coefficient of year2002, -5.203399 is the proportionate change in marks (all else constant) for student in year 2002 relative to student in year 2004.
Coefficient of year2003, -7.195910 is the proportionate change in marks (all else constant) for student in year 2003 relative to student in year 2004.
(table 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4; appendix p4, 5)
Test of coefficient constancy across the three subsamples
Restricted model:
Unrestricted model:
Where,
d = 8 (no. of equality signs)
Therefore,
Where , Therefore, we reject the null and this shows that there is structural inconsistency and that it is better to split samples into subsamples than to estimate observations together.
Null hypothesis that the slope coefficients in the model in question4 are constant across the three regression equations
However, as we are testing that the slope coefficients in this model are constant, we use the regression ran on the two dummy variables 2002 and 2003 (Question 3)
At this stage of the work, we have collected some important statistical information about the relationship between the dependent variable, qtmark, and its hypothetical determinants, the independent variables. To do so, I have created several models for varying independent variables and sometimes even adding dummy variables to identify significance levels. The previous results will facilitate the next task that is to try and create a model which includes the independent variables that have a strong influence on exam performance. To formulate such a model, all the independent variables included will have to be strongly significant, not only independently but also jointly. We should also take into account the value of the coefficient of determination (R2), as it gives us an idea of how much the performance (percentage) is explained by that model.
We have looked at a number of variables and they include attr, ability, hrsqt, attc and alevelsa. From previous questions, I have learnt that attr is a significant variable to qtmark. Thereby, at this point, the explanatory variable that my model shall definitely include is attr. The high correlation (0.37) observed between ability and qtmark could be a sufficient reason for also including ability into the model. This sufficient reason to include it as well in the model is reinforced by the conclusions of the experiment made by Romer about whether students should attend classes. I went on and analysed the variables, attc and alevelsa in question 3 and found out that they are both significant as we are able to reject the null (t-statistic that is greater than 1.96 with a probability equal to zero). Since attc is higher than alevelsa, I have decided to include it in my model. I am now left now with alevelsa and hrsqt. Since it is not straightforward whether to include them in the model as well, my first tentative best model, let's call it model A, is one including, ability, attr, and attc.
I then ran a regression on variables, ability, attr, attc, alevelsa and hrsqt. As table 6.1 (appendix p7) shows, the t-prob of variables are very close to zero (if not zero), except for hrsqt where it is 0.0325. We then reject the null hypothesis for each of the variables ability, attc, attr and alevelsa at 1% level of significance, as well as the null for hrsqt at 5% significance level. The t-prob of the f-test is also zero meaning that we also reject the null hypothesis of joint significance. All the independent variables within the model are statistically significant, and thus it could be a potential best model. My second best guess of the best model, model B is then:
Having data for some relevant dummy variables which might influence performance, the next step would be to include a dummy variable in the model above and see whether it affects the model. The dummy I chose to add is uk. With the exchange rate of the pound high, not many international students are able to afford studying here in the UK and therefore, most of them are scholarship holders, sponsored by their home government and private companies. Consequently, we can expect to see international students performing better than local students as international students are probably top students in their country, chosen to study abroad. My third best guess of the best model, model C is then:
From table 6.2 (appendix p7), we observe that the t-prob values of each variable including the dummy in this new regression (table 6.2), all the previous independent variables tested in model A, are still significant (0<=t-prob<=5%) and the null of insignificance for the dummy variable is also rejected at a 5% significance level. Again, the t-prob of zero in the F-test suggests we reject the null of joint significance. By looking at R 2 values for both models, we may say that model in which I added the uk dummy variable (model B) is a better one: while the independent variables in model A explains about 27% of the variation in performance, the independent variables in model B explains about 28% of the variation in performance, that is an increase of around 1.4%
To increasingly improve model C, we could think about other variables that may also affect the outcome of exam performance. As Romer's experiment suggested a higher quality of instruction may encourage students to attend more classes and by doing that, increasing their chances to improve exam performance. Such a variable could be treated as a dummy: it would take the value 1 for good quality of instruction and zero otherwise, where a good quality instruction is one that successfully gets students to attend classes.