When we are asked to design a new system it is useful to ask ourselves questions to aid analysis. With these questions in mind, we can then start to write down a specification for what we want from a system. These questions are the first stage in the design technique and come before any research or specification. They are part of the analysis of the problem.
The questions I asked myself first of all for the analysis of a design for a National Air Traffic Control System were concocted from initial thought without looking at how the analysis might break down to further distance the questions from each other and not create answers or part-answers that exist in more than one question. These questions are:
What is the Hardware?
What is the current system like?
Who is going to use it?
When do they want the system for?
Are there any other systems we need to communicate with?
Coming up with these five questions off the top of my head takes less than 10 minutes. However, though they look different at first glance, once you try to break the question up you find that the sub-questions crossover each other or one question can be put into another. For example, question 1 can be placed as a sub-question of 2 because it is not general enough.
Before looking at the methods for isolating the questions by brainstorming the problem, to make comparisons between the earlier and later questions more possible, here are the final questions which will be used to analyse and research:
How is the new system going to be introduced?
What other systems does it need to talk to?
What's the old system like?
What longevity does the system need?
What cost factors are involved?
The best way to go about creating a set of key questions like this is to create a spider diagram, with the task at the centre and the key points you are trying to look at in the analysis, branched off around it. With relevant ideas to look at in these key points branched off around them. However, because I don't know what they key points are, it is impossible to create a spider diagram this way. Instead, we can use a bottom-up approach to the diagram, where we create a lengthily list of specific points to look at, and then categorise these into groups. I decided the best way to split the points was into groups of:
The money group gives some examples of the points which all go into this group but not any others. Some groups may have very few points at all: WHY? is a point which has been made into a group on its own because it is so important, can't fir in any existing groups; and can't really have points attached because it it so selfexplanatory.
With the points in groups we could now hopefully create a list of questions (given earlier) relating to those groups, whose answers will hopefully cover the points in the respective group. We can now compare the questions (6-10) and see that because of this grouping of points and backwards though processes involved in selecting groups, no two questions are related. Also there is more breadth to the questions. For example, questions 8 and 9 may cross paths talking about the lifespan of a system, but can't give answers that can have similar points. Compare this to questions 1, 2 and 4, which can all talk about hardware. i.e. question 2 could easily go into the hardware of the current system, and question 4 could say what hardware the company my need/has purchased to run the new system on. Both leave question 1 obsolete.
The best way to go about creating initial designs of solutions to a problem is to look at 'synetics'. This strips the problem down into different analogies that we can work with. For extracting work from a compressed non-combustible gas, we can split synetics into the following categories and create words that work with these analogies:
With these key words in mind, I can now take one of them to create an initial sketch for an idea and use other words from the list also to develop the idea.
The user requires the engine to act as a means of turning a shaft, which will be attached to the workings of the device. The engine must be able to produce sufficient torque to operate the device in such a manner that the speed of rotation of the shaft does not decrease notably at normal r.p.m. when the device is loaded. Because the device is portable, the engine must reflect this requirement and not be substantially heavier than about 7kg and must have the same moment as the front of the device if resting on someone's shoulder at a shoulder support. The engine should not have more that 3 times the diameter of the device to make sure it does not stand out as an eyesore to the rest of the device or be bulky. The engine should be able to operate in any orientation and not be sensitive to shock or vibration, which it will endure, in daily use. The engine should not leak any dangerous materials or fluids and be free from corrosion in the environment in which it is used. The engine must be easy to start and run. To allow for different circumstances of use, the r.p.m. of the engine must be adjustable by the user and an idle mode should be incorporated to allow the engine to run at a slow speed between uses or short carrying journeys. This may incorporate a centrifugal clutch to stop the device operating at low engine speed. The clutch will help prevent stalling, as the load on the engine remains too great for the decreasing torque caused by reduced r.p.m.
Fuel is supplied to the engine from a fuel tank connected to a carburettor. This mixes the fuel with air by carburetion. This new air/fuel mixture can then be taken directly into the engine. Inside the engine we have a crankshaft, which is actuated by a piston connected to the crank by a connecting rod (conrod). The piston is moved down under pressure when the fuel/air mixture ignites using a two-stroke engine cycle:
At the start of the cycle, exhaust gases escape via the exhaust port as the piston moves upwards. At the same time, the air/petrol/oil mixture in the crankcase that was compressed by the piston moving downwards enters the combustion chamber. As the piston reaches the top of the combustion chamber, both the intake and exhaust ports are closed and the mixture is compressed. Just before the piton reaches the top of the chamber, the magneto lets out a high voltage pulse, which causes a spark between the electrodes on the spark plug, which ignites the fuel. As soon as the air intake is closed, the crankcase becomes decompressed and so more fuel mixture is sucked into the combustion chamber by opening the reed valve.
When the fuel has been ignited, it forces the piston down and lets the exhaust gasses out of the exhaust port and the cycle begins all over again.
For a more detailed look at the engine, I will look at the carburettor. A carburettor mixes the air and fuel into an emulsified form, which can then be sucked into the combustion chamber. Its basic form comprises a tube with a narrow passage known as the choke tube (or venturi), which contains a jet through which fuel can flow. As the engine sucks in mixture, it draws air through the carburettor and venturi. As the air is sucked in, it increases velocity inside the choke tube. A situation then occurs where air cannot get through the venturi in the same quantity as it can the rest of the carburettor/inlet manifold. This decreases pressure in the venturi; thereby fuel is sucked in as the pressure is lower than that at the other end of the fuel-line. The fuel is sprayed into the venturi through a jet in a fine mist. This mist evaporates into the air. Just after the choke tube is a butterfly valve (throttle) which can be varied between opened and shut to regulate the pressure (i.e. amount) of fuel/air mixture allowed into the combustion chamber to make the engine run faster (more mixture can be burned: bigger explosion), or slower. Similarly, just before the choke tube is another butterfly valve called the choke tube. This again can be manually opened and closed to allow more or less air through. As you close the valve, pressure in the choke tube decreases even further at the set throttle, and so more fuel is added to the air to enrich the mixture. This is particularly desirable when the engine is cold, as you don't get such a lean burn. The component is made from metal - probable stainless steel or a light alloy to prevent corrosion externally in damp conditions. Because of the nature of the fuel used, there will be little internal corrosion. The surface will have to be made as smooth as possible to limit the effect of friction between the mixture and the carb. tube, which could make the fuel condense. This is particularly true with regards to the butterfly valves, which look to be made of brass to limit this effect further. The carburettor was probably case by pouring molten metal into a die and leaving it to cool and set hard. The product was probably then taken out of the die and any sand (dependant on material) from the fuel/airways removed by air blasting. The components that make up the butterfly valve were made separately. Indeed the pivot shaft for the butterflies may have been extruded from molten metal. There would had been several carburettor bodies done in one casting to save energy cost and time. The whole thing would then be assembles on a production line on a continuous or mass scale. To estimate air pressures and speeds in the carburettor tube and the choke tube, one might look at how quickly the cylinder is drawing in air and relate this to the diameters of the tubes to see how much air will be drawn in. Similarly when the choke is closed we can see how much air could get in compared to the rate of the cylinder drawing air to calculate the vacuum in the choke tube.
There are 3 faces which interact with other components. Just before the choke the face is machines flat to connect to an air filter by 4 bolts taken through holes in the unit. Another face has a lipped edge to accommodate a fuel hose with a rubber dome. This dome can be pressed to push extra fuel into the choke tube, thereby increasing fuel/air mixture. Commonly called a tickler. The face opposite the choke end is machined flat to be attached to the inlet ports on the engine via bolts located through holes on the face. A gasket between the two faces ensures an airtight fit. The carburettors are not susceptible to much wear, only where the spindles of the butterflies rub against the bores in the carburettor. This may be minimised using lubricant.
The diagram shows a view of a simple carburettor as on the one I examined. Only major difference in the lack of float chamber to control fuel pressure as it would not work in all orientations.
These pictures are not of the same, but nonetheless very similar carburettor to the one I looked at: