First of all divisions had always been present in Black politics and they did not just suddenly emerge in the 1960's, they did however became more pronounced and much wider during this decade. This essay shall examine some of the main causes of divisions within black politics and shall look at the consequences that these divisions had on black politics in the 1960's.
Since the 1950's black politics had begun to gain more momentum and strength in the face of white supremacists and despite segregation. With the emergence of Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King as the leader of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, black politics started progressing in leaps and bounds. By the beginning of the 1960's King had become the personification of the Civil Rights Movement for many blacks, and whites. However it was also at the beginning of the 1960's that another black man had begun his rise to prominence within the black ghettos of the North; Malcolm X was soon to be recognized as King's biggest political opponent.
King and Malcolm have often been marked out as the biggest division in black politics, but this essay shall study the other divisions that emerged in the 1960's as well. Nevertheless the divide between King and Malcolm cannot be ignored. The divide stemmed mainly from a disparity in their ideologies. King was from a black middle class family in the south; his father was a prominent force in campaigning for black rights and the Reverend at the Ebenezer Baptist Church. Martin received a full education, including university, and at nineteen was ordained. This middle class background was common to many black political leaders, though not all of them made it public knowledge. In contrast Malcolm had been raised in absolute poverty in the north. He had lost both parents by age twelve, and lived in foster care before moving to Boston to live with a half-sister. By this time Malcolm's resentment of the white man had begun to grow and he loved the black ghettoes of Roxbury and Harlem. Malcolm was a hustler, drug pusher and user, as well as the leader of a burglary gang before ending up in prison at the age of 21. It was during this time in prison that Malcolm converted to Islam, which he saw as 'the natural religion for the black man'. It was this conversion to the Nation of Islam that was to set Malcolm on the path towards a place in black politics.
First and utmost King was a dedicated Christian, a fact that some think King placed after his commitment to Civil Rights, though in reality they were wholly joined together. King believed whole heartedly in integration and in the 'American Dream'. King believed in justice and love, with, as James H. Cone identifies, justice as his starting point, King wanted to tell the Negro to have "the moral courage to stand up for their rights". The Montgomery bus boycott opened King's eyes to the national problem of racism and eventually the global problem, so his ideas on love and justice began to evolve. Love symbolized integration and justice desegregation. Love was also the foundation of King's philosophy of nonviolence. Eventually King and the SCLC were set 'to redeem the soul of America'. King's ideals developed continuously throughout his life but he had some basic principles to which he adhered to and which became groundwork of his future. His most publicized belief was nonviolence and nothing was more important to King, politically or religiously, than nonviolence, but he also held other fundamental values. He believed that Negroes must "maintain a continuing sense of dignity and self respect", King wanted Negroes not to see in black and white but in the essence of equality, in that everyone is a human being, and an American citizen, despite color. King also placed great emphasize on hard work and the philosophy that "God helps those who help themselves", he also connected this idea with the need for strong leadership in the Negro community. Finally this was entwined with King's desire that Negroes uphold and improve their moral standards.
Malcolm X came to represent the utter opposite of Martin Luther King, but in some ways the two men were similar. Like King, Malcolm was deeply religious; he was just Muslim not Christian. After his release from prison Malcolm's reputation within the Nation of Islam grew and the Prophet Elijah Muhammad became like a father figure to him. The two founding principles on which the Nation of Islam was based were a reaffirmation of black history and culture, and the rejection of the white man and his values. Before his break with Elijah Muhammad in 1964, Malcolm became the main spokesman for Elijah and he was often described as the 'number two man' within the group. In complete contrast to King's theory on integration, Malcolm wanted segregation. Malcolm believed that for blacks to gain a total feeling of self respect they must separate themselves from the white man. Like King, Malcolm believed that blacks needed to gain more respect for themselves but he thought this was possible without whites. The black population of America needed to get back in touch with it's roots and embrace their 'blackness', hence the symbolic name X, which stood for Malcolm's African name that he would never know. After his break with Muhammad, Malcolm's ideas evolved and his focus was more political than religious, but he always held very strong views, most of which clashed with King's.
So by 1964 there was one major division in the Civil Rights Movement, between those that followed King and those who followed Malcolm X. It is important to remember that while the Civil Rights Movement had never been entirely united before, this divide between two of the most well known black men in America, was of huge significance. The media were able to portray Malcolm X as a 'racist demagogue' and King as 'the white man's choice for the black man'. Both men held a great influence over blacks in America but were unable to find a common ground to hold them together and fuse two very different ideologies into one, united philosophy. Other organizations like SNCC and CORE were also divided over the best route to follow and after the assassination of Malcolm X more divisions within the Civil Rights Movement began to emerge.
One of the main threats to the Civil Rights Movement came from the idea and rise of 'Black Power' from 1966 onwards. The phrase was originally coined by Stockley Carmichael at a rally in Mississippi, but it spread rapidly and had many connotations. King and other Civil Rights leaders realized that as the new Chairman of SNCC, Carmichael had made an unfortunate choice of words, and Black Power could only mean trouble. For most whites, Black Power simply meant black supremacy, even though Carmichael and Rick tried to say this wasn't the case, 'Black Power is not Black supremacy; it is a united Black voice reflecting racial pride in the tradition of our heterogeneous nation'. King liked the idea of blacks gaining more self respect and pride but the phrase 'Black Power' seemed to promote militant nationalists as it was too ambiguous in its meaning. The Old Guard integrationists immediately rallied together to denounce Black Power, Wilkins of the NAACP said that 'No matter how endlessly they try to explain it, the term "black power" means anti-white power'. Black Power led to the final separation of the left and right wings of the Civil Rights movement.
Indeed SNCC and CORE had never been further from King and the Old Guard. The distance between the different groups of the desegregation movement had been growing larger for a while and the rise of Black Power really wedged them apart. CORE had moved from its early integrationist policies to black nationalistic ideologies, where it no longer believed in integration or allowing white supporters in the organization. The withdrawal of white liberal support also occurred in SNCC and the public image of both organizations changed rapidly. The media portrayed the leaders and members of SNCC and CORE as racist demons inciting violence and riots among the black youth. SNCC was becoming increasingly radical as it made a sharp turn towards nationalism, which was epitomized by the creation of a separate political party. Carmichael led the newly formed Lowndes County Freedom Organization, more commonly known as the Black Panthers. The Black Panthers came to symbolize dangerous and militant black nationalists, not just in the eyes of whites but also in the eyes of many blacks. The Old Guard also disapproved of CORE and SNCC new resolutions on self defense, as the Old Guard had always remained convicted to a policy of nonviolence.
During the late 1960's Black Power seemed to mean whatever was convenient for the person promoting it, even Nixon rode on the popularity of Black Power. Over time Black Power became increasingly connected to socialism, leading to the emergence of a new ideology for young blacks and a development in King's own theology, which led to more splits within the Civil Rights Movement. King refused to condemn the phrase 'Black Power' and instead tried to make it more positive instead of the nationalistic rhetoric that many people saw it as. King's stance on this issue caused tension between himself and other leaders in the Old Guard, like Wilkins, Young and Randolph. James H. Cone believes that it was around this time that King had become disenchanted with whites and more receptive to separatism, and as King's speeches indicate his philosophy was evolving. The war in Vietnam really highlighted and confirmed King's new ideas.
King and the SCLC had originally tried to avoid the issuing of commenting directly about the war; even though King disapproved he was encouraged not to say anything either way. Support for the Johnson Administration was high and SCLC did not wish to alienate its white, liberal allies. King decide to take a firm stand on Vietnam early in 1967 after completing his book (Where Do We Go From Here: Chaos or Community? ), "never again will I be silent on an issue that is destroying the soul of our nation". The war in Vietnam became the focus for many of Martin's speeches in his last year, and he linked war with the poverty and racism in America. The war in Vietnam really marked the final change in King's ideology and highlighted divisions among King's supporters. SCLC and NAACP were both worried that King's criticisms of the war would alienate the federal government and white financial supporters. The NAACP and the Urban League viewed the war as an opportunity to get in with the Johnson Administration, whereas SNCC denounced the war as early as January 1966. Eventually, due to mounting pressure, SCLC came out officially against the war. King had decided that in order for America to progress internally the war in Vietnam had to end and this spurred him into action. King began to make anti-war speeches and take part in the anti-war marches that were being organized. This led to Civil Rights leaders arguing more between themselves, those like Rustin and the NAACP took a pro-Johnson stance whereas Bevel and Wachtel sided with King.
Black Power and the Vietnam War really exposed the disunity not just within the Civil Rights Movement but also within the Civil Rights groups themselves. By the end of 1966 SCLC's leaders and staff were tired and demoralized. Bevel left SCLC to devote himself to the anti-war movement and, after the departure of several other executive staff, SCLC was beginning to flounder. Other organizations like SNCC and CORE were also beginning to die. Black Nationalism and rioting and increased white repression coupled with the failure of the Johnson Administration and the Vietnam War was taking its toll on all factions in the Civil Rights Movement. By the spring of 1957 SCLC was immobilized by organizational and financial problems. SCLC's influence in the north was still weak and many leaders felt that King was too preoccupied with the war and not focusing enough on the Civil Rights Movement. The 1960's had seen the Civil Rights Movement divide quicker and stronger than ever before. King and Malcolm X marked the first big division that would lead to many other divisions in the following years up until the death of King and the eventual disbandment of the Civil Rights Movement.