Many historians and Che Guevara himself have recognized that there were two stages to the Cuban revolution; the insurrectionary stage and the post insurrectionary stage. The first phase was armed action lasting to 1 st January 1959; and after that the political, economic and social transformation of Cuba comprised the second stage. This essay shall assess and evaluate the first stage. There are two ways to begin an assessment of Che Guevara's contribution to the insurrectionary phase of the Cuban Revolution; the first is by studying what Che actually did during the insurrectionary phase of revolution and what he accomplished, in other words was he a success? The second approach is to examine what Che meant to Cuba and the revolutionary forces during the insurrectionary phase. Through these two approaches an evaluation shall be made of Che Guevara's contribution to the insurrectionary phase of the Cuban revolution. The main area of concern when discussing Che Guevara is problem of objectivity and impartiality, and a fair conclusion has tried to be drawn from the evidence collected.
The historian Richard Harris once wrote 'revolutionaries are not born, they are made', this statement has never been truer than with the revolutionary Che Guevara. As a child and teenager Ernesto Guevara never appeared to be the man he would later become. He was plagued by asthma his whole life, though as many historians and biographers agree this could account for Ernesto's strong desire to prove himself as capable as his peers. He competed in football and rugby and has always been described as an 'adventurer'. Still despite this daring and competitive character Ernesto never had any strong political beliefs till much later in his life, though his sense of the injustices of the world began to develop much earlier. Ernesto became fascinated by injustice when he took his now infamous trip around Latin America on a motorbike with Alberto Granados, in 1952. This trip opened his eyes to the fate of many Latin Americans and marked his first step into the revolutionary world.
Ernesto traveled extensively round Latin America after completing his medical degree in 1953 and his political ideas developed rapidly during this time, especially after he reached Guatemala. He supported the new President Jacobo Arbenz when the government expropriated land belonging to feudal estates and the United Fruit Company to give to the Guatemalan peasants; he also supported the government treatment of the indigenous peoples, though at this time he was still not Communist. It was the CIA sponsored invasion of Guatemala that pushed Che into his belief in armed resistance. As the invasion force pushed into the capital Che tried to persuade arms to be given to the masses to support 'their revolution' but this failed and Che got his first glimpse of 'Yankee Imperialism' and its power over Latin America. Due to his support of the government Che was now a wanted man whose convictions and beliefs were growing stronger by the day. He was soon forced to flee and he arrived in Mexico in 1954. Che's arrival in Mexico would be were his real career as a revolutionary began.
Che's meeting with Castro in Mexico launched Che into the world of a revolutionary and a guerilla. His political beliefs were now firmly entrenched in his mind and he would often espouse them with a complete and utter honesty that horrified Fidel. During their time in Mexican jail, Fidel would passionately deny his Communist affiliations, while Che couldn't compromise his beliefs by denying them. Che's ability as a guerilla soon became apparent; at the completion of training his instructor Colonel Bayo singled Che out as having 'excellent discipline, excellent leadership abilities, and physical endurance excellent'. Che was given responsibility of training recruits at Fidel's ranch, which was purchased specifically for purpose of guerilla training. It was during this training period in Mexico that Ernesto was given the nickname 'Che' as an affectionate reference to the fact he was Argentinean. Over time Che was given more and more responsibility by Fidel as his abilities were recognized 'Che had that quality of personal magnetism that attracts and inspires the loyalty and devotion of others'. It can be argued even now that Che's strict ideas on guerilla training and warfare had already helped Fidel's revolutionary force, but Che's real potential was seen after the landing in Cuba.
Fidel's planned invasion was a disaster in which Che was actually wounded twice, though this has only added to the myth surrounding him. Fidel and his remaining revolutionary force retreated to the mountains and Che's real contribution to the Cuban revolution began. Che was promoted through the guerillas till he reached the highest position available, that of comandante, he possessed boldness, determination and a strict sense of discipline that was crucial in the continuation of Fidel's guerilla warfare. When in 1957 Che was given command of his own unit he soon proved he was worthy of the task, his forces soon controlled much of the Sierra Maestra, and the guerrillas had managed to defeat Batista's best efforts to dislodge and destroy them. It was during this period of guerilla warfare that Che wrote his most well known book 'Guerrilla Warfare' which was published in 1959. This book is now required reading for any up and coming revolutionary.
It has to be argued that if were not for Che would Fidel have succeeded in his guerrilla war? Che's forces were involved in the most crucial part of the insurrectionary phase of the revolution, the battle fought in Santa Clara in December 1958. Che arrived in the city as the head of his guerrillas plus the students and peasants that had joined his convoy along the way. Che and his rebels managed to capture a government train filled with 400 reinforcements for the army. The train was surrounded and derailed and the troops forced to surrender, causing the troops already defending the city to dissolve into panic. Without this decisive action on the part of Che Guevara the battle in Santa Clara could have been lost and the guerrilla forces under Che could have been destroyed.
On the 1 st January 1959 it was confirmed that Batista had fled and Fidel and his guerillas had won their battle to liberate Cuba, the insurrectionary phase of the Cuban revolution was over. So the first part of the Che's contribution to the Cuban revolution can be drawn to a close and the question of whether he was a success can now be answered. Che Guevara's participation in the Cuban revolution contributed directly to its success. The Che shown above is the 'insurrectionary theorist, strategist and tactician', who went on to utilize his skills in other revolutions. Is it possible that without Che, Fidel would have simply been the leader of another failed rebellion in a struggling Latin American country? It is possible. Without Che who would Fidel had appointed as a comandante? Would Fidel have been able to find another man as completely loyal and devoted to him as Che? When the triumphant Fidel rode into Havana on January 8th his brother Raul was on his right and Che Guevara was on his left, thus symbolizing the high regard that Fidel had for his compaero.
Che contributed an enormous amount to the revolution, but it wasn't all about what he did, there was also another side to Che that contributed to the insurrectionary phase of the revolution. There is 'Che the guerrilla hero, the martyr and myth'. Even if it can be argued that Che's legend didn't really become global till after his death, during the insurrectionary stage of revolution the myth surrounding Che had already begun to grow.
Che lived in the true revolutionary way 'todo o nada', 'all or nothing'. The fact that Che has become such a martyr his that he wasn't afraid to die for his beliefs 'In the arduous profession of the revolutionary death is a frequent occurrence'. Che's personal ideas on what a revolutionary was continue to add fuel to the legendry fire engulfing his name. Che was a prolific writer and his diaries and essays have provided future revolutionaries with guidelines, instructions and beliefs on how to become the 'twenty first century man'. Che's idea of this new man was a theory quite closely related to his ideas on guerilla warfare; he believed there would be a new generation of men who would be willing to sacrifice themselves for the good of Latin America; through armed struggle. Che's essay on 'Socialism and Man in Cuba' truly expresses Che's deep belief in his ideas, 'There is no life outside the revolution. In these conditions the revolutionary leaders must have a large dose of humanity, a large dose of a sense of justice and truth'.
Ernesto 'Che' Guevara quickly moved from being just a revolutionary to becoming a symbol for revolutionaries, a process that accelerated after his sudden and suspicious death. So what did he mean for the Cuban Revolution? His constant literary and oratorical attacks against US imperialism showed how important the future of Cuba was to him and how important the future of Latin America was. Che firmly believed that "Yankee Imperialism' was responsible for many of the problems faced by Latin America and other third world countries; he also believed that armed struggle was the only way to combat this growing threat. Che's personal characteristics are also crucial to his myth and why he meant so much to Cubans. When Che was proclaimed by Fidel to be 'a Cuban by birth' the people were able to see for themselves how much Che meant to their leader and how much he had contributed to a revolution in a country that wasn't his own. Che's capacity for personal sacrifice and the way he stayed true to his all his beliefs endeared him to the people as a real hero; someone who would fight against the injustices in the world no matter where these injustices were present. 'Che's exceptional devotion to the realization of his ideals was truly heroic'.
Even if Che's political beliefs, morals and ideals are not in accordance with your own it is hard to deny the impact that he had as a revolutionary and a symbol. Ernesto 'Che' Guevara made a huge and heroic contribution to the Cuban Revolution, both through his actions and his meanings. He was a true revolutionary. He never compromised his ideals; he was loyal to the end; he committed himself wholly and truly to his cause. Che was also distinct from other revolutionaries by his lack of desire to advance politically; he was loyal to Fidel even if they disagreed later in their lives. Che Guevara emerged as a hero of the insurrectionary phase of the Cuban revolution and it he will now remain a hero for many years to come. 'His life was the personification of revolutionary idealism and practice, and his historic struggle continues to be an inspiration to those who fight against social injustice and oppression throughout the Third World'.