In 1963 Martin Luther King declared his dream of a racially integrated, non-discriminatory, American society. Some historians may argue that three centuries before, this ideal had been a reality; others may argue that this dream never was and never will be. This essay will discuss and examine the origins of racism and slavery in colonial America and shall attempt to determine which came first in this imperative historical debate. 'Perhaps no single institution has shaped the character of American history as much as slavery and no single feature of thought has been as important as white racism.'
It is important to remember that Africans were not the first peoples in America to be enslaved; the Native Americans became the first servants or slaves used by the colonists. Many problems occurred with the use of Native American slaves or servants. The colonists found them poor workers and unsuited to the lifestyle, also diseases brought over by Europeans made the Natives, weak and many died. For this reason white indentured servants were sent over from Europe to replace the Native workers.
In the early 17 th century the number of white indentured servants immigrating to the colonies had begun to decrease. Political and civil disturbances in England between 1640 and 1740 augmented the supply of white servants. The colonies had been trying to encourage immigration for some time before Africans began to arrive. However many problems arose with the indentured servants. Indentured servants could only be kept in employment for a limited amount of time, which was normally about four to five years. After this period of employment was over, the workers were meant to receive a small plot of land to farm. The main difference between the white and black servants was that the white servants had rights and were accepted by society, these were the two key reasons as to why slavery was to become a more popular option than white labor.
The first Africans arrived in Virginia in 1619, but did they come as slaves or indentured servants? It is commonly believed by historians that the first 20 Africans in America came as indentured servants, like the white servants. An important aspect of this essay shall be to determine how or if the word Negroe became synonymous with the word slave?
On one side of the argument are historians of the Progressive and Marxist strains. They believe that slavery in colonial America developed because of important economic factors, and that racism was a result of slavery. However, in opposition to this argument are the historians who believe 'Blacks had been the subjects of discrimination and demeaning treatment from the outset and slavery then became another manifestation of race prejudice." I shall scrutinize both points of view and establish my own opinion in answer to the question.
The former of these two points stresses how slavery developed because of important economic factors and not because of racist attitudes. When the colonies began in America, there were two main objectives that needed to be attained for success to be assured. The first of these was how to secure an adequate supply of labor, and the second was how to establish and maintain a degree of social control necessary to assure the rapid and continuous expansion of their capital by the exploitation of that labor. So as the colonies grew, and the number of immigrants decreased the easiest solution to the labor problem was to use Africans.
Historians that consider economic factors for slavery developing as true, cite the fact that if slavery developed because of racist attitudes why didn't it become a legal institution till after 1660? When Africans first arrived they were indentured servants, like the whites and some historians argue that they were treated identically to the white servants. Life was tough for all servants and the Africans lack of rights and freedom was not unusual, but to begin with Africans did not have to spend their lives in servitude like slaves did. The case of the African, Anthony Johnson is often used by historians to illustrate how Africans could succeed in colonial America alongside the whites. Anthony Johnson came to the colonies as a black indentured servant, when he had completed his work period he was given land and ultimately ended up owning is own servants, some of which were mixed race. Eventually though the Africans ceased being servants and became slaves in the colonies, so how did this come about?
The historians Oscar and Mary Handlin believed that 'A change in the economic structure produced a corresponding change in the labor supply system." The colonists soon began to believe that African workers were much more economically viable than their white counterparts. Certain ideas, like the suitability of Africans to work the land began to develop within the colonies, which was often used as a justification of African labor. The colonists realized that they could keep the Africans from having rights or land, as the Africans didn't speak the language and didn't even understand what was happening to them. Africans were easier to get hold of than white servants, as the Africans were kidnapped and forced to sail to the colonies, whereas most white Europeans were given the choice to go. As J. Atkins stated in 1680 'since people have found out the convenience and cheapness of slave labor they no longer keep white men, who formerly did all the work on the plantations'
It is important to clarify that the main focus of this essay has been on slavery and racism in the southern colonies of America like Virginia and South Carolina, but this does not mean that slavery and racism did not exist in the northern colonies. The demand for labor in the northern colonies was much less than in the southern colonies, due to the different topography, climate and farming techniques employed. So obviously less Africans were sent north, though this does not mean the north was free of racism and slavery, it simply means there was not as strong a demand for a labor force.
The reasons above are one half of an argument that shows how Africans went from indentured servants to black slaves. Historians who understand that economic factors explain the development of slavery also believe that racism developed from the institution of slavery. So to begin with 'slavery in no way implied, in any scientific sense the inferiority of the Negroe', but finally slavery was seen to encourage race prejudice and the social degradation of blacks. Even though economics is said to have brought the Africans over to the Americas, can it be used to explain the status the Africans acquired there. I shall now examine the other side of the historical debate where historians believe 'to be black was to be a slave'.
Historians on this side of the argument stress that it was the individual racist views of people that caused them to believe "slavery was a civilizing force" and that enslaving Africans was the only way they could survive in colonial America. When the English first encountered Africans in the 16 th Century they were repelled by their black skin. They saw the blackness of the Africans skin as beastly, ugly, and horrifying but also as a distinct sign of inferiority. At the time whiteness was a symbol of purity and black was the color of the Devil. The Africans were also associated with the Bible through Ham, Noah's fallen son who had been cursed by God to have black children. In England the concept of blackness had always been loaded with intense meaning. Even the terminology used towards the African blacks, the word Negroe, illustrated the differing treatment. 'Negroes were set apart from white men by the word Negroes and a distinct word is not attached to a group unless it is seen as different'.
It is evident that Africans had already been identified as different and probably inferior by the English, before they had even reached the colonies, so did this idea continue in colonial America? Even though slavery didn't become legal until after 1660, there is a lot of evidence to support the view that racism was present within the colonies before slavery. Historians like Oscar and Mary Handlin believed that up until the 1660's Africans were treated very similar to white indentured servants, however the historians Carl N. Delger and Winthrop D. Jordan have found a lot of evidence contradicting this argument.
As early as 1630 Africans were being put into servitude for life, like in the case of John Punch. John Punch ran away with two white servants and after being caught his punishment was life servitude; this was much stricter than his companions punishments. Discriminatory legislation against Africans began to appear as early as 1640; most of this legislation was about racial commingling and sexual promiscuity. The Virginia Statutes imposed strict laws on sexual relations between whites and blacks, with harsh penalties especially for the Africans if these laws were broken. I have cited the case of Hugh Davies to illustrate this example of disgust felt against whites that had sexual relations with blacks. A white man Hugh Davies was whipped 30 times in public, for disgracing himself and Christianity by laying with a negroe. Africans were also denied the right to bear arms, something that everyone else in America was allowed to do. In the northern colonies as well legislation had been passed forbidding sexual relations between white and blacks, and Massachusetts was the first northern colony to deny Africans the right to bear arms.
It is also important to mention briefly, how the Africans were viewed in North America and how they were viewed in South America, as this reinforces the idea of racism in England and colonial America. Many historians are in agreement that there was much less racism in Latin America, and one of the main reasons for this is that the Spanish thought of their servants and slaves as people. In colonial America servants and especially slaves were treated as objects. They were the property of their master, like a house of a tool, and they could never do anything about it. A plantation owner in colonial America could get away with the murder of a slave because it was judged that 'a man would never deliberately damage his own estate,' and a slave was just part of an estate.
So was 'slavery basically an economic phenomenon' as Eric Williams suggested or as Carl N. Delger suggests 'instead of slavery being the root of discrimination, slavery was moulded by race discrimination'. I consider that the ideology and racist beliefs of whites towards those of black skin is evident in the treatment and cause of the enslavement of Africans. Even before the arrival of Africans in colonial America, the whites had strong views of the black race. They saw that the 'color black stood in contrast to a range of cultural values associated with whiteness; with purity, goodness, virtue and beauty." However I don't believe that the economic reasons for slavery can be ignored in favor of the idea that slavery stemmed from racism. It is clear to see how money and business were important elements in the expansion of slavery in the colonies, and it is also obvious how slavery could be justified by its economic importance. So instead of trying to make racism and slavery mutually exclusive, should we be thinking of these terms as being equally cause and effect?
This brings us to the work completed by the historian Winthrop D. Jordan. Jordan came to the conclusion that racism and slavery probably evolved at the same time in a circular process, with most Negroes gradually assigned to perpetual servitude and simultaneously debased and identified with a lowly status. Jordan does stress a significant point as many of the first incidents of debasement in the colonies occurred around the same time as enslavement began taking place. Winthrop states that slavery and prejudice were 'constantly reacting upon each other, dynamically joining hands to hustle the Negroe down the road to degradation.'
After examining and considering the many different arguments to the question did racism lead to slavery or the reverse? I have found that I can come to no precise conclusion as to whether racism led to slavery or slavery led to racism, and I am unable to give a definite answer to the question. I can only conclude in my opinion that the historian Winthrop D Jordan has probably come closest to solving this imperative issue in history.