It cannot be said that writing is merely an act of love, writing is a form of expression and therefore can be many things including love. For Isabel Allende writing has many meanings and she has often spoken on what drives her to write. 'Writing is a matter of survival: if I don't write I forget and if I forget it is if I have not lived'. From reading Allende's novels and her own words it is clear that for her writing is an act of love. The memoir Paula is the most obvious example of writing as an act of love, though the focus in this essay shall be on Allende's first novel La casa de los espritus, (The House of the Spirits). The House of the Spirits has been critiqued and categorized in many different ways since its first publication in 1982. It has been described as magical-realism; historical-realism; a family saga; magical feminism and a Chilean version of One Hundred Years of Solitude; personally an act of love seems a more than adequate way to describe Allende's writing of the novel and Alba and Trueba's telling of a story.
What is noticeable about The House of the Spirits is that it begins and ends in the same way; 'Barrabs came to us by sea, the child Clara wrote in her delicate calligraphy. She was already in the habit of writing down important matters, and afterward, when she was mute, she also recoded trivialities, never suspecting that fifty years later I would use her notebooks to reclaim the past and overcome terrors of my own'. A superficial reading of the book leads to the idea that having the beginning as the ending and vice-versa shows the circular motion and repetition of life and history. Consequently proving that writing does not bring coherence or understanding, it merely brings confusion and the cynical belief that the world is trapped in pain and loathing. This essay shall prove that a comprehensive reading of The House of the Spirits provides enough evidentiary support to conclude that writing is an act of love, which brings coherence, understanding and the eventual release from hate and fear.
Those first few lines of the novel contain some of the most critical clues needed to decipher The House of the Spirits. The beginning suggests that the writings of a female called Clara are important to the narrator but it is only by carrying on with the story that the reader can truly understand how significant the female word is. Clara first began to write when she ceased to speak after her sister's death, from this point so early on in the novel writing becomes a momentous symbol for many things. It symbolizes female creativity, female resistance to patriarchal domination, female solidarity and love.
The idea of writing is present and continuous throughout the novel, what is of added importance is that in The House of the Spirits the focus is on female writing. Allende has always tried to break down gender stereotypes through her novels, and The House of the Spirits really set the precedent for what Allende would produce later in life. Allende broke the traditional barrier of having a dominant male narrator and a passive female voice in the background. Women and the women's word are the focus in this novel and Allende seems set to prove that the women's word is a strong as a man's.
Alba's dominant narrative controls and guides the story from the start, though other female characters aid her in this. Clara's notebooks form the basis for the telling of the story and the importance of the notebooks reflects the value of Clara in the story. Clara occupies a magical place within the story, a space between the real and the spirit world, but also a place where she can never be ignored or forgotten. Even after her death Clara's spirit manages to exist through time and transcend the human and spirit world boundaries to aid Alba and forgive Esteban Trueba. The importance that Allende allocates to Clara in the novel is mirrored by Clara's own dedication to writing. Clara's writing is constant in the story even though numerous events occur that could stop it. The constant moving between houses; the births of her children; an earthquake and even the rage of her husband do not stop Clara's desire to write. Clara's determination and dedication to writing contribute to the idea that writing brings coherence. Clara's notebooks are Alba's primary witness to the remarkable lives of her family and are perfectly ordered and understandable, indeed Clara refuses to let names be used more than once as 'repeating the same name just caused confusion in her notebooks that bore witness to life'. As the reader begins to realize the importance of writing for coherence and understanding another female writer emerges.
Clara's daughter Blanca begins her own form of 'private writing' through letters to her mother. Blanca is lonely, isolated and miserable and her correspondence with her mother, every day, is a source of happiness and love. These letters are evidence of how writing can be an act of love. At the end of the novel Alba uses these letters to write her own story and they help Alba acquire an understanding of her past that had been missing. The idea that looking at the past can help comprehend events in the present and preserve the future is an idea that progresses through the narration, both Alba's and Esteban's.
It is important to remember that Alba is not the only narrator in the novel. Though Alba's female narrative is dominant throughout the story, Esteban Trueba's narrative contribution plays a significant role in helping the reader to understand that writing is an act of love. Esteban begins his narration in a strong but rather defensive tone, and he seems to feel the need to justify his actions 'I've been a good patron; there's no doubt about it'. As the story progresses the reader can sense a change in the tone of Esteban Trueba's narrative as Esteban is forced to confront himself and he can finally see himself in a true light. 'Writing, in fact, rather than speaking, gives him the opportunity to confront his violent behavior'. By the end of the novel Esteban Trueba can clearly see his appalling behavior towards the tenants of Tres Maras; Clara; Blanca; Pedro Tercia and any one else whom he dislikes has eventually brought about his own downfall. By the end of the story Trueba needs forgiveness, he is a lonely, shriveled and broken old man who ends up begging for help from a women in order to have Alba returned to him. As Trueba's power weakens throughout the novel his discourse mirrors this. At the beginning his voice is powerful by the end it is disjointed, confused and almost pathetic, but through the writing of the truth has come Trueba's forgiveness. Once again, the narrative of Esteban Trueba shows that writing is an act of love' it brings coherence and a release from pain and loathing 'as my grandfather slowly lost the rage that had tormented him throughout his life, she appeared as she had been at her best'.
'Isabel Allende's life and fiction form an inextricable bond, woven together with textured strands of love, violence, politics, adventure and death'. As writing is an act of love for Allende then it seems obvious that her work should be so intertwined with personal experiences. The character of Clara in The House of the Spirits is based on Allende's own grandmother, Isabel Barros Moreira, a strong woman who had a taste for the magical and the spiritual. Esteban Trueba's character was also fashioned from reality with Allende's grandfather, Augustn Llona Cuevas being the inspiration. Allende's grandfather represented the traditional, conservative and patriarchal society of Chile but at the same time Allende held him on a pedestal of respect and affection. Often readers of Allende can become confused over were reality ends and fiction begins, but this blurring of the boundaries merely reinforces the idea that Allende writes from love and with a passion for understanding. Allende once said that writing the House of the Spirits was 'a way of drawing out all the sadness that had built up inside, of trying to share the painful experience'. Allende writes from love to help bring an understanding to people and she carries this idea through her characters in The House of the Spirits.
Allende uses Clara's notebooks to help bring coherence and understanding to Alba. Clara wrote to help clarify events in a way that could not deceive her like the mind often can. Clara also wrote as a way of taking a fresh look at things, 'I write, she wrote, that memory is fragile and the space of a single life is brief, passing so quickly that we never get a chance to see the relationship between events: we cannot gauge the consequences of our acts'. Like Clara, her notebooks seem able to defy time and the odds. Even during the 'infamous pyre' that destroys all Jaime's, Nicolas, Trueba's and Uncle Marcos's books somehow Clara's notebooks miraculously escape and as Linda Gould Levine says 'this reflects Allende's view of the potency of women's words, words that cannot be silenced by oppressive regimes'. The fire of books is another example of Allende's desire to make the women's word as strong as the man's. Allende's use of a typical literary device to add believability to her story; the fact that events that may otherwise seem to bizarre to be true have been written and preserved through time adds an air of authenticity to a story and proves 'the presence and influence of Clara's notebooks that bear witness to life; they are not only the most important source for shaping Alba's narrative, but are also symbolic in a broader sense of the power of the written word and it's ability to mould and transform life'.
The ability of writing to bring release from pain and loathing, and its capacity to change life is finally proved once and for all at the end of the novel. The everlasting Clara who though unable to save her daughter from rape is able to convey to her the strength to continue and to 'write a testimony that might one day call attention to the terrible secret she was living through, so that the world would know about this horror that was taking place parallel to the peaceful existence of those who did not want to know'. Once again the reader can see the importance of the written word of the female, as without Clara's mystical encouragement and her physical notebooks Alba may never have had a chance to write her story. For Alba, the planning of the story gave her a release from the terrible ordeal she was living through and when she was released her writing managed to change her life.
By looking back at the past Alba finds out about the rape of Pancha Garcia and is able to see how things link together through time, 'I am beginning to suspect that nothing that happens is fortuitous, that it all corresponds to a fate laid down before my birth'. Eventually through her writing Alba is released from her hate and need for revenge, 'I seek my hatred and cannot seem to find it. I feel it's flame going out as I come to understand'. Alba's realization that revenge is not the answer is something Allende has always espoused, 'we can't torture the person who has tortured us because then it's a never-ending chain of fear and hate and anger and violence'. Along with Alba's change of heart at the end of the novel comes her final release from the bonds of pain and loathing, 'I have to break that terrible chain. I want to think that my task is life and that my mission is not to prolong hatred but simply to fill these pages'. Again this idea of breaking a cycle of hate, anger and violence is another ideal that Allende holds close, and an ideal she expresses through her writing, 'I write for those who want to share the obligation of building a world in which love for our fellow men...will prevail'. Isabel Allende writes with love and for an understanding, her ideas are mirrored through her female protagonists. Clara writes for clarity and coherence, Blanca writes for love and Alba writes for the release from the bonds of pain and loathing.