'To bind up the nations wounds' and 'to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace'. This was how Lincoln viewed the aim of reconstruction at the end of the civil war, but there were many different beliefs as to the aim of reconstruction and an equal amount of ideas of how best to achieve these aims. Reconstruction can said to have begun in 1863 with Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation and it is widely agreed that reconstruction formally ended in 1877 with the inauguration of Rutherford B. Hayes; however these dates are debatable. Reconstruction after the civil war took numerous forms and occurred in a variety of ways all of which are still widely examined, discussed and revised by historians today. In this essay the focus shall be on Presidential Reconstruction and its failure, from Lincoln's early attempts in 1863 to Johnson's policies in 1865.
As the Unionists began to gain more and more territory in the war, the issue of what to do when the war ended became of implicit importance. The right of a state to leave the Union had never been mentioned in the Constitution so neither the President or Congress had any guidelines to follow when dealing with the legality of secession. President Lincoln believed that the project of reconstruction lay firmly with the Presidential Executive and not Congress. As early as 1862 Lincoln began devising and implementing policies to deal with reconstruction.
The first problem that Lincoln faced was how to form a loyal government in a Confederate state, so he began to implement his Ten Percent Plan. Lincoln's plan of amnesty and reconstruction required just ten percent of the qualified voters of 1860 to take an oath of allegiance; they were then allowed to set up a state government which the President would recognize. However Republicans believed this policy to be far too lenient and that the problem of reconstruction belonged to Congress, so they passed the Wade-Davis Bill in opposition to Lincoln's plan. This Bill made it much harder to be considered a loyal citizen and only after a majority had taken an oath of allegiance could delegates elected to state, where they must take the iron clad oath. This second oath was important as it restricted many more Southerners from voting than Lincoln's plan did. The Wade-Davis Bill also had another important requirement that was notably absent from Lincoln's proclamation; the state had to abolish slavery as a condition of re-entry into the Union. As Congress passed this Bill on the last day in session Lincoln was able to get rid of the Bill with a pocket veto, but the Bill did mention a second problem that faced Lincoln: 'the future of slavery and the negro'.
Lincoln has become martyred as the 'Great Emancipator' but in reality this is not what Lincoln intended to be. For Lincoln the issue of slavery always came second to a reunion with the South and this showed in his early policies. Historians are only able to guess if Lincoln's attitude towards blacks would have changed, though most believe that Lincoln would eventually have seen that the acceptance of blacks in the United States was inevitable and that he should flow with the tide and not against it. This view was not shared by Lincoln's successor, Andrew Johnson.
On April 15 th 1865, Vice President Andrew Johnson was sworn into office as the seventeenth President of the United States. To most politicians this meant a significant change in reconstruction policy for the better. Even radicals like Senator Wade felt pleased with the new President, "Johnson we have faith in you" as they believed they had gone from a 'lenient' Lincoln to a 'firm' Johnson. An important aspect of Johnson's time as President is the contrast between the support he received at the beginning of his Presidency and the lack of support he had by the end. How did a southern Democrat have so much support from Radicals and Republicans?
Much of Johnson's early support came from his beliefs on how to treat the south, "Treason must be made odious and traitors must be punished and impoverished"; this belief was strong within Radical and Republican groups. Johnson's ideas on how to treat the south stemmed from his own personal dislike of the elite planter class, whom he believed were the real traitors who had dragged the south into war. Andrew Johnson was living proof of the American Dream. He was born in to poverty in Tennessee and gradually worked his way up as a tailor. He was illiterate until he married and then began to work his way into politics. Up until his time as President, Johnson's political career was another American success story as he had advanced from the very bottom to the very top. During the war Johnson's fierce denunciations of the secessionists leaders put him firmly within the Republican Party and gained him much early support.
Johnson issued his Proclamation of Amnesty in May, and it was greeted with enthusiasm from both republicans, though the radicals believed they had been deceived on the issue of slavery. The amnesty promised a pardon to all those who would take an oath of allegiance, though fourteen classes of Confederates were excluded from this general pardon and had to apply to the President for a personal pardon. The most notable exception were Confederates with taxable property of $20,000 and the major Confederate officials, this clause impressed the radicals as they had hoped Johnson would make an example of the 'traitors'. Unfortunately it soon became clear to radicals and republicans that what Johnson said and what he actually meant were two different things.
After the Proclamation of Amnesty Southerners came forward in huge numbers to receive pardons and Johnson received thousands of requests for a personal pardon. Though Johnson gave out these pardon cautiously at first he was soon doing them in mass amounts. Johnson took the south's willingness to co-operate as a sign that they supported him and his policies, and indeed they did but largely due to the huge relief they felt that the requirements for re-entry weren't harsher. Many historians believe that in May 1865 Reconstruction could have taken a very different path. Johnson could have imposed practically any rule on the Southern states and it would have been accepted but he always believed firmly in state rights and upholding the Constitution, so he stuck to his policy of reconstruction with only two amendments later on. As the radical Charles Sumner later said "he has missed a golden opportunity".
Even though in the eyes of some Johnson's policy was misguided it achieved the outcome that Johnson had hoped for. The South began to reorganize itself as now it had an opportunity to rebuild in a way that reflected every individual state. Nevertheless Johnson's treatment of the South led to many new problems and the first of these were the South's choice of new officials. Johnson's Proclamation stated that practically everyone was loyal, indeed it is a wonder how so many states seceded when everyone claimed to be 'a Union man' who simply 'followed the state'. Under Johnson's requirement s the South began choosing their new governments, though the majority of these men could hardly be called loyal. In the deep South service to the Confederacy proved to be a virtual necessity for electing an official, and the state of Georgia sent former Confederate Vice-President Alexander H. Stephens to the senate. Further up in the South the elections had some of the outcomes the President had been hoping for, and in most states former Whig-Unionist men took up office. For Johnson and the South the 1865 elections had been a success and the states could now concentrate on providing a new constitution and entering the Union as quickly as possible. On the other hand Republicans and Radicals felt that the South was once again back in the hands of the traitors and dissent began to grow as feeling towards Johnson changed. It seemed Johnson liked the idea of being the 'champion of the South', indeed Johnson was a Southern Democrat and he did gain support from the South, but at the expense of support from the North.
The events that occurred after the elections were of crucial importance to why Presidential reconstruction failed. Johnson made the ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment and repudiation of Confederate debt extra requirements for entry back into the Union, but both these provisions were created with a lack of enthusiasm in the South. These two new conditions laid on by Johnson were hardly radical but the states reverted back to their pre-war prejudices and many refused to ratify the amendment or merely acknowledge that slavery did not exist. The repudiation of state debt also caused similar debates within the newly formed state conventions and eventually Johnson had to publicly declare Confederate debt null and void. The problems that occurred from the acceptance of the two new conditions proved to Radicals and Republicans that the secessionist South had once again come back into power and that Johnson had deceived them with false promises and his desire to gain popularity in the South. Johnson's fatal mistake was suggesting these changes at a time when Southern hope of 'home rule' had been revived and they felt able to revise or reject them. Further problems that arose within the year were used as ammunition against Johnson over the next few years as Presidential Reconstruction began to fail.
Most of the tribulations that were to affect Reconstruction stemmed from the issue of slavery and the black population. After the abolition of slavery had been accepted most of the South faced a severe labor problem, as the planters now had no personal authority over the blacks the state had to somehow re-establish a form of authority. New laws were needed to make sure that white supremacy was kept intact, and the President's own beliefs went hand in hand with most of the Southern whites. Many new laws were passed in different states as a legal means of keeping a large black population subordinate. These laws quickly became known as the Black Codes and they played a significant role in the failure of Presidential Reconstruction. On the surface the codes were used as a way of defining freedmen's new rights and his place in society. In reality they were used as a way of controlling the black workforce and limiting their social and economic possibilities. Legally the codes had not re-enacted slavery but they had come as close as it was possible to doing so and in some respects the freedman was in a worse position than before. Now they weren't just controlled by one man they were controlled by the whole state, as an early historian said the black codes 'put the state much in the place of the former master'.
The Black Codes provided crucial ammunition for Radicals and Republicans to prove that Presidential reconstruction had failed. To Johnson's growing number of opponents the South's choice of Confederate leaders showed that they were not loyal to the Union. Johnson had failed to create a 'new political leadership in the South' and in part this is because it appeared that he had aligned himself with the old Southern elite just to increase his own following and possibility of re-election. The states revision or complete rejection of the terms imposed on them by Johnson were used as an example of the states 'reviving arrogance'; the enactment of the Black Codes showed a contempt for the morals of the north; and the south's continued determination to resurrect the past and old social structures was clear evidence that Johnson's reconstruction policy wasn't working. Worst of all was the President's 'apparent tolerance of these things' and his failure to do anything about them. While it highly unlikely that Johnson actually approved of the Black Codes he regarded states rights as undisputable and he never advocated black suffrage or citizenship for blacks. Johnson's policy was acceptable on paper but almost a complete disaster in application. Political stability in the South had been restored and new governments had been formed, yet the majority of these governments could hardly be considered loyal. New constitutions and laws had been made, which was what the President wanted but these new laws went against nearly everything the North and the president's opposition wanted. When Congress was called into session at the end of November 1865 Johnson believed his policy of reconstruction had been a resounding success and that any opposition came from a small number of troublemakers. Unfortunately for Johnson the majority of Congress disagreed with him and over the next few years a bitter feud grew over the issue of Reconstruction. By the time Congress ended Presidential Reconstruction and failed and Congressional Reconstruction began.