In this essay I examine Popper's criterion of falsification contrasted against Kuhn's puzzle-solving criterion. Kuhn's normal/revolutionary science and Lakatos's hard core/protective belt ideas are discussed. Thargard's views on astrology are generalised to try and see if they apply to all non-science and thus create demarcation criteria. Whether such criteria exist at all is examined with regard to underdeterminism. If they are to exist what conditions would count as satisfactory is also examined.
As the definition of science is discussed below it is not possible to provide a clear definition of it now, but merely state that everything not covered by the term science is deemed non-science. Non-science includes pseudoscience and it is significant to note that any accurate definition of science must also exclude this pseudoscience. Thus I do not attempt to define pseudoscience. It is also beyond my aim to separate science from good science.
In this essay I aim to critically examine criteria that claim to define science and discuss what conditions such criteria must have in order to be a satisfactory definition.
By the end of this essay I will have shown various arguments claiming to define science or non-science and examine what conditions the demarcation criteria must have. I will have also discussed what criteria science should have in my own view.
We place great value on scientific teaching. We trust that stars are at the huge distances scientists say they are and that time slows down when you move sufficiently fast. They say that extraterrestrial aliens visiting Earth are fictional and that the planets cannot affect our lives. There are many examples whereby the general population think they know a particular truth of reality solely because they have heard scientists declare it true. We may choose to believe scientists, thinking they will not mislead us and have no ulterior motive other than to discover the truth. Non-scientists often have hidden agenda that could potentially exploit our willingness to believe scientists. It is vital that we know what science is because we value the truthful knowledge it provides.
Philosophically, we are not interested in simple definitions of 'science' such as those found in the dictionary; "Knowledge acquired by study" (1989, Oxford English Dictionary) fails to tell us clearly what is science and what is non-science. Nor are we after an easy consensus, whereby some governing body has the final and definitive say. We need to discover, by examining the scientific method, what the very nature of science is and from this devise our definition.
Aristotle had two orthogonal criteria for separating science from opinion "by the certainty of its principles" and from craft "by its comprehension of first causes." (1983 cited Ruse 1988, p.339) In his time science would have looked little like it does today and so these rational criteria cannot encompass the modern day range of scientific pursuits. The infallibility of scientists and the certainty in their words was large part of what science was, up to medieval times at least.
By the twentieth century philosophers knew that all scientific theories were equally unprovable, as you can never have certainty, and so needed some criteria to separate science from non-science. Inductive logic was used to give probabilities to the different theories in question. As higher probabilities meant the theory was more scientific, there was a scale of non-science up to good science.
The method used to determine the probabilities is irrelevant, however, because Karl Popper (1959) argued that all theories are equally improbable as there are an infinite number of theories, and so any one theory has a zero probability. Probability and verification became worthless in trying to establish what science is.
This realisation lead to the statement in Sir Karl Popper's article, Science: Conjectures and Refutations (1963 cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.7) that "the criterion of scientific status of a theory is its falsifiability, or refutability, or testability." Thus taking the onus away from verification and giving it to falsification. A science, therefore, is one that has theories that can be falsified. Not only this, however, the scientists must accept the refutation and abandon their theory. Failure to reject refuted theories is non-scientific. Thus there was a criterion to check science against, to ensure it was genuine.
The issues involved with separating statements, like science and non-science, Popper calls the "problem of demarcation." (1963, cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.9) This problem, he claims boldly, is solved by his criterion of falsifiability.
Popper used it to show that Freud's psychoanalysis was non-science because any behaviour could be explained by the theory and so there could be no refutation. Also he showed Einstein's general theory of relativity to be science because it made risky predictions, that if shown to be in disagreement with fact, would mean the end of the theory.
Popper argues the more falsifiable the predictions in a theory, the more scientific it is. But if bold, testable claims are the hallmark of a genuine scientific theory then it would not be difficult for some pseudoscientific group to have an outlandish theory that has a crucial test requiring some impractical aspect that rules out the actual test being performed. Popper would say, as long as the group are willing to refute their theory when the test fails, this would be scientific.
Popper doesn't want to get at the truth, because the truth can never be known for certain, he wants bold theories that are abandoned the moment they are shown to be unrealistic because then another, bolder, theory can take its place which will hopefully be closer to reality.
In order to make scientific progress, the refutation must be acted upon and Popper insists the theory must be abandoned. However, Kuhn and Lakatos object by saying "abandoning a theory the instant it makes a false prediction would rule out too much good science." (Curd & Cover 1998, p.64) From my own observations of scientific method, I do not see abandoning but instead the altering of theories to more accurately predict. My views agree with Kuhn and Lakatos is this instance.
Thomas Kuhn, who trained as a physicist, has a different view to Popper about the modes science takes. Kuhn believes we have normal science and revolutionary science periods. He claims "that it is normal science, in which Sir Karl's sort of testing does not occur." (1970 cited Curd and Cover 1998, p.14) Kuhn is saying that Popper's criterion does not apply most of the time, as scientists hang on to their theories until the weight of evidence against the theory has grown to be inescapable. Kuhn attacks Popper's use of 'falsification through testing' as a demarcation criterion by noting that the Ptolemaic model was replaced before it was tested. Kuhn adds that he cannot conceive of any scientific theories that were "replaced before it had ceased adequately to support a puzzle-solving tradition." (1970 cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.17) Puzzle-solving is what happens during normal science periods, where scientists use their theory to solve problems of the natural world as well as problems in the theory.
Kuhn argues that puzzle-solving is the definition of science and that because the falsifying "test arose from a puzzle" (1970 cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.15) it is puzzle-solving and not testing that is more fundamental. He says that astrology is unscientific, not because "of the form in which its predictions were cast" nor the "explanation of failure" but "they had no puzzles to solve and therefore no science to practice." (1970 cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.16) Kuhn is saying that astrologers follow the rules laid out to them and do not attempt to solve any of its issues. This lack of puzzle solving means astrology was never a science, but more of a craft.
Like Kuhn, Imre Lakatos disagrees with Popper's criterion. His reasoning is based on observation of actual scientific practice.
As Curd and Cover (1998, p.71) point out, the orbit of the moon and Uranus did not match Newton's theory precisely (because of a calculation error and the then unknown planet Neptune's influence respectively) but Newton's theory was not abandoned immediately, as Popper's prescription says it must be if it is to be scientific.
Nevertheless, it is a scientific theory being used by genuine scientists, from which I conclude that Popper's falsification criteria is somewhat wide of the mark. Genuine scientists do not always abandon theories when they theories appeared to have failed.
To explain this behaviour, Lakatos devised a proposal, based on observation like Kuhn, whereby theories have 'hard core' of inviolable laws and a 'protective belt' of auxiliary hypothesis and assumptions. Any fault in the theory is assumed to be due to the vast amount of assumptions in the 'protective belt', which protects the 'hard core' from refutation. Therefore the 'hard core' cannot be rejected or modified. These parts in the theory form a research programme which "will be progressive or degenerating depending on whether they succeed in leading or whether they persistently fail to lead to the discovery of novel phenomena." (Chalmers 1982, p.80)
What Lakatos notes is that, in his experience, a common factor in all research programmes that he deems scientific is that "they all predict novel facts." (1973 cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.24) Due to the Newtonian programme continuing to predict novel facts (1998 Curd & Cover, p.71) it was progressive and remained scientific, despite not being abandoned in light of anomalies. When a research programme becomes less progressive than a rival theory, history shows that scientists will follow the more progressive theory predominately.
The 'hard core' and 'protective belt' aspect of scientific theories could be used to determine whether a theory is scientific or not. If a theory is found to have no protective belt then it is irrefutable and so non-science. This approach allows theories to have irrefutable parts, unlike Popper's criterion, and still remain scientific.
Paul Thagard approaches the problem of demarcation from the other side in his article Why Astrology Is a Pseudoscience by listing criteria that makes a theory or discipline pseudoscientific. They are:
I find these criteria to be fairly vague, they lack the precision to definitely separate science from non-science and leave much open to debate. What is a "long period of time" and how many unsolved problems constitutes "many"? Regardless of these issues the criteria can still be employed against some pseudosciences, namely astrology.
Kuhn's argument for saying astrology was a pseudoscience is that it has no puzzles to solve. Thagard says that astrology does have puzzles to solve, such as "the significance of the three planets, Neptune, Uranus and Pluto" (1978 cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.31). These unsolved puzzles force Kuhn to say astrology is not unscientific, which is a flaw in Kuhn's argument, because it clearly is. In order to make astrology a non-scientific pursuit Thagard defines a discipline to be pseudoscientific if there is little attempt made to solve these problems. This is a subtle change on Thagard's part, shifting the standpoint from existing problems to attempted solutions.
Thagard's attempted answer to the problem of demarcation is not ideal. By not defining science, only pseudoscience, unintuitive results occur whereby research programmes like biorhythms are not denounced non-science simply because there are no alternative programmes to be less progressive against. The formulation of Thagard's criteria means that a theory can be scientific at one point in history and pseudoscientific in the next. He admits in his article that astrology was not pseudoscience to Kepler because "existing alternatives were scarcely more sophisticated or corroborated than astrology." (Thagard 1978 cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.33) This would make the property of 'being scientific' time dependant, and although Thagard, Lakatos and Kuhn all agree that the property of 'science' should be viewed in the social and historical context, I feel that science is time independent and that its definition should reflect this.
Later on in his 1988 book titled Computational Philosophy of Science Thagard altered his beliefs about demarcation criteria, in particular the criterion denying pseudoscience if there were no alternatives. In response to this issue he discusses a new criterion that "pseudoscientific theories are often highly complex and riddled with ad hoc hypotheses," (Curd & Cover 1998, p.74) which provides a way of spotting pseudoscience even if there are no known alternatives. But despite Thagard's criteria building from Popper, Kuhn and Lakatos's thoughts we still do not have a clear definition of science that can determine the pseudo from the genuine without exception.
Another potentially productive way to define science might come from analysing the general principles that most people consider to be science, share. This method is not knowing what science is beforehand and then trying to fit rules to match, nor appealing to consensus about what science is, but based on our rational ability to detect the genuine from the pseudo. It is trying to find satisfactory criteria from understanding how science works. What conditions would the criteria have that would make them satisfactory?
If there are any satisfactory criteria how precise should they be and will they offer conditions that are necessary, sufficient or both? Larry Laudan in his article The Demise of the Demarcation Problem states that satisfactory criteria must have both conditions to separate science and non-science. (1983 cited Ruse 1988, p.343)
Popper's falsification criterion provides only a necessary condition, so we can only say 'that must be non science' or 'that might be science'. Necessary only conditions do not provide us with a definition what science is.
Conversely, if we have a condition that, if satisfied, means a theory is scientific then we have no way of defining what non-science is. Failure to meet this sufficient only condition means the theory is only possibly not science.
Thus it is clear that a satisfactory criterion should contain "a set of individually necessary and jointly sufficient conditions for deciding whether an activity or set of statements is scientific or unscientific." (Laudan 1983 cited Ruse 1988, p.343) Only this level of conditions would allow satisfactory demarcation criteria. However, these conditions do not mention how accurate the criteria should be at separating science from non-science.
The precision in the conditions would have to be good enough to maintain most or all practices of what are considered science, such as physics. Laudan says
How did we get these existing patterns of usage though? Laudan says that we have a "shared but largely implicit sorting mechanism" (1983 cited Ruse 1988, p343) which must work somehow to enable us to mostly agree on what is acceptable as science and what is not. It is important to pursue these observations as they have implications for ascertaining whether we can define science, and so separate it from non-science, at all.
The difficulty in generating satisfactory criteria could be because there are no rules defining science absolutely. It could be a similar problem in language where we can easily tell whether a sentence is grammatical or not, but have great difficulty in writing down all the rules that make a sentence grammatical. This underdeterminism has been discussed by Kuhn (1970) with regards to how scientists carry out research and pick new problems.
Peter Lipton's article on underdeterminism (1991 cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.413) describes Kuhn's argument for why scientists appear to have similar judgements and ideals about research.
I suggest that our 'implicit sorting mechanism' is the effect of applying the shared exemplars of what we know to be science and non-science, to the theory or discipline under question. This would imply that the definition of science is underdetermined and therefore whilst we can try to come up with ever more precise criteria for separating science from non-science, none can ever be truly satisfactory. This interesting line of thought indicates a path of further research, as discussion of it here is outside the aims of this essay.
I do not attempt to provide strict criteria of my own, but based on previous criteria suggested as well as Kuhn's answer to what characterises a good scientific theory (1977 cited Curd & Cover 1998, p.103), I will show the variety of conditions that a precise definition of science must cover.
The predictions or consequences of a scientific theory must be unambiguous and also to must concur with known observations. This isn't to say the theory must explain everything, but its consequences must match observation to a useful degree of accuracy.
The theory needs to make sense alongside all the other accepted scientific theories and as well as have no internal conflictions. Scientific theories often progress by adding corrective terms to older theories, such as in the case of Newton's laws of motion and Einstein's theory of relativity, thus agreement with other accepted scientific theories is assured in such cases. This consistency also applies to the outcomes of the tests of a scientific theory, in that they must be reproducible.
A scientific theory must be able to explain more than the just the known results that went in to creating the theory. For example Snell's law wouldn't be scientific if it merely stated 'when light is incident on glass in a vacuum at 45 it will be refracted to 27.7'. Science must provide general laws that hold for many angles, say, under many conditions. This scope factor is tied in with Popper's requisite for boldness of a theory.
As Curd and Cover mentioned above pseudoscientific theories are more complex and have more ad hoc hypotheses than genuine science (Curd & Cover 1998, p.74), which should be simple and preferably elegant. This simplicity must bring order to seemingly separate phenomena. The reduction of electricity and magnetism to one force governed by a few equations in Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism is in stark contrast to the many variables and interpretations required in astrology to predict aspects of human behaviour.
Scientific theories must predict novel phenomena or disclose hitherto unknown relations; otherwise they are just explaining facts and making no progress.
I use Kuhn's characteristics because they agree with my own views, and add to them my own thoughts on what characterises a good scientific theory:
In agreement with Popper, falsification must play a role. Genuine scientific theories must be open to testing and refutation, or else they are just ideas; philosophical theories. This necessary condition would see many theoretical physicists becoming non-scientists, which could have important implications.
Science must concern nature. This is closely related to being able to perform experiments, but I mean it more generally. Practices that consider unnatural or supernatural phenomena are not scientific regardless of how many experiments they wish to perform.
In this essay I aim to critically examine criteria that claim to define science and discuss what conditions such criteria must have in order to be a satisfactory definition.
In this essay I have critically examined several criteria for separating science from non-science and found none to be satisfactory. Poppers falsification fails because scientists do not abandon theories the instant they are refuted. The puzzle-solving criterion of Kuhn, created to make astrology non-science, actually allows astrology to get off being denounced unscientific according to Thagard because astrology does have problems to solve. Thagard says astrology is a pseudoscience because it makes little attempt to solve its problems, but was a genuine science when it had no alternatives. Lakatos defines scientific theories as ones that predict novel facts, but his inviolable 'hard core' idea is in conflict with the notion that all of science capable of being tested and refuted.
Demarcation is philosophically and socially important. As we place great value on the teaching of science, we assume that scientific disciplines are superior to the pseudoscientific ones. Any demarcation criteria will effectively sort the disciplines into those that are deemed acceptable as far as capturing reality and those that are unusual and more than likely false. Philosophically, the demarcation criteria will tell us what is reasonable to believe and what is not. Socially, pseudoscientists could have fierce opponents that could use these demarcation criteria again them. If the line is drawn incorrectly and a genuine science is labelled unauthentic then this group could face a difficult time making progress with such a negative view of their practice.
If there are satisfactory criteria then more intense questioning of the scientific method may reveal them. If it is not possible to have any satisfactory criteria then it must be shown why. In any case, the difficulty of finding any satisfactory criteria for separating science from non-science is clear indication more thought should be spent on the matter in further research.