This essay seeks to explore the themes inextricably linked to humanitarian intervention such as the UN Charter and customary law. However it is first necessary to define and provide a brief history of humanitarian intervention; to lay out a foundation on which subsequent arguments can be expounded. The numerous provisions in the UN Charter e.g. Article 2(4) will then be scrutinised; examining their relationship with humanitarian intervention. The emerging views from jurists concerning the role of customary law and whether a law of humanitarian intervention has matured will also be examined. Subsequently a discussion of the normative question of what the law should be in this area of international law will be conducted in light of the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty (ICISS) Report.
The most accurate definition of humanitarian intervention in the context of this essay is one formulated by Holzgrefe and Buchanan, "the threat or use of force across state borders by a state (or a group of states) aimed at preventing or ending widespread and grave violations of the fundamental human rights of individuals other than its own citizens, without the permission of the state within whose territory force is applied." However humanitarian intervention can either be unilateral or bilateral but emphasis will be placed on the former. The debate surrounding humanitarian intervention reached its peak during the Kosovo intervention in 1999 although prior to that the intervention in Iraq regarding the Kurds and Shias brought worldwide attention to this 'right of intervention'. The U.K justified the intervention in both those situations as being a right of unilateral humanitarian intervention and based it on an emerging customary law. Furthermore Sir Jeremy Greenstock; U.K delegate to the UN Security Council regarding Kosovo stated that "[e]very means short of force has been tried to avert this situation. In these circumstances, and as an exceptional measure on grounds of overwhelming humanitarian necessity, military intervention is legally justifiable." Yet again the argument of humanitarian intervention was advanced in the recent Iraq case by the U.K although this has gathered little support. Whether customary law has evolved to create a lawful humanitarian intervention will be explored further below.
It is generally accepted that there is no right of humanitarian intervention since it would be incompatible with the provisions listed in the United Nations Charter. Article 2(4) of the Charter is a blanket prohibition that stresses on territorial integrity and political independence; on a literal reading would suggest that even intervention aimed at ending egregious leadership and gross violations of human rights would not satisfy the provision. However Byers cites the argument by the Belgian government that "unilateral humanitarian intervention does not contravene Article 2(4) of the UN Charter because it is not directed against the 'territorial integrity or political independence of any State'." On closer inspection this purposive interpretation collapses since the incidences of humanitarian intervention normally involve forcible military measure; eventually threatening political independence and territorial integrity. It is important to not interpret the Charter provisions so as to deprive them of any real meaning because doing so will only lead to a lack of confidence when relying on this significant treaty.
The concept of state sovereignty is also another important facet of international law which serves to discourage humanitarian intervention and is highlighted in Article 2(7) of the UN Charter. This nevertheless has been argued as not being an absolute qualification. Teson argues that "[s]overeignty serves valuable human ends; and those who grossly assault them should not be allowed to shield themselves behind the sovereignty principle." Ergo states that fail to protect her citizens and are themselves perpetrators of such violations will not be allowed to invoke the sovereignty argument. Since a state that loses the will of the people has effectively lost its sovereign right it would be unfair to allow a state to shield itself behind this principle. But this interpretation cannot be applied in all instances since not every violation is serious enough to justify another state violating another state's sovereignty unless permitted by the UN charter e.g. Article 51 Self-defence. Indeed this is the only use of force that is legally accepted although stringent requirements have to be met i.e. necessity and proportionality.
Is there a right of humanitarian intervention based on customary law? Some authors have argued that there is while others are less convinced. The Kosovo intervention in 1999 has been held by some to be a legal precedent that supports the requirement of usus. Furthermore the action by NATO has been argued to provide the necessary opinio juris although it is difficult to see how this psychological element would be established in light of dissent in the international community. Byers points out that "the Kosovo intervention provoked an unequivocal statement from the G77 group of 133 non-industrialised states that unilateral humanitarian intervention is illegal under international law." Is this clear enough evidence that opinio juris has been established? There seems to be a consistency and consensus among the majority of states on the illegality of humanitarian intervention within international law. However how much weight should be accorded to the statements by the G77 Group? It may be the case that only certain major states such as the United States have considerable force in their arguments and statements by smaller states are negligible. Ergo as it prevails there is no acceptance by the international community as to the emergence of a new doctrine of humanitarian intervention. To argue either wise will certainly be met with much objection. Currently only bilateral intervention; humanitarian intervention authorised by the Security Council has been accepted notwithstanding that this has not happened in many instances. The argument of legal precedence is strained because some authors claim that Kosovo sets the precedence while states such as the U.K claim that Iraq sets the precedence for Kosovo. How far back does one have to go in order to justify humanitarian intervention? Valek argues that humanitarian intervention was not unknown in the pre-Charter era and cites examples of joint intervention by Great Britain, France and Russia in aid of Greek insurgents in 1827. But surely if there is a sound argument that there is a right of humanitarian intervention based on customary law it would have emerged much earlier as based on such an example. Although considered to be a flexible source of law customary law evolves slowly and gradually. The fact that it had not emerged earlier does not negate its existence. However jurists such as Hilpold are sceptical of the existence of customary law in establishing humanitarian intervention. He supports this contention by highlighting the cases of intervention by Vietnam and Tanzania in Kampuchea and Uganda respectively. Hilpold argues that "the fact that both Vietnam and Tanzania have tried to justify their actions by allegations that do not withstand an even rudimentary scrutiny while the humanitarian argument would have been at hand speaks volumes for the legal quality both states have attributed to this concept: it seems that neither of the two states attributed much reputation to this concept." Therefore it seems clear that humanitarian intervention does not have the full support of the international community and hence cannot be claimed as a customary law since the requirements of usus and opinio juris are not satisfied. This is reinforced by Cassese's discussion of usus; stating that "...the matter is too delicate and controversial to warrant the contention that the evolution of international law in this area may result from a single episode, however significant its magnitude, and regardless of the involvement of many states and the reaction of others." Hence relying solely on Kosovo as a legal precedence will not be useful in terms of establishing a customary law of humanitarian intervention. The argument then turns to whether humanitarian intervention has reached the status of jus cogens. Joyner argues that "in the case of the norm of humanitarian intervention, such status has not been remotely approached, and is not likely to be for the foreseeable future..." This seems to be an accurate analysis since a rule will only amount to jus cogens if there is support and recognition by the international community as a whole. Indeed the evidence highlights no such existing recognition.
Authors have debated furiously on humanitarian intervention but the question of what the law should be has never truly been answered; since their discussion tends to focus heavily on whether there is such an existing right. It seems that the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty (ICISS) Report has been one of the most major reports in terms on formulating what the law of humanitarian intervention truly is. Indeed the ICISS prefers to express such a concept as a 'responsibility to protect'; shifting the focus towards the needs of the civilians rather than the right of the intervener. As stated in the report "the 'responsibility to protect' reflects the idea that sovereign states have a responsibility to protect their own citizens from avoidable catastrophe-from mass murder and rape. From starvation-but that when they are unwilling or unable to do so, that responsibility must be borne by the broader community of states." This reflects Teson's views regarding state sovereignty and how a state cannot shield itself behind this argument when the state itself is the perpetrator of gross violations on its civilians. Therefore it seems to be generally accepted by the majority of the international community that it is morally justifiable to have a right of humanitarian intervention in circumstances of human rights abuses such as in Kosovo and Rwanda. The problem is in formulating an acceptable framework within international law that can be embraced by all; especially developing countries who fear the use of humanitarian intervention as a tool by powerful states to assert their autonomy and further Western 'democratic' values. These fears so accurately reflect the argument propounded by Koskenniemi that "... international law exists to advance the repertory of substantive values, preferences, and practices that those in dominant positions seek to realize in the world." The likelihood of abuse is a crucial aspect that has to be considered when framing a right of humanitarian intervention. Indeed authors such as Jutta Brunne and Stephen J. Toope have highlighted the ICISS Report as "[suggesting] that a carefully crafted framework on the use of force for human protection may go a long way towards addressing worries about the potential for abuse." This may however be a rather utopian view since the role that the Security Council currently exercises in relation to humanitarian intervention is already flawed in a sense. The inability of the Security Council to reach a unanimous decision in relation to the deployment of military intervention in states that are undergoing human rights abuses clearly reflect the weakness of the UN. Therefore even a carefully planned framework will fail to work in humanitarian crises when the enforcement mechanism; the Security Council is inherently weak. As such it is likely that a new mechanism concerning humanitarian intervention needs to be established instead of altering the veto power. In the words of Henkin, "[t]he need for intervention may sometimes be compelling, and the safeguard against the dangers of unilateral intervention lies in developing bona fide, responsible, collective intervention." In order to avert gross violations of civilians we have to focus on developing not just a detailed framework but instilling a sense of responsibility in the intervening states. This has been the aim of the ICISS Report that stresses on the 'responsibility to protect'. It is a responsibility and not a right. Even by refocusing the debate on 'responsibility' it is rather difficult to formulate a new legal norm that can be embraced by the whole of the international community. There is no consensus among developed and developing states regarding the act of intervening militarily in another state to halt systemic abuse. But at least the ICISS Report is a good starting point in placing the humanitarian intervention debate into the spotlight so that the whole of the international community can lend their voice towards creating or halting a new legal norm. We have to be reminded that humanitarian intervention is not just a question for Western states but also involves the developing states of Asia. Thus a carefully planned framework has to be recognised and accepted by both the former and latter states. This is highlighted in Amitav Acharya's essay; citing the words of Malaysia's foreign minister, Syed Hamid Albar that, "[w]e have to be wary all the time of new concepts and new philosophies that will compromise sovereignty in the name of humanitarian intervention, in the name of globalisation which is another form of trying to interfere in the domestic affairs of another country." Therefore much of the suspicion that is generated from the East will have to be answered by a fair and detailed framework. The ICISS Report provides a good basis for that since there is much scope for improvement in relation to the four 'responsibilities': The Responsibility to Protect, The Responsibility to Prevent, The Responsibility to React, The Responsibility to Rebuild. The last 'responsibility' draws attention to the fact that humanitarian intervention is a continuous process and the intervener cannot claim to have finished the task simply by halting the gross violations. Indeed their task extends towards "[building] a durable peace, and promoting good governance and sustainable development." So is there a future for humanitarian intervention? This is succinctly answered by the ICISS Report; "If we believe that all human beings are equally entitled to be protected from acts that shock the conscience of us all, then we must match rhetoric with reality, principle practice. We cannot be content with reports and declarations. We must be prepared to act. We won't be able to live with ourselves if we do not."
The interventions in Kosovo and Iraq paint a bleak image of humanitarian intervention. This is no less reinforced by the weakness of the UN Security Council in terms of their veto power and the interpretation or rather misconstruction of the provisions in the UN Charter. Arguments propounded by prominent jurists based on customary law seem tenuous at best because of the inability to prove the existence of usus and opinio juris. But in light of all these failings the case for humanitarian intervention is no less weakened as proven by the ICISS report. The fact that consensus among the international community has been difficult to attain has not led to the demise of a right of humanitarian intervention. Instead strong emerging views calling for a carefully planned framework of this right of humanitarian intervention has continuously arisen. It therefore seems likely that this debate will persist until we find ways in which the law can be interpreted creatively to address rhetoric with reality and principle with practice. We have a 'responsibility to protect'.