The international legal sphere is a complex framework of symbiotic and interdependent relationships between states. The fact that there is hardly a coherent legal structure and legislating body to govern these fragile and fluid connections has led to considerable innovation. In order to give effect and substance to international law, jurists have debated about the role and significance of the various sources of international law. This essay will primarily explore the notion that the significance of custom is currently waning in international law. For purposes of limiting and focusing the discussion of this essay; the analysis of other sources of law such as general principles of law, judicial decisions and teachings of highly qualified publicists enumerated in Article 38(1) of the Statute of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) will not be included. Therefore, there will be an emphasis of custom in relation to international conventions, the use of force, and the role of peremptory norms; jus cogens, and custom as a proxy for efficiency. This discussion will also include the inherent problems of the two elements within custom; state practice and opinio juris sive necessitatis (therein referred to as opinio juris). Appropriate cases from the ICJ will also be referred to as a device in understanding the role of custom in earlier and more recent times. In addition, this essay will briefly discuss the importance of 'soft law' such as the persuasive force of Security Council and General Assembly Resolutions of the United Nations. Ergo by taking into consideration all aspects of law discussed in this essay, a conclusion will then be made as to whether custom is now of limited importance as a source of international law.
Before starting on a substantive discussion of custom or customary law, it is first essential to define 'source'. "By 'sources' one means those provisions operating within the legal system on a technical level, and such ultimate sources as reason or morality are excluded..." However, the term 'source' is in itself problematic as pointed out by Kelsen that it is "a figurative and highly ambiguous expression." International custom is listed in Article 38(1)(b) of the Statute of the ICJ "as evidence of general practice accepted as law." It is widely accepted that two important elements have to be complied with in order to form custom. These are (1) state practice and (2) opinio juris. It is thus regrettable that these elements pose the most problems in the formation of custom especially since they are the basis of custom formation. The requirements for constituting state practice are not coherent even though general principles have been expounded in cases brought before the ICJ. In the North Sea Continental Shelf cases, it was held that "state practice, including that of states whose interests are specially affected, should [be] both extensive and virtually uniform..." Questions have arose regarding the usage of 'extensive' and 'virtually uniform'. Does this mean that consistent practice has to be adopted by all involving states and any irregularities on the part of a state signal a deviance from uniformity? It has been argued that such a deviance is unlawful if indeed a custom has been formed. However, this raises the alleged theory of the 'persistent objector'. Thus, it is apparent that custom is plagued with uncertainties that serve to perpetuate mounting criticism on it. Another inherent complication within custom is that of opinio juris. This is termed the 'psychological element' "or belief that a state activity is legally obligatory." There is a sense of circularity in this requirement. In order to create a new custom, there must be a belief by states involved that such a norm is already legally binding. As encapsulated by Goldsmith and Posner, "The idea of opinio juris is mysterious because the legal obligation is created by a state's belief in the existence of the legal obligation." Therefore it seems rather inefficient to determine a formation of custom on a belief that custom is already in existence. It is exactly because the existence of opinio juris cannot be effectively determined that custom is of limited importance in international law. The uncertainties surrounding the requirements of state practice and opinio juris make it difficult for states to depend on custom as a source of international law. For example, in order to establish a concrete argument based on custom, there must also be a concrete basis for an argument; that would be custom itself. So without certainty it seems that custom is now of limited importance; it will possibly be relegated to the bottom if its problems are not dealt with. However there is also the argument that custom is rendered flexible without these precise set of requirements. This is linked with the argument that customary international law as a judicial tool promotes efficiency. The facts of this discussion will be expounded in the next section.
Custom may at closer inspection still retain its importance in international law especially in relation to states that are not parties to a particular convention. Therefore allowing some sort of judicial activism to manifest itself and manipulate custom to promote efficiency. As per Benvenisti, "efficiency is the underlying principle- the grundnorm- of customary international law." Kelsen established the concept of grundnorm and according to Kelsen, "the grundnorm is a logical necessity for all normative systems." But judicial activism is itself another source of debate as judges are not allowed to make law in a course of proceedings. Instead judges are to apply the law. But it is evident that custom is used as a judicial tool to create new law as highlighted in the two decisions of the ICJ, Nicaragua v. United Statesand Gabcikovo-Nagymaros. In the former, "it reveals the judges of the [ICJ] deciding the content of customary international law on a tabula rasa." So according to D'Amato, the judges circumvented the requirements of state practice and opinio juris by simply deciding that the latter was furnished by the former and loosely interpreting state practice. The impetus for such a decision was probably due to strong convictions among the majority judges that there should be a customary international law governing the use of force in that instance. In Gabcikovo-Nagymaros "the Court distorted the logic of the [Watercourses Convention] and treated it as an empty vessel into which it injected its own contradictory vision, pouring new law in old bottles." Thus to circumvent the two problematic requirements; state practice and opinio juris the Court exploited customs' inherent vagueness to promote 'efficiency'. It can be clearly seen that it is exactly the existence of these problems that eventually lead to efficiency. But is there really efficiency? If to promote efficiency means to create uncertainty and vagueness, surely international law is better off with a coherent set of rules and requirements. Therefore custom may indeed be of limited importance in light of this discussion. Jus cogens or peremptory norms are argued by Cassese to be "a special class of general rules made by custom [that] has been endowed with a special legal force." This means that these norms such as slavery and genocide cannot be derogated from. So is jus cogens a 'super-custom' or just another form of international law? If we take the former approach that it is a higher derivative of custom then the latter is by no means limited in its importance. Custom's potential role is then to maintain the current peremptory norms and lay the foundation for the formation of others, and thereby promoting issues of humanitarian law. Another informal source of international law termed 'soft law' has been a source of debate among jurists in the past decade. "['Soft law'] is a body of standards, commitments, joint statements, or declarations of policy or intention." The complication is whether 'soft law' has any binding effect. It is generally held that they do not and therefore General Assembly and Security Council Resolutions are held to be only of persuasive force. It has been stated by commentators that 'soft law' complements custom in some sense. This is because they help furnish custom with the necessary state practice and opinio juris requirements by providing evidence; in the form of basic evidential documents and negotiations within international organizations. This is supported by Shaw who states that "[a]s well as constituting state practice...such resolutions [are] evidence of the existence of or evolution towards an opinio juris without which a custom cannot arise." It is now easier to satisfy and prove the requirements for the formation of custom with the additional assistance of 'soft law' such as declarations. This will then prevent the time lag and uncertainty related to custom and subsequently proving that custom is still as important in international law as before.
The relationship between custom and treaty is indeed a complex one. It is generally accepted by jurists that a hierarchy of sources of international law do not exist. So both custom and treaty are on equal footing. But three important maxims have to be taken into account; lex posterior generalis non derogat priori specialis, lex posterior generalis derogat priori and lex specialis derogat legi generalis. Custom has been slowly losing its importance as a source of international law ever since the end of the Second World War. This is evident with the increasing codification of international law in the form of treaties such as the Charter of the United Nations, the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties and the Genocide Convention. One of the reasons why treaties have surpassed custom in terms of importance is that the formation of the latter is rather time-consuming. Thus custom may be "outdated and archaic" when it does come into force and "as a result states, recognizing the inadequacy of a customary rule [fall] into the habit of violating it because of that inadequacy." But "[t]reaties, on the other hand, are a more direct and formal method of international law creation." So formulating a new law by way of treaty produces quicker and arguably better results notwithstanding that some states may simply choose not to be parties to it. The United States for instance is not a party to the Rome Statue. Therefore in some cases custom may have a wider ambit than treaties and consequently wider influence. Treaties are specific in nature and have a degree of certainty because only the states to the treaty can be bound by the law. Custom is applicable to all states that have fulfilled the requirements of state practice and opinio juris and even in cases where there is only acquiescence. Therefore, it is argued by Gerhard von Glahn that custom based on Western homogeneous values are being placed on other diverse legal orders not necessarily sharing such values. But if those values are positive values that for example encourage the protection of human rights then surely custom is doing something right. Humanitarian intervention is a contentious issue and to argue that customary international law exists or should exist to prevent gross violations of human rights is not a question for this essay. However if there were custom in that aspect and assuming it were properly utilised without the risk of abuse by powerful states, it would serve nation states well by safeguarding the sanctity of human life. Every state would then be bound. This is unlike treaties where "they only bind ... the States that have agreed to be bound by their provisions." Treaties themselves are also inherently problematic and may lack certain substance because of being improperly worded and interpreted. The Rome Statute for example is non-retroactive and so cannot prosecute atrocities committed prior to its coming into force. Custom therefore has an important role to play in instances where treaties do not possess their full weight. In addition custom still retains its importance in relation to the customary principle of "pacta sunt servanda"; which is "the bedrock of the customary international law of treaties."
The question is whether "custom is now of limited importance as a source of law." So is it? By summarizing all the facts that been discussed above it seems that the inherent problems such as state practice and opinio juris in custom do contribute to its slow formation in international law. However, one has to bear in mind that even treaties have its fair share of complications as evident in the Rome Statute of the International Court. It by no means imply that custom is now limited as a source of international law due to certain weaknesses in its formation. The significant role that custom plays in relation to humanitarian law is justified by the argument that it is a judicial tool for promoting efficiency. This is done by allowing judges to manipulate its vagueness and as such circumventing problematic requirements in order to produce efficiency in international law. Custom is also arguably the basis on which peremptory norms are formed notwithstanding contrary arguments. This prevents gross violations of human rights such as slavery and genocide and thus is beneficial in maintaining the protection of those rights. The emergence of 'soft law' has also to a certain extent reinforced the importance of custom. This is because there is now additional assistance in providing a substantial and more accurate basis for the formation of custom. Custom is therefore still intact, not limited in its importance and still surviving. Taking the words of Detlev F. Vagts, "[c]ustom lives." This is in contrast to Goldsmith and Posner's theory that lambastes the role of custom and argues that it has no real, significant role in international law with respect to relations between states.
This essay has argued on both sides of the discussion that "custom is now of limited importance as source of international law." By analysing the inherent problems within custom, namely state practice and opinio juris and linking this argument with the notion of efficiency, it is found that it by no means imply that custom is of limited importance just because of certain weaknesses. The uncertainty and vagueness apparent in custom can arguably be 'cured' by judicial action or rather judges using custom as a judicial tool to promote efficiency. This was evidenced by the two decisions of the International Court of Justice; Nicaragua v. United States and Gabcikovo-Nagymaros. The essay then goes on to briefly discuss jus cogens as a sort of 'super-custom' and that custom provides a basis for jus cogens in relation to humanitarian law such as slavery and genocide. It was also argued that with the emergence of 'soft law' that includes General Assembly and Security Council Resolutions there is now additional assistance to prove the formation of custom in international law. As this makes it easier to provide a more accurate basis on which custom is formed then the latter still retains its importance. The essay then concludes by summarizing the different facts discussed and, subsequently arguing that custom is not of limited importance as a source of international law in recent times despite some apparent weaknesses.