EU citizenship and the role it plays in Community law has been evolving and as such, this essay will seek to analyse citizenship from the start point of the recent case of Bidar
. Furthermore, this will facilitate in evaluating the significance of EU citizenship for both the citizens of the European Union and non-EU family members of the latter. But, it is first necessary to attach some sort of definition to the term citizenship of the European Union. This can be found in the statement made by Ulrich Preuss; "European citizenship does not mean membership in a European nation nor does it convey any kind of national identity of 'Europeanness'. Rather, by creating the opportunity for the citizens of the Member States of the European Union to engage in manifold economic, social, cultural, scholarly, and even political activities irrespective of the traditional territorial boundaries of the European nation-states, European citizenship helps to abolish the hierarchy between the different loyalties... and to allow individuals a multiplicity of associative relations without binding them to a specific nationality. In this sense, European citizenship is more an amplified bundle of options within a physically broadened and functionally more differentiated space than a definitive legal status." Therefore, keeping in mind this notion of citizenship, analysis of EU citizenship shall be conducted by taking into account its different functions and its relationship with other Community law.
Before starting on the evaluation of Bidar, it will be mindful to note that 'Citizenship of the Union' is introduced by the Treaty of Maastricht and of particular importance are Articles 17 to 22 of the EC Treaty. "Article 17 EC established the concept of Union citizenship. Consequently, only those holding the nationality of one of the Member States have direct access to rights and benefits relating to free movement." This highlights the relationship between EU citizenship and the rights of free movement as most cases concerning citizenship are based on this right of free movement. The latter is important in helping to determine the significance of EU citizenship as "[i]t is in the area of free movement generally that the whole arena of citizenship is most developed." In Bidar, two Articles were highlighted; Article 12 EC- the prohibition of discrimination on nationality and Article 18 EC- the right of free movement subject to certain limitations and conditions. Citizenship was linked to these two Articles. Directive 93/96/EEC and Directive 2004/38/EC were also referred to and is of much relevance in Bidar because the former relates to rights of residence for students and the latter dealing with a more general right of residence. Both the Articles and Directives have to be read together in order to understand the full extent of EU citizenship and the role it plays in Community law. Thus, Article 12 that concerns the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of nationality is confirmed by Article 24(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC. So, it is apparent from Bidar that individuals are able to rely on the different provisions in Community law such as that of Articles 12 and 18 EC so that EU citizenship can be applied; Bidar himself being an EU citizen.
In Bidar, the applicant was a student and so termed a non-economically active person. This shows a shift from stressing on economic aspects as"[o]riginally the right to move freely within the European Community was linked closely to the performance by nationals of Member States in the territories of other Member States of economic activity-whether as employee, self-employed or service provider." Thus, the right of a citizen to move freely no longer needs to be based on market considerations and suggests the expansion of the concept of EU citizenship; allowing more EU citizens to exercise their rights. Although this may be true to a certain extent, there are still limitations and conditions that have to be met as mentioned in Article 18(1) EC which may include financial limitations such as not being a burden on the host State. So, in actual fact, the notion of citizenship is still limited as not all constraints have been swept away. This may be contested as the various cases brought to the European Court of Justice and certain directives i.e. Directives 90/364 and 90/365 have shown a gradual shift towards applying the concept of citizenship in more general terms. But, even in Konstantinidis
, "the court focused specifically on the economic considerations, highlighting the role of Konstantinidis within the EU system as a 'market' citizen." This case can be seen as a regression as earlier in Gravier
, a case concerning Article 12 EC; the prohibition of discrimination based on nationality and fees charged by Belgian universities on non-EU nationals, the Court was prepared to uphold a broader concept of citizenship and as stated by Shaw, "...provisions of the Treaty which originally had a 'market' orientation, have been used for a broader constitutional purpose." Therefore, in Bidar and Gravier, Community law is apparently trying to confer rights based specifically on citizenship of the EU although in a limited sense without focusing on economic activity. Case law does not show a coherent set of rules to be applied in the question of citizenship and the Court seems to be interpreting EU citizenship by either expanding or limiting the meaning in its different context. The significance of citizenship cannot be fully understood in such transient circumstances. In Bidar, one of the directives mentioned was Directive 93/96 EEC- right of residence for students. Grzelczyk
 is referred to; also involving the application of the aforementioned Directive that includes limitations and conditions. This clearly shows that being an EU citizen does not mean unconditional rights but rights subject to limitations and conditions- Article 18(1) EC i.e. financial, temporal and other conditions set out by other relevant Directives. The use of citizenship is indeed rather narrow as can be inferred from case-law and certain provisions. Bambaust
 is another case relating to such constraints and in particular sickness insurance where "the Court held that Art. 18(1) EC Treaty, which provides every EU citizen with the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States, grants a right of continued residence to an EU worker within the host Member State, even after the EU worker has ceased working. This right is 'subject to the limitations and conditions laid down in this Treaty'." The significance of EU citizenship is highlighted here because without any such citizenship of any one of the Member States, such a right of continued residence would have been denied. The fact that limitations and conditions have to be fulfilled does however imply that citizenship cannot be argued in all circumstances. But, in many cases the Courts have chosen not to apply such a stringent test regarding the latter. In D'Hoop
, the contributing roles of this case along with Grzelczyk emphasize "both that Union citizenship was destined to be the "fundamental status" of nationals of the Member States." However, if this is indeed right, then why the distinction between nationals of the host State and other Member States; both being members of the European Union, especially in terms of state social assistance? It is true that this has been slowly chiseled away especially with the new Directive 2004/38/EC but the fact remains that these two sets of citizens are not on the same playing-field. Reference to them being two sets of citizens is in itself a paradox because they are not two but one; a single entity of being citizens of the European Union. This is of course a misinterpretation if we refer back to Preuss's description of citizenship.
Sala
 is an important case for highlighting the significance of citizenship and can be regarded as one of the pioneering cases in this area. "The ECJ applied the general principle of non-discrimination on grounds of nationality to Sala, and did so on the ground of citizenship." Without any further reference on economic grounds and being in possession of residence permits, Sala was able to claim child-raising allowance. Contrast this with Grzelczyk, and we can see the basis on which they were decided: "these cases turn on two principles: integration and solidarity." This point was also tackled in the A-G's opinion in Bidar where the term "a degree" of financial solidarity was described as "a further reference to the observance of the principle of proportionality in applying the national requirements in respect of eligibility of social assistance." This suggests that obtaining EU citizenship does not automatically confer any special rights because integration in the society of a host State is needed. The extent to which rights are granted will in some sense depend on the level of integration. But the requirement of integration should not be inequitable and discriminatory to EU citizens from other Member States i.e. in Bidar where it was held that the conditions relating to the length of residence in the United Kingdom legislation was discriminatory according to Article 12 EC. In Bickel and Franz
, Article 12 EC and Article 18 EC were relied upon and like Sala; both invoked the same Article 12 EC although on different facts. The former identified the benefit of Article 17(2) and the latter; Article 18. Both upheld the fact that these Articles could be relied upon to protect citizenship rights but premised on different bases. This illustrates that citizenship rights are usually upheld together along with other provisions and do not have a free-standing right as such. This seems to be supported by the statement that "Union citizenship now provides the Community law nexus through which Union citizens gain the protection of Art. 12 EC Treaty are thereby able to access a range of benefits and rights on a non-discriminatory basis in other Member States. This protection arises without the Union citizen needing to establish a Community law right of residence in those States." The argument by AG Jacobs that the migrant worker(or professional) should be able to reply on a prima-facie claim as a 'European citizen' to a basic standard of rights protection is therefore not readily apparent when an analysis of the case-law is conducted. The significance of EU citizenship has to be inter-related with other Community provisions in order to protect the citizen and as such, is less useful on its own.
Most importantly in assessing EU citizenship is Directive 2004/38/EC; concerning rights to non-EU family members of EU citizens. This is significant because even non-EU persons can derive Community benefits indirectly through citizens of the European Union. The impact that EU citizenship has is therefore not just upon its own members but even non-EU nationals. The scope of citizenship is widened and refined through implementation and enforcement of this Directive. However, this benefit is to a certain degree limited due to certain limitations and conditions as laid down in the Directive i.e. monetary and temporal- Article 7- right of residence for more than three months. The limitations and conditions seem to be acceptable because there might be an influx of non-EU members into the EU and the significance of EU citizenship eroded as the distinction between non-members and members less clear. Ergo, a considerable significance of EU citizenship is in some respect its exclusivity. This is in some sense supported by this statement: "...with the establishment in the TEU of the status of Union citizen, whereby Member State nationals are further distinguished from their non-member country national counterparts, despite the fact that, in the opinion of one commentator, Union citizenship amounts to little more than a 'cynical public relations exercise.'" Citizenship and its indirect benefits to non-EU family members are still predicated to an extent on the basis of the economic market as the conditions listed in the Directive i.e. Article 7(1)(a) based on being a worker or self-employed persons relates to a contribution to the market economy and not disregarding Article 7(1)(b), (c) and (d); the gist of the three provisions is not to be a burden on the State's resources, so there is still a link to the economy; namely not to be a drain on the wealth of the State. Thus, reading citizenship in its context on the basis of social and economic conditions, we can see that the latter being deeply entrenched in the history of the European Union. Carpenter
 is an interesting case to note as it deals with the freedom to provide services; exercised by a husband which subsequently granted a right on his spouse to remain in the United Kingdom. Citizenship was linked with Article 49- freedom to provide services and interpreted in light of Article 8 European Convention on Human Rights-respect for family life. The fact that an EU citizen and the particular Member State is a signatory to the ECHR can give rise to rights that can be upheld in circumstances such as these to activate Community rights. EU citizenship is therefore important to activate Community right like in the latter. "The Court of Justice linked Union citizenship to the protection of fundamental rights and recognized the importance of the right for family life and unity sanctioned in Art. 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights in order to eliminate obstacles to the exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty." Lastly the right of a non-EU citizen to reside is connected with the significance of citizenship as highlighted in Chen
 where the primary carer was granted a right of residence with reference to Directive 90/364/EEC (repealed by Directive 2004/38/EC). "In the Chen case, the Court of Justice has re-emphasised that Union citizenship is a source of enforceable rights protected by the European Institutions and not merely part of a rhetorical discourse to confer further legitimacy to the EU." How precise this statement remains to be seen as case law has not been that consistent.
The criticisms discussed here about the significance of EU citizenship on both EU citizens and its non-EU family members were intended to give a brief but as accurate an insight as possible. As I have shown, EU citizenship has to be understood within a broad framework that is inclusive of both Community legislation and also case-law. The evolution of EU citizenship is not complete and will continue into the near future and the cases discussed will then create precedent just as Sala and Grzelczyk have created in terms of the prohibition of non-discrimination on the grounds of nationality. The complete transition from defining citizenship along the lines of economic grounds to more general terms will continue to be observed and at least, the majority of cases seem to have shifted away from this strict notion as was highlighted earlier. Consequently, the significance of EU citizenship is its ability to confer Community rights by establishing a nexus with other provisions although some see this as frail; itself not being able to give rise to a prima-facie claim.