For this essay I have chosen to analyse Ibsen's 'A Doll's House'. However, before attacking the elements of this play that qualify it as an example of naturalism, I feel the need to explore this term further, in order to form a central understanding of what 'naturalism' refers to.
At its most basic level, naturalism may be defined as a movement in drama at the end of the nineteenth century calling for an end to romanticism and advocating a new type of realistic drama that would reflect social and scientific developments. Understanding the characteristics of naturalism on stage, however, is a rather more complex.
The idea that became the catalyst for the development was that of the scientific method as the key to all truth and progress, a belief grounded partly in Charles Darwin's 'The Origin of Species', and firmly rooted in the works of Emile Zola, the leader of the naturalist movement. Developing Darwin's argument that, "...human behaviour, when viewed as a product of hereditary and environmental forces, came to seem determined by factors largely beyond any individual's control', Zola thought that the dramatists search for truth should be achieved using the same method of detachment as a scientist, "While I was busy writing Therese Raquin I gave myself up entirely to precise analysis of the human being... I wrote every scene, even the most impassioned, with scientific curiosity alone." Zola's much criticised scientific analysis in the novel, (it prompted one journalist to refer to it as "putrid literature") conforms entirely with the technique of the naturalist playwright to present on the stage a 'slice of life' in its most random and depressing form. In presenting truth on the stage, drama became brutally realistic and the typically happy endings of melodrama were erased. The shocking conclusion of 'A Doll's House', for example, was found to be unacceptable by many German audiences and Ibsen was forced to create a revised ending in which Nora finds herself unable to leave her children. Ibsen regarded this as a "barbaric violence done to the play. Those who make use of the altered scene do so entirely against my wish."
It is important, I think, to distinguish the term 'naturalism' from 'realism'. Although similar in applying to the movement as a whole, they are each defined differently as a single play can be both naturalistic and realistic, "...it would be logical to us "Naturalism" to refer to the theoretical basis shared by all dramatists who formed the movement, and their approach to representing the world. "Realism could then apply to the intended effect, and the stage techniques associated with it."
Naturalism in drama appears to present us with a truthful representation of life through an immense understanding of determinism, (which lays the foundation of the plot), morality - or rather lack of it, (evident in many of the character's actions), and illusion - which expresses theme, (evident in scenic specification). "The familiar irony of the phrase 'the illusion of reality' is particularly applicable to naturalistic theatre, since the nearer it approximates reality, the more illusory it in fact is."
In order for this presentation of 'real life' on stage to be believable, a need for verisimilitude between all aspects of the production is introduced. When this unity is acquired, naturalism in performance can fully achieve its aim of creating an awareness of social issues, "When society becomes more preoccupied with the quality of life rather than the life itself, so the theatre becomes less exaggerated and more concerned with debating the realities of living." Ibsen was aware of this, and his treatment of the elements of dialogue, character, plot structure, themes and setting in 'A Doll's House', illustrate why it is considered an example of naturalism.
An aspect typical of the majority of naturalistic plays, are highly detailed stage directions. Before each of the three act in 'A Doll's House', a mood is created by the changes in setting. The scene implies that Ibsen intended to stage an illusion using an over detailed naturalistic design. The setting for Act One, for example, creates a sense of satisfaction and security. On the surface, everything appears perfect. A cosy atmosphere is evoked,
On first appearance, Nora's determined circumstances as a middle-class married woman, indicate a warm and happy life. The placement of everything is precise - where the piano stands in relation to the doors, the small table between the stove and the door in the right-hand wall, for example. Similar to a real doll's house, in which the owner collects more and more pieces to add to the scene until it is perfect, the room appears to contain everything a married woman would dream of. However, this is only illusion. So idealistic is the scene, that the audience is faced with a false sense of security - a feeling that, as everything appears to be perfect now, events in the play will take an unsettling turn. The room crowded with possessions creates a sense of oppression, and Nora's claustrophobia, which steadily increases throughout the play, is immediately implied when she enters the scene and becomes another of Torvald's possessions. Although she appears in high spirits, early stage directions describe her sense of entrapment. She cannot even eat the macaroons without the fear of Torvald's presence, (illustrated at the point only by his study door),
Her uneasiness is made more apparent in the setting for Act Two, in which the cosy atmosphere and anticipation of Christmas celebration has disappeared,
Nora's carefree humming at the begging of Act One is replaced by her walking uneasily about the room, her safety shattered by the threat of Krogstad.
The creation of mood change by scenery compliments the plot structure in 'A Doll's House', which, through a linear progression of related scenes leading logically to the climax in Act Three, reflect the shocking changes of character during the play.
It is through the characters that the themes and issues explored in the play are illustrated so clearly. Indeed, the characters themselves become representations of the themes. "Ibsen's major thematic concern was to explore the notion of freedom and responsibility juxtaposed with the inhibiting force of determinism." This is apparent in all five of the principle characters.
Nora's role throughout her life, both as a child and eventually a wife and mother has always determined her future. As her father's child she was treated as his plaything, and now she has become Torvald's possession.
The threat that Krogstad poses in having the ability to destroy Nora's doll's house acts as a catalyst both for the audience's understanding of woman's position in society and the realisation that something needs to change. Moreover, it emphasises Nora's own recognition of this. At the beginning of their discussion in Act One, Nora's failure to realise that the rules of the law outside the household apply to her is illustrated in her childlike impetuousness in attempting to defeat Krogstad,
Thus, her own naivety and inexperience with the real world is the real threat to the future of her married life and a direct result of the social determinism that she eventually escapes. The fact that her well-intentioned action in forging her father's signature in order to save her husband's life is illegal reflects the woman's subordinate position in society.
The other victims of social determinism are Krogstad - battling within the unheard lower class, Mrs. Linde and, somehow curiously, Torvald himself. As Nora is playing her role as the doll, Torvald is performing his own role as master of authority without even realising it, "Men were more likely to be dominated by the social prejudices of the day because of their role as bread winner and provider." He is completely unaware of the social prejudices against women and is therefore left bewildered at the end of the play when Nora leaves him. In contrast, Nora as a woman who would "spearhead the revolt against society", is fully aware that she is playing a part and eventually becomes omnipotent,
Mrs. Linde's behaviour in making decisions for her future is less shocking than Nora's sudden change of character primarily because of her appearance, "...the chilling soberness of her tightly drawn lips and the total absence of charm in her prematurely aged features." She is a widow and makes clear her decision to find something to do in her opening discussion with Nora. Her future is determined by her loss of everything - including sorrow and grief. Her mission in taking Krogstad in hand and "guiding him on the straight and narrow path of righteousness" is the result of her desperateness to play the role of carer once again.
Biological determinism is explored in Dr. Rank's character. The fact that he has inherited a mortal illness - syphilis - from his father makes him comparable to Nora whose social determinism is the fault of her own father,
Moreover, Rank's character is parallel to that of Oswald Alving in Ibsen's 'Ghosts', who is also a victim of his father's promiscuous behaviour,
While Nora's character comments predominantly positively on society changing for the better, Dr. Rank appears to illustrate that it is diseased forever - that some things cannot change. This is suggested in his first conversation with Nora and Mrs. Linde, in which he expresses his pessimistic outlook on life,
When Mrs. Linde expresses her pity for the sick, Rank's reply as he shrugs his shoulders,
suggests that there is no point to compassionate attitudes when the damage has already been done.
Nora's character can be compared with Strindberg's 'Miss Julie' for much of the play. To begin with she appears to have absolutely no notion of what society means and relates to Dr. Rank that, as a child,
Like Miss Julie, Nora sensed a freedom in the world below stairs.
Although the dialogue in 'A Doll's House' does not mirror the 'realistic flow' to the extent of, for example, 'Miss Julie', it certainly succeeds in echoing conversation naturalistically. Ibsen stated that the dialogue must seem perfectly natural. The effect of the play depends a great deal on making the spectator feel as if he were actually sitting, listening, looking at events happening in real life. This is used to the advantage of the plot structure, which could become unconvincing if the dialogue was static. "Ibsen discarded asides, soliloquies and other non realistic devices, and was careful to motivate all exposition." This thereby allows the sudden arrival of Mrs. Linde appear perfectly natural as the dialogue asks questions about what happened during her absence,
On the surface 'A Doll's House' is a play about women's rights, presenting Nora as an early version of the New Woman. In her character we see a decrease of melodrama and a realisation of the actual. In this effect, Nora represents the change in the style of Romanticism to Naturalism in the theatre. Beyond her character, however, Ibsen explores other contemporary issues and stereotypical figures in society, creating an awareness of everyday life while presenting them naturalistically. Issues and character are hidden within the naturalism - Mrs. Linde, for example is practical rather than beautiful, and this is illustrated when Torvald suggests she stop knitting and learn to embroider instead,
Those audience members, who found Nora's decision to leave her family insupportable, perhaps did not appreciate Ibsen's illustration that although our atmosphere may be determined, our attitude is dependant on us as individuals. A woman in Nora's position had two choices - either to accept her life the way it was or break free from it completely. By choosing the latter, Nora challenges previous beliefs of morally correct behaviour. Her decision is not easy, as taking responsibility for one's life is extremely difficult, especially in the case of a married, middle - class woman living in the nineteenth century. It is invaluable in creating awareness of a need for change.
Rather than using naturalism simply for the sake of showing an audience real life on stage, Ibsen creates an illusion to make us aware of reality. As a doll's house creates the illusion of perfection, Ibsen creates the illusion to further the reality on stage.
**********************