This essay will explore the rule against bias; nemo judex in causa sua in the context of the given scenario. Therefore an analysis of this rule of natural justice that 'no man may be a judge in his own cause' will be conducted in light of the main facts in this problem. A brief definition and explanation of the rule against bias will be formulated; in order to lay out a foundation in which this rule can be applied to the different facts of this case. These facts will be scrutinised from every aspect to provide a balanced analysis. Furthermore relevant cases and statutes such as Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) will be referred to in this essay. This particular case is concerned with advising Gareth on the law of bias as a ground for judicial review and as such only procedural impropriety will be analysed and not the merits of the case.
The rule against bias has to be analysed in light of Article 6(1) of the ECHR as it concerns an 'independent and impartial tribunal'. This means that a tribunal has to follow the rules of natural justice; 'nemo judex in causa sua' and also 'audi alteram partem' in order to provide a fair trial. Gareth can potentially invoke Article 6(1) in the European Court of Human Rights where the "concept of impartiality is tested both subjectively-was there in fact bias?-and objectively-were there guarantees in place to exclude any legitimate doubt as to the impartiality of the tribunal?" The test seems to be similar to that of the common law rule against bias especially since Lord Hope stated in Porter v. Magill (2001) that the newly modified test of bias now "represents in clear and simple language a test which is in harmony with the objective test which the Strasbourg court applies when it is considering whether the circumstance give rise to reasonable apprehension of bias." So it seems unlikely that Gareth will succeed considering that the test of bias is now in line with the Strasbourg interpretation of Article 6(1).
Furthermore the requirement of "guarantees in place" implies recourse to a higher court or tribunal. It is clearly highlighted in the case that Gareth unsuccessfully appealed to the Employment Appeal Tribunal (EAT), which is in this case a higher tribunal. Therefore even if there was bias in the first instance; the fact that Gareth had a right of recourse to the Employment Appeal Tribunal would imply that he is not likely to succeed in judicial review. There has been no apparent evidence that the EAT also consisted of tribunal members that were bias or appeared to be. It is not known whether the EAT were made up of the same tribunal members as in the Employment Tribunal (ET). However it is unlikely that the EAT was of the same composition as the ET since the EAT is normally presided over by a High Court Judge and either two or four different lay persons. But if indeed the EAT consisted of the same three individuals from the ET then there would "normally be a breach of natural justice where an adjudicator takes part in the determination of an appeal against one of his own decision, unless he is expressly authorised to do so by statute." This is not a case in which the decision-maker has been expressly authorised by statute to further adjudicate in an appeal. Therefore there is a real possibility of bias when applying the test expounded in Porter v Magill (2001). If however the EAT were to conduct a full and fair trial; then it would be irrelevant if there had been a failure of natural justice in the first instance. This was held to be the case in Calvin v. Carr (1980). Thus Gareth would fail to establish the law on bias as a ground for judicial review as he had a full and fair hearing in the appeal stage.
Another important aspect of the rule against bias is the right of waiver; "the act of abandoning or refraining from asserting a legal right." If Gareth had known of the facts that entitled him to object but continued to allow the proceedings to continue without any protest, then he would be held to have waived his legal right to object. As such he would not be allowed to protest later based on the decision-maker being bias. It does not seem apparent that Gareth had known the essential facts and so "there is no presumption of waiver if the disqualified adjudicator failed to make a complete disclosure of his interest." Therefore Gareth does not seem to have waived his right to object in this case and can thus apply for judicial review.
Gareth's case for judicial review based on the rule against bias seems rather bleak considering that he has already appealed to the EAT; satisfying Article 6(1) that "guarantees [were] in place". This would of course be a different matter if it could be shown that the EAT were themselves bias. Furthermore there is no conclusive evidence that Fiona was actively involved in consulting The Construction Company Ltd and so unlikely be biased. George's family connection with Gareth seems tenuous at best especially since George has never met Gareth and thus would not be sub-consciously or consciously biased. The facts show that George and Geoffrey have never met Gareth although all three of them are members of the same golf club. Thus there is no real possibility of bias notwithstanding membership of the same association. This equally applies to Geoffrey's and Gareth's possible membership of the same trade union. Lastly the close friendship between B and C may give rise to a possibility of bias as the former could influence her husband, Geoffrey. All these facts however will not assist Gareth since he had a full and fair appeal trial. Hence it is very likely that Gareth will be unsuccessful in judicial review.