Promoting competition is ultimately the most important responsibility delegated to competition authorities. But how exactly is this achieved? Competition authorities are equipped with tools to combat anti-competitive practices and behaviour; one of these tools is the powers of enforcement. For the purpose of this essay the powers of enforcement are to encompass many different aspects such as the powers of investigation, powers to impose penalties and powers to order the termination of infringements. However competition authorities cannot apply competition law effectively if the law itself is not bolstered by strict and precise enforcement powers. Therefore this essay will seek to explore how enforcement powers held by the United Kingdom national competition authority, the Office of Fair Trading (OFT), have developed since the implementation of the Competition Act 1998, Regulation 1/2003/EC and Enterprise Act 2002. In addition an analysis of the interrelationship between the European Commission's enforcement powers and Regulation 1/2003/EC will be conducted. Competition law will be an effective mechanism to promote competition if it is backed by stringent powers of enforcement, and provided that competition authorities are confident enough to use them.
According to the OFT's website its enforcement role is to "uproot and deter all forms of anti-competitive behaviour, including cartels and the abuse of market power." This has certainly been made easier with the implementation of Regulation 1/2003/EC as the European competition rules, namely Articles 81 and 82 can now be directly enforced by the OFT. However much of the OFT's current enforcement powers are derived from the Competition Act 1998 which reflect those provisions embodied in the EC competition rules. This is in addition to newer and more extensive powers of enforcement acquired through the Enterprise Act 2002 and Regulation 1/2003/EC. These provisions have not only served to strengthen the enforcement powers and role of the OFT in the United Kingdom; they have brought it more into line with those powers held by the European Commission.
The Commission is tasked with the responsibility of overseeing the activities of all national competition authorities in the European Community, and since Regulation 1/2003 its role has been reduced to that of supervisory level. As aforementioned national competition authorities can now directly enforce community rules and this applies to individual exemptions under Article 81(3) too. Thus the Commission no longer holds a monopoly over such an exemption and this can be considered as a reduction in their enforcement armoury. But essentially "[t]he Commission, alongside the NCAs, has wide powers to carry out investigations into possible infringements of the competition rules and it also has the power to impose fines or, in some cases, a structural remedy." Most commentators agree that the Commission's enforcement powers have been increased as a result of Regulation 1/2003. But the extent to which it has been increased is still debatable. The main aspects of enhanced enforcement powers are the ability to impose structural remedies and penalties and the powers of investigation.