Without being overly presumptuous it can surely be asserted that Judaeo-Christian theology has shaped the underlying structure of the laws of Western Civilization. Of course it has not been the sole contributing factor and neither should it be. There have been other influences such as classical teachings that helped to mould the common law in a unique way. But to what extent did Judaeo-Christian theology inspire the development of our English common law and the secular legal profession? How important was such a theology to the evolution of common law and the persons involved? These questions are pertinent. This is especially so because the analysis is located within the context of an encroaching Roman civil law system; inclusive of the strict Canon rules of the church. Therefore the essay will begin with an initiative to define the term 'Judaeo-Christian' in order to frame the essay within a suitable background. Subsequently the influences of Judaeo-Christian theology will be analysed in relation to the ideas and writings of mediaeval and early modern commentators such as Sir John Fortescue, William Dugdale and Sir Edward Coke. Furthermore the works of modern jurists will help to complement and supplement in order to provide a current perspective.
The term 'Judaeo-Christian' is an amalgamation of two words - Judaism and Christianity - which is prosaic and not much of a revelation as such. However it is crucial to elucidate this uncontroversial point to establish a starting premise. Judaism and Christianity share many common elements. It is therefore not surprising that the term 'Judaeo-Christian' emerged to signify these similarities. It is useful to highlight that 'Judaeo-Christian' ideas reflect "the 'personal' God of the Old and New Testaments." In addition "Judaeo-Christian thought...affirms both a beginning and an end of time - Creation and Day of Judgment." These elements are central tenets of the 'Judaeo-Christian' faith that have helped formulate the development of the Western world in a legal, social and moral sense. In the Christian sense of the word there is an underlying current of the expression of love, supported by the proposition in Press's article that "the Christian's began in the third century an examination of their beliefs, in which the ideas of love (AGAPE, caritas), faith ( PISTES, fides) and the tri-unity (THEOS, deos) and perfection of God figured prominently." The fundamental principle of love as expressed by Jesus Christ paved the way for the development of common law. Furthermore it has been suggested by Raffield that "[i]n such a society Christ was the embodiment of law, representing its ultimate purpose - adherence and deference to the sovereign power of God Almighty." Hence commentators of the mediaeval and early modern period utilised these beliefs of the love and sovereignty of Christ to legitimize and strengthen common law against the inequitable idea of imperium.
It is without doubt that William Dugdale was convinced of the divinity of common law. His book Origines Juridiciales is filled with religious references. These allude to the majesty of God Almighty and His contribution to the English common law and the peoples of this great nation. One particular statement which has a particular strong emphasis on God and law expounds that "[t]hus, to speak humanely, may the beginning of Empire be ascribed to Reason and Necessity: but out of doubt it was from Almighty God himself, that this beam of light did shine into the hearts of men; whereby they might discern, that they could not subsist without a Guide and Ruler..." It is clear that from the start of his book, Dugdale highlights the importance he places upon God and thus Judaeo-Christian theology. One of the many reasons for utilizing Judaeo-Christian teachings to emphasize the origin of common law was to confer upon it a sense of antiquity and legitimacy. Common lawyers were convinced that the strength and integrity of the law would have to stem from an ancient and divine source. It was necessary to develop common law at its very core and in particular establish the sacred root of Judaeo-Christianity. This was an essential requirement for the evolution of common law when we examine its growth within an interfering civil law system. Together with this system were its numerous maxims. One in particular that did not sit comfortably with the common law maxim of 'lex facit regem' was the civil law maxim of 'quod principi placuit, habet vigorem legis'. But through the ingenuity of jurists the latter could be superseded by the former. This was possible by referring to the divinity of the common law which was derived from Judaeo-Christian influences of love, equality and fairness. "The soul of man was acknowledged to have an individual relation with God, which transcended the claims of society..., jurisprudence was founded upon moral principles directly derived from Christian theology." Ergo the power of the King had to be subjugated to the omniscience, omnipotence and omnipresence of the Almighty Father. Furthermore Dugdale refers to Lord Ellesmere's statement "that the Common Laws of England are grounded upon the Law of God, and extend themselves to the original Law of Nature, and the universal Law of Nations; and that they are not originally Leges scriptae." Thus it is apparent that antiquity, history and divinity which are all important to the development of common law are clearly present within this statement. It was necessary for these three components to be linked together, not just thematically but substantially as a unit. Press suggests that "history has been taken to be the very essence of Christianity, its difference from and superiority from all other religions." This statement bolsters the arguments forwarded by early modern jurists concerning the antiquity and legitimacy of common law - grounded upon the divine history of Judaeo-Christian theology. However it is unlikely that this exposition will succeed in today's multi-cultural society where individuals are free to practice other religions and Judaeo-Christian philosophy is no longer paramount. But the word 'development' is key for this essay as we are concerned with how the common law started to exist or came into being. Judaeo-Christian theology may indeed no longer be the driving force behind the growth of common law. But it did serve a vital purpose in the development of common law during the early modern period. This we surely cannot deny.
It seems strange to term common law as insular considering that it was influenced by various philosophies such as classical, renaissance and Judaeo-Christian teachings. However the insularity of common law appertains to its disdain for the civil law system. No other common lawyer was as insular as Sir Edward Coke, and who was described by one commentator as "insular not by ignorance but by ideological necessity." But how exactly does the insularity of common law relate to our assessment of the importance of Judaeo-Christian theology to the latter's development? By isolating the common law from its civil law counterpart common law needed to further develop to oppose civil law ideas. One method was through the use of Judaeo-Christian theology. It was by no means the only way of fighting off the perceived threat of civil law but it was one of the more important authorities. However the civil law system contained its own ecclesiastical doctrines that were regarded as superior by the King. Therefore it seems ironic that both systems were employing religious thinking to defend their rights. The King defended its imperial monarchy by repeatedly affirming that they were God's representatives on earth while the common lawyers employed arguments of faith, love and justice that were based upon Judaeo-Christian theology. Thus Raffield has indeed correctly stated, "...the idea that truth and justice are embedded in the antique and mysterious traditions of a sacrosanct legal institution, rather than in the prosaic and ambiguous texts of legislators and reformers." Shielded from the 'evils' of the civil law system common law was then free to develop and find its course. By establishing itself upon Judaeo-Christian theology it allowed its pervasive influence to prevail among the general public by stressing on common law's divinity and antiquity. Raffield expounds that "[f]or Coke and his contemporaries the significance of divinity and theology was practical rather than theoretical, affecting the development of substantive law." However practicality has to be firmly supported by theoretical aspects of Judaeo-Christian theology in order to provide for a stronger legitimacy of common law. The practical aspects can only function if the theory is duly referred to. Therefore Coke and his peers may well have considered the practical and theoretical aspects as complementary and inseparable; neither one was negligible. The insularity of common law allowed "England [to develop as] a separate, distinct and characteristic legal system which differed radically from the Roman law. It grew up as an embodiment of the social, industrial, religious and political experiences of the English people." Hence the concept of religion - Judaeo-Christianity - once again emerges as one of the championing influences of common law. However lest we should forget it was not the only factor. It has been noted by modern jurists that civil law and canon law had a role to play notwithstanding the notion of insularity. This seems rather contradictory considering the premise we started off with. But David J. Seipp establishes in his article that "[s]erjeants pointed to canon law and civil law analogies to bolster their arguments, and quoted maxims, definitions, and distinctions from those laws to elucidate their own positions on common law." According to Seipp and not surprisingly, no references to the sources were made. This was surely a move to protect the sanctity and insularity of common law. Any references would be considered self-defeating and inimical.
The term 'sanctity' seems hardly apt for a profession which was so vehemently despised in the novel 'Bleak House' for all its injustices and inequity. This is indeed a far cry from the divine pedestal that the common lawyers were placed at when Sir John Fortescue said, "Forsomuch then as y e lawes are holy, it followeth that the ministers and setters forth of them may right well be called Sacerdotes, that is giuers & teachers of holy things..." This suggests that the judiciary had an important and divine role to play as the keepers and interpreters of the common law. But the legal profession in Charles Dicken's 'Bleak House' may actually be reconcilable with the position expressed by Fortescue. Both have a similarity. It is the sense of austerity in terms of appearance. This may indeed be a convoluted interpretation but at least a commonality can at once be seen. Peter Goodrich states that "[t]he solemnity of law was based in reverence for the person or majesty of the divinity...the Christian divinity was singular and serious." This much can still be seen today in the courts of the modern day England where judges still wear sombre looking robes and according to one commentator, "enormous horsehair wigs that can cost over one thousand pounds and weigh almost that much." Much of this ancient tradition originates from ecclesiastical roots as the mediaeval lawyer was almost certainly a member of the priesthood; of monastic orders. Thus it is clear from this exposition that Judaeo-Christian traditions played a significant part in the formation of the secular legal profession. Even after numerous centuries Judaeo-Christian influences with respect to dressing remains intact in the English legal system. The role of the sacred Judaeo-Christian practices was to enforce the authority of the common lawyer as God appointed servants or indeed to "[imbue] in laypersons a sense of the solemnity and dignity of the law." The image of the secular legal profession as divinely appointed was a particular symbol used to enforce the legitimacy of common law. This was one of the tenets of sumptuary laws. Goodrich states that "[t]he regulation of apparel and appearance was always and crucially a matter of theological significance, a question of moral governance of the means or media through which an invisible and divine order was to be seen and honoured in its manifest form." It is clear that Judaeo-Christian theology formed the basis of sumptuary laws by focusing on the divine image of individuals. This applied to both the monarch and secular legal profession. It was a paradoxical situation. Common lawyers were symbolized as a divine profession concerned with morality and justice in order to resist the imperial monarchy. But similarly sumptuary laws were employed "...in which God the Father was manifested and embodied through the figure of the monarch (imago dei)..." As aforementioned these ancient traditions of apparel continue to apply to the modern judiciary. Although no longer regulated by sumptuary legislation or necessarily representing a divine image, its importance lies in asserting the dominance of common law as an archaic, well-established and much respected legal system; to "strike fear into the hearts of criminals everywhere." Also in relation to the divinity and hence austerity of the legal profession lies the subject of friendship. The latter was extensively discussed by Aristotle who placed much emphasis on the bonds of friendship in providing for a just government. Friendship is also an important part of Judaeo-Christian theology that corresponds to the biblical injunction to 'love thy neighbour' located at Matthew 21:39. But in reality this particular Judaeo-Christian teaching has not been translated into the workings of the secular legal profession; whether in the past or present. Instead another dimension of Judaeo-Christian theology is adopted; its formality and solemnity. Furthermore Goodrich asserts that "[f]riendship becomes a transcendent ideal, a heterotopia, an other or unthought dimension of a professional identity that denies all subjectivity or affect in its workaday lives." Thereby reinforcing the notion of the legal profession as rigid and traditionalist.
Judaeo-Christian theology influenced the development of the common law by providing for its legitimacy through the idea of divinity and thus antiquity. Furthermore through the exposition of the insularity of common law we discover that its rivalry with civil law provided an impetus. This led to the utilization of Judaeo-Christian theology to further strengthen the common law position. Also ancient traditions with respect to the apparel of the legal profession which originated from ecclesiastical sources are also as relevant today. This is clearly reflected in the judicial robes and wigs worn by the judiciary that provides an air of authority to this sacred profession. This tone of austerity is carried through to an assessment of its workings. In particular the relationship among lawyers or rather notions of 'friendship' were examined with respect to classical teachings of Aristotle and biblical injunctions. Thus reaffirming that particular aspects of Judaeo-Christian theology are influential whereas others less so. In order to encapsulate the importance of Judaeo-Christian theology to the development of common law, let us conclude with the words of eminent legal historian, J.H. Baker, "And surely, if civilisation is cut away from its roots, it will wither for want of sustenance." A befitting description indeed.