"Suffer any wrong that can be done you, rather than come here!" These words were exclaimed in Chapter 1 of Bleak House as a clear warning to all potential litigants stepping into the old Court of Chancery. This was noticeably fitting at a time when the Chancery was infamous for its interminable and dreadfully protracted proceedings. But to what extent was this phrase in Bleak House an accurate depiction of the grinding process of law and its attendant injustices? This essay will seek to analyse and interpret the realities of law with respect to the Court of Chancery during a paternalistic and philanthropic Victorian era. Moreover this analysis shall be conducted within the context of Charles Dickens's Bleak House; this will provide a unique insight into the workings of the law, particularly trusts, although there might have been some resentment by Dickens against the Chancery. Thus a brief introduction regarding the work of Bleak House and the particular time period in which it was written shall be provided. It is also important to interpret this particular question through an objective perspective by reference to modern articles. This will help to shed some light on the work of the Court of Chancery, specifically within the period from 1800 to 1875, by locating arguments within a different sphere from that during Charles Dickens's writing of Bleak House. By referring to Bleak House this essay shall also provide an intellectual discourse regarding the practice of Chancery; this necessitates an examination concerning the reality of the workings and carrying out of the law in the Chancery by utilizing primary and secondary sources. In addition the case of Jennens which was supposedly an inspiration for the writing of Jarndyce v Jarndyce by Dickens will be discussed. It provides an example of the various Chancery cases related to wills and trusts which were in abundance during Dickens's time. Furthermore the main pre-occupation of the Chancery in the 19th century was in relation to administration of estates and private trusts, albeit there were other matters such as bankruptcy and business cases being heard. Equity played a considerable role in the regulation of trustee's duties towards beneficiaries, and essentially contributed to the development of the trust concept. Equity was the essential component of the Chancery. It is also imperative that this essay analyse the institutions and personnel involved in the Chancery, who were responsible for the adjudging of cases. In particular the established role of the Lord Chancellor including the sham Lord Chancellor Mr. Krook will be examined. In addition we shall also explore the legal themes surrounding the solicitors in Bleak House e.g. Mr. Tulkinghorn and Mr. Kenge. These characters, although fictional depictions, are particularly valuable in highlighting both the strengths and deficiencies of their counterparts in reality. Ergo the purpose of this essay is to interpret four central aspects related to the work of the old Court of Chancery (1800-1875) - the law, practice, institutions and personnel - by referring to Charles Dickens's Bleak House and his elucidation of these various aspects through metaphorical illustration and character portrayal.
Dickens was writing Bleak House in a tumultuous and paradoxical period that consisted of strife and wealth. Although there was a general wave of economic development in Victorian England, this only served to endow the rich with more riches, and to perpetuate poverty and suffering among the poor. It was the beginning of the 19 th century and industrial development was at its peak bringing along with it many socio-economic and demographic changes. Hence as one commentator writes, "By the mid-nineteenth century, the law was struggling to catch up with a rate of change which was accelerating..." This meant that the rapid industrialization far exceeded any proposed advancement or reform of law, which necessarily led to a disproportionate legal system. The latter was not adapted to the changes in society and as such could not cope with the amount of litigation put forward in the courts; the Court of Chancery. This dire situation is reflected in Dickens's Bleak House which was an illustration of the injustices, delay and expense of the law in the Court of Chancery. It is apparent in the writings of Bleak House that vehement protestations of the law and personnel involved in the work of Chancery are boldly voiced out by the author. Even when the reader sees a glimmer of hope with a chanced discovery of the long-lost will, they are left disappointed to realise that the whole estate in question has been absorbed in costs. The litigation proceedings have been in vain but in retrospect the only good that has come out of the judgment is its finality, though that brings with it dissatisfaction and despondency. Therefore it seems that the proceedings put forth in the Chancery are but a vicious cycle. Dickens himself was no stranger to the mechanisms of the Chancery as he was personally involved in litigation concerning a plagiarised version of his novel, A Christmas Carol. It must have been an extremely disheartening experience for Dickens. It is no wonder that he subsequently wrote Bleak House as an exposition of the ineptitude and corruption of the law in Chancery, which had by then crystallized into hardened principles much like the common law. Many commentators have also asserted that the fictional case of Jarndyce v Jarndyce was loosely based upon the real case of Jennens, in which "...the case was not concluded until more than 80 years after it started." Although Jennens was an extremely protracted case highlighting the delays of the Chancery, it was by no means the only case with such an appalling record. Hence the case of Jarndyce v Jarndyce must have been based upon an amalgamation of cases litigated in the Chancery, and in relation to different subject matters. But wills and trusts certainly form the chief constituent of Dickens's fictional case and little is known except that "It's about a Will, and the trusts under a Will - or it was, once. It's about nothing but Costs, now." The fact that not much is known lends to a sense of mystery and a certain degree of legitimacy, as accurate criticisms cannot be launched against a case that is so ambiguous. However it is recognized by commentators that "the fiction, however is built on a secure bedrock of fact; the voluminous testimony and submissions made by Dickens's contemporaries to a series of parliamentary inquiries on the legal system furnish ample backing for much of his 'bill of complaint' on such scores as delay and expense, procedural technicality, and inconclusiveness of outcome." But there is still the issue of credibility. Although Dickens does not furnish Jarndyce v Jarndyce with the complete facts and legal issues much accustomed by lawyers and jurists, it provides a unique insight into the law, practice, institutions and personnel involved in the work of the old Chancery. This is possible by looking through the lens of the myriad characters, and also from an observation of the various interwoven linguistic intricacies in Bleak House.
One of the purposes of this essay is to emphasize the law of trusts within the work of the Court of Chancery. It is the underlying theme that flows beneath the analysis and assessment of Bleak House in relation to the Chancery during the Victorian era. Before the implementation of the Judicature Acts of 1873-1875 the old Court of Chancery was recognizable as a court concerned with equity. "Equity's procedure allowed the court to consider cases in a more three-dimensional way." It was the only jurisdiction competent in dealing with equity unlike its more rigid common law counterpart. Thus equity's flexibility allowed trusts to evolve into a sophisticated concept that was extremely protective of the beneficiaries' interests. Indeed trusts and equity were and still are complementary with one another. Without delving into a lengthy historical account of how equity developed in the Court of Chancery, it is important to note that the Chancery's role was to administer justice for individuals through the tools of morality, equity and conscience. According to Radcliffe and Cross, the equity of the sixteenth century was chiefly concerned with remedying any wrongdoing to the plaintiff according to discretionary and moral attitudes of the Lord Chancellors. Eighteenth century equity was however starting to build a foundation composed of organized principles and rules enunciated in reported cases, albeit there was still a discretionary element involved. It can therefore be seen that the gradual hardening of equitable principles had begun even in the earlier part of the eighteenth century. One of the main areas of Chancery practice which was influenced by this change was trusts law. "...roughly from 1800 to 1875, courts developed doctrines that sharpened the distinctions between trust and other legal arrangements." Many trusts principles that are now fossilized in the minds of lawyers and law students such as certainty of objects, and the elaboration of the rule in Saunders v Vautier (1841) concerning termination of a trust by consenting sui juris beneficiaries were determined by the Court of Chancery in the nineteenth century. Even the fictional case of Jarndyce v Jarndyce appertained to a trust under a will, and the determination of who should inherit was a crucial matter. But of course the crux of Bleak House was its arguments concerning the delay and procrastination of the Chancery. Indeed the Victorian Court of Chancery "...has a far broader public for its much darker persona, thanks to Jarndyce and Jarndyce." Dickens's novel is filled with linguistic descriptions of the inexcusable practice of Chancery and the persons involved such as solicitors and the Lord Chancellor. It is surely contradictory that the establishment of Chancery as a jurisdiction dealing with equity and remedying injustices is the same place that produces hardship and anguish. "In 1616 the supremacy of equity had been established as a means of escaping the common law jurisdiction, but by the nineteenth century, because of the backlog of administration in the Court of Chancery, escape was often sought in the other direction." The other direction was the Courts of Common Law; the same jurisdiction where individuals previously wanted to withdraw from. Hence it seems apparent that both courts had their deficiencies which needed to be remedied. The Court of Chancery was not solely concerned with the law of trusts and there were other subject matters such as bankruptcy, debts, and property disputes although trusts overlapped with the latter to a significant degree. "The two most important uses to which the trust was put in this period were perhaps in connection with settlement of landed estates and the safeguarding of the property of wealthy married women from the common law rights of their husbands." Although this statement depicted the function of trusts in the seventeenth to the eighteenth century it can equally be applied to the nineteenth century period. However it is important to highlight that the use of trusts was also utilized by farmers, tradesmen, professionals and even charities; trusts were no longer limited to the landed classes. Dickens was also aware of this fact. Mr. Gridley in Bleak House was from Shropshire, who we can infer from limited information, was a beneficiary under a testamentary trust established by his father, a farmer, who was certainly not of the landed classes. Thus the law of trusts extended its hand within various circles, which implied that the delays and injustices of the Court of Chancery were known to almost all stratum of society. The article written by Horwitz and Polden provides a deeper understanding of the identity of litigants to a chancery suit, and they effectively divided the identity of parties into eight major categories such as gentlemen, minors and widows. This essay has therefore relied on the statistical evidence submitted by Horwitz and Polden to support the argument that the use of trusts was not solely limited to an exclusive category - gentlemen (gentry). But caution must be noted regarding the fluidity of self-ascriptions as was highlighted in the aforementioned article itself. It is clear that Charles Dickens's Bleak House does present a certain degree of usefulness with respect to the law although not readily apparent on the surface as a whole. Although there are no clear signposting of trust issues in Bleak House the novel itself hints at this theme throughout the book; the use of characters that embody the trust theme such as Mrs. Jellyby, who is involved in a charity concerning the cultivation of coffee and education of Borrioboola-Gha natives. Charities are themselves a form of trust (charitable trust) - "the trust is the legal form most widely adopted to provide that institutional structure." The Victorian society was much concerned with philanthropy, morality and religion. Hence charities fulfilled these aims and benevolent purposes; individuals could satisfy their altruistic needs. This in itself is indicative of the dominant air of patriarchy in those times. However it is to be acknowledged that charities played a vital role in supporting the welfare of the needy in Victorian society. "The enactment of the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 re-established a deterrent system of state poor law, imposing conditions on those who sought relief." Ergo help could be sought from charitable institutions but only by the 'deserving poor' as expressed by Moffat. This was yet another lamentable scenario. From creating the ruinous case of Jarndyce v Jarndyce, to a sad figure of Mr. Gridley, and to the disillusioned Richard Carstone, Bleak House cautions the reader against entering Chancery. The use of trusts in these cases were not in itself harmful but coupled with the interference of the Chancery, trusts were turned into creatures of despair and destitution. This is in direct contrast with the statement by William Holdsworth who expressed trusts as a magnificent and ingenious concept; "...nobody had any idea of the magnitude of the juristic feat which English lawyers had accomplished when they invented [the trust] concept. No one had any idea of the large space which that concept has filled, and still fills, in our public and private law." The fact that the trust concept was lauded as a pinnacle of Chancery's success was sorely diminished by harsh realities in practice.
Focusing on the trust concept we find that the law did not necessarily correlate with the practice. "The creation of the trust and its effective management was both personally and legally a matter of conscience." This statement applies to the role of the trustee. But on closer inspection this phrase; specifically the words "legally a matter of conscience" should surely apply to the Court of Chancery. The Lord Chancellor and Master of the Rolls were the persons, who adjudged cases and produced final judgments according to equity (encompassing conscience). However the law does not correspond to the reality of litigation in the Chancery, where it can be said that the conscience of the Lord Chancellor and Master of the Rolls were not bound. As aforementioned, by the seventeenth century rules and principles of equity were beginning to harden. Thus the reality of practice was that judgments were being 'churned out' according to established precedents and not according to conscience. This is reflected in Bleak House where the character Mr. Boythorn exclaims that "[t]here never was such an infernal cauldron as that Chancery, on the face of the earth! Nothing but a mine below it on a busy day in term time, with all its records, rules and precedents collected in it..." and also at Chapter 39, "Chancery, which knows no wisdom but in Precedent, is very rich in such Precedents; and why should one be different from ten thousand?" But this was not a necessarily disagreeable thing since criticisms which plagued the early modern Court of Chancery that justice; or rather equity varied according to the length of the Chancellors foot could now be diminished in its Victorian counterpart. There could not be any allegations of unrestricted subjectivity, which was paradoxical considering that it was subjectivity that lent equity a sense of authority over the law. Subjectivity did not mean unfettered discretion but a sense of doing what was right according to the conscience and morality of the individual Lord Chancellor or Master of the Rolls. The actual practice of the old Court of Chancery which was slow and protracted invited the criticism of authors such as Dickens. This opinion is equally shared by Jeffrey Slusher that, "[p]erhaps the best-known condemnation of the unintelligible character of 19th-century English law is found in Charles Dickens' Bleak House. In Bleak House, armies of bizarre lawyers consume decades exchanging and debating documents filled with arcane legal terminology, whereas the voices - indeed, even the participation - of the litigants themselves are unimportant and unwelcome." The sense of prolonged litigation is clearly highlighted in the above statement. But to what extent was the logjam in the Court of Chancery attributable to the system itself. Were the deficiencies in the Chancery exaggerated by Dickens and his contemporaries? Although there were some accurate criticisms regarding the practice of the Court of Chancery, due recognition has to be given to the law reformers who sought to remedy the defects. It was not always clear what the root cause of a particular problem was. This was because of the fluctuating statistical information and methods used to calculate the turnover of cases in Chancery. For instance Michael Lobban acknowledges in his article that "[i]n the era of Lord Eldon's chancellorship, the figures for the number of bills filed in Chancery could thus be used as a weapon to defend or attack Eldon, depending on which years where chosen by the speaker for comparison." The fact that the underlying problem was not aptly detected meant that reform was slow-going. Maybe a main problem was never to be discovered, maybe because the weaknesses that plagued the Court of Chancery were a combination of different factors. Factors such as a lack of personnel, indecisiveness, flourishing industrial economy, a separate jurisdiction of law and equity, and mounting administration suits could have all played a part. This is a clear thread running across Michael Lobban's articles in relation to the reforming of the nineteenth-century Court of Chancery. Dickens might have been biased against the Court of Chancery as he had been involved in a copyrights case, which could have motivated him to formulate certain normative opinions. It is apparent when reading Bleak House that an intense dislike of the Chancery can be felt from the strong and opinionated words that are employed. When the solicitors Mr. Kenge and Mr. Vholes express their reverence for the Court of Chancery, a hint of sarcasm by Dickens can be detected through these characters e.g. when Mr. Kenge opines that the established law of equity in England is a great system, "O really, Mr Jarndyce! Prejudice, prejudice. My dear sir, this is a very great country, a very great country. Its system of equity is a very great system, a very great system. Really, really!" Dickens seems to be mocking the Court of Chancery through Mr. Kenge's exclamations; the latter states the word 'great' repetitiously as if to convince himself about the superiority of equity and to banish all self-doubts. This same theme of mockery continues to be imbued within the character Mr. Kenge, who later in the novel asserts "that this has been a great cause, that this has been a protracted cause, that this has been a complex cause. Jarndyce and Jarndyce has been termed, not inaptly, a Monument of Chancery practice." If this be so, the numerous real cases that Dickens relied upon as inspiration for Bleak House must have been the 'zenith' of their times. This seems highly unlikely with cases such as Jennens proving the contrary. The case of Jennens was supposedly the foundational case on which Dickens wrote the story of Jarndyce v Jarndyce in Bleak House. According to the article by Patrick Polden, the case of Jennens begun in the late 18th century when William Jennens (William the Rich) died in 1798, and continued until the early 20th century which was by all accounts a lengthy and costly affair. It attracted litigants from numerous countries such as Australia, the United States and India, and was in this respect a remarkably international case. Also it bore a striking resemblance to the fictional case of Jarndyce v Jarndyce, or was it the other way around? The truth of the matter is that there was never a clear-cut distinction regarding whether fiction followed practice or vice-versa. Polden quotes a solicitor who "wrote in reminiscences of his own professional involvement in inheritance disputes [that], 'reality and fiction tread upon each other's heels in a perpetual circle.'" This illuminates the truth that Charles Dickens's Bleak House should not necessarily be employed as a primary source in interpreting the reality of practice. It can prove useful as a supplement in an analysis of the real cases and maybe that is all.
The aspects of institution and personnel overlap to a certain extent and therefore are encapsulated as a whole. The former has been interpreted as 'how the Court of Chancery is organised', thus it is clear why the two aspects are not mutually exclusive. From 1800 to 1875 there were a long succession of Lord Chancellors and Master of the Rolls. It would be a wasteful exercise to list all of them. Ergo a selection of Lord Chancellors will be discussed in relation to the question of reform of the Court of Chancery. The Chancery was essentially a composition of the Lord Chancellor, Vice-Chancellors (created in 1813), the Master of the Rolls who "in the eighteenth century...had become a judge in Chancery...", Masters in Chancery, six clerks and the sixty clerks; the latter three exercising an administrative function. There were also the solicitors and barristers who were involved in the work of the Chancery by handling the affairs of their clients. Dickens was especially skilled in creating a vision of a dark legal profession by focusing on Mr. Tulkinghorn and Mr. Krook; they are the fictional embodiment of the personnel involved in the work of the Court of Chancery. Their depiction is meant to capture the reality of the real persons involved, who were for most of their part portrayed as carrying out malicious schemes. Paul Raffield expounds that "[i]t is a mark of [Dickens] genius that these specters are believable to the reader not merely as archetypes of a discredited profession, but also as malevolent shades: phantasms, rendered all the more terrible by their fully formed and horrifyingly realized human shapes." During Lord Eldon's period of chancellorship, the Court of Chancery was inundated with arrears and it is not surprising if the false Lord Chancellor, Mr. Krook in Bleak House was modelled in part upon his practices. "Eldon was notorious for the scrupulous hesitation with which he approached any decision, however marginal or insignificant. The slightest doubt over the law or the evidence in a case could be enough to produce a lengthy adjournment for re-consideration, research and re-argument." However it seems unlikely that Dickens created Mr. Krook based upon a single Chancellor for it would be unforgiving to pile the blame on one person. Also James Oldham acknowledges that "...there may [be] discrepancies in sources used to count cases." This indicates that the actual practice of Lord Eldon and even succeeding Lord Chancellors are shrouded in ambiguity. With respect to the personnel involved in the work of the old Court of Chancery, Bleak House mainly concentrates on solicitors and the Lord Chancellor. Therefore Bleak House is not particularly helpful in shedding light upon the rest of the personnel such as the Vice-Chancellor and clerks. Dickens does mention them in passing but there is no real substance compared to the main persons. The relationship between the Chancellor and the Master of the Rolls may have been the trigger for all the costs and delays. As Lobban observes, "no decision of fact was final: it might always go back to the Chancellor. It was therefore precisely in those areas where it had developed a unique function - settling complex transactions between multiple parties - that the structure of the court made it chronically inefficient, particularly in administrative suits. These cases brought the largest amount of money into the court, and they generally took up the least proportion of the judges' time: but they gave the court the bad name it had acquired." This is clearly highlighted in Bleak House. The case of Jarndyce v Jarndyce involved many suitors and the case itself had been in existence for decades, which meant that costs and interests would have dramatically increased. This then brings us to the next issue of 'costs in the cause'. This dreaded matter was well dramatized in Bleak House where it was stated that "for Costs is the only power on earth that will ever get anything out of [the property], or will ever know it for anything but an eyesore and a heartsore." Also Richard Carstone is the fictional embodiment of the suitor who spends excessive amounts on a protracted cause, and eventually ends up with nothing or very little. "Suitors in Chancery had to pay fees at every step in the procedure: which were for the most part appropriated by the officers themselves." It was a much known fact that cases were prolonged as long as possible, in order for clerks and the masters to incur fees. The question of costs was illustrated in Bleak House when describing the work of Tulkinghorn, "[d]rafts that he requires to be drawn, are drawn by special-pleaders in the Temple on mysterious instructions; fair copies that he requires to be made, are made at the stationer's, expense being no consideration." It is an unfortunate ending for Bleak House that "...the whole estate is found to have been absorbed in costs." This ending serves as a warning to all about the self-serving personnel of Chancery and "the carnivorous character of Chancery law" However it is to be reminded that not all personnel bore a resemblance to the sombre characters painted by Dickens in Bleak House. Lord St. Leonards was one of the numerous exceptions. Holdsworth explains in A History of English Law that there was a controversy between Dickens and Lord St. Leonards regarding litigants who were placed in prison for contempt of court, who were abandoned and subsequently died. But from an objective viewpoint which Holdsworth indeed possesses, he carefully observes that Lord St. Leonards enacted an Act of 1830 that ended the abuse of these prisoners. Holdsworth also corrects the assertion made by Dickens, who stated in the preface that everything written about the Chancery in Bleak House was nothing but the truth. Indeed Bleak House does not expose the whole story. Although law reform was slow, developments were gradually enforced. We should not be blindsided by the exquisite literary virtuoso of Dickens from recognising that Bleak House was a tale of Chancery from around the late 1840's and early 1850's (during research and writing) to 1853 (when it was published). Ergo it only attempts to provide an illustration of that particular time-frame. It was a narration of the hardships experienced. Its attack on the Chancery at least prompted some positive transformation upon the work of Chancery in the later years, reflected by the culmination of the Supreme Court of Judicature.
In conclusion, the Victorian Court of Chancery was indeed a force to be reckoned with. Its study is made even more interesting with the inclusion of Charles Dickens's Bleak House; a book so well-known to law students and lawyers. The case of Jarndyce v Jarndyce is so engrained in their legal minds that many a student or lawyer would be forgiven for attempting to find this fictional case in the English Reports, or from similar sources. However there were numerous cases that resembled Jarndyce v Jarndyce and the Jennens case was one such example. Indeed it is sometimes difficult to ascertain whether fiction followed practice or vice-versa. The fact is that Bleak House is extremely useful in understanding and interpreting the law of equity; particularly the trust concept within the context of a burgeoning Victorian economy. Trusts were increasingly used by the middle classes and were no longer an exclusive law concept employed by the gentry and landed classes. This was illustrated in Bleak House through the unfortunate character of Mr. Gridley, who had a cause involving a will (testamentary trust) from his father; a farmer. Equity was a crucial concept of the Chancery. Thus it was paradoxical that the old Court of Chancery in dealing with the issue of trusts and other cases invoked injustice, although equity was the paramount consideration. It has been argued in this essay that the discretionary element in equity produced hardship and inconsistency, but similarly organised precedents could also produce the same result. As such a balance needed to be sought. Therefore a continuous effort to speed up reforms was required of the Lord Chancellor, and who was portrayed as a sinister and shady character in Bleak House. It is no wonder that Mr. Krook (false Lord Chancellor) came to such a cruel end by 'spontaneous combustion'. It was as if Dickens was taunting the real Lord Chancellors. This is of little surprise since we know that there was a controversy between Dickens and Lord St. Leonards regarding persons imprisoned for contempt of court. The interpretation of the law, practice, institutions and personnel involved in the work of the old Court of Chancery borrows its ideas from Bleak House not as an ultimate authority, but as a supplement. No matter how brilliant or innovative Bleak House was, let us be reminded that it was a controversial work of fiction. It is no substitute for the crucial and decisive authority of case law, statutes, statistical evidence and scholarly articles. Credibility still remains an issue in relation to Charles Dickens's Bleak House.