Human rights atrocities have become a focal point in this global era through the many egregious acts committed by individuals over the past few decades. These violations of humanity have taken place in various locations such as Cambodia, Rwanda, Yugoslavia, Sierra Leone, Iraq and the list goes on. Attached to the commission of these horrific acts is the notion of responsibility--individual criminal responsibility. As such international criminal law intervenes by initiating the legal processes of investigation, prosecution, trial, judgment and punishment in relation to an individual's perpetration of international crimes: war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and crimes of aggression. These different processes are clearly embodied in the International Criminal Court (ICC). Furthermore the investigation process is readily apparent from the Chief Prosecutor's communication concerning Iraq. The latter process reflects the factual, legal and procedural aspects in establishing the role of individuals accused of serious crimes. However the various legal processes are equally found in the national courts. Therefore individuals can also be held accountable for the commission of very serious crimes through the principles of jurisdiction and complementarity. As such the weaknesses of the ICC (as reflected in the Chief Prosecutor's communication) in relation to the definition of international crimes, and subjective thresholds such as gravity and proportionality do not pose a major threat to international criminal law because of the opportunities for domestic prosecutions.
The establishment of genocide and crimes against humanity require fulfilment of the definitions in Articles 6 and 7 of the Rome Statute respectively. The crime of genocide requires specific intent that is targeted at particular groups of individuals as listed in Article 6 of the Rome Statute. This requirement sets a rather high level of intent and thus not every harmful act perpetrated will fall into the category of genocide. The essential elements are the numbers and specificity. This fact is highlighted in the Chief Prosecutor's communication concerning the situation in Iraq. Although "genocide remains a central conceptual component of international criminal law..." certain factual and procedural aspects have to be satisfied before a thorough investigation procedure. This may be considered a hindrance to a further development of genocide if what is essentially required are statistics and pedantry. But of course it is arguable that these are exactly the components that lend to the legitimacy of international criminal law because of the notion of adherence to the rules. Furthermore international criminal law is concerned with the prosecution of individuals who have not adhered to the rules of the international community. The communication also raises the issue of the defining elements in relation to crimes against humanity (Article 7 of the Rome Statute). So long as the required elements attached to crimes against humanity cannot be satisfied a further investigation cannot occur. Hence it is clear that adherence is the key.
The crime of aggression has regrettably not been defined in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court because of power politics rather than a lack of consensus over definition. The development of a definition of this particular crime has been slow but steady ever since its inception at Nuremberg. Indeed Shukri observes that "over fifty years ago, it was authoritatively held by the International Military Tribunal (IMT) at Nuremberg that initiating a war of aggression was the supreme international crime." Therefore there is no question that the crime of aggression is a reprehensible act. There has been unanimity regarding only one aspect of definition and this was highlighted in the article by Antonio Y
ez-Barnuevo. The author observes the final comments by the coordinator Silvia Fernndez de Gurmendi that aggression is essentially a "leadership crime". With the guidance of both the definitions in the IMT and General Assembly Resolution 3314 (XXIX) with respect to the crime of aggression, it is then clear that the real impediment is the power struggle between the ICC and the Security Council. This fact has been elucidated by many jurists and commentators. This certainly does not bode well for the future of international criminal law because of the fear of politicization. But Lehto argues that "there may, in fact, be some legitimate overlap between the political and judicial functions..." of the ICC. This statement illustrates a realistic and practical approach to the role of the ICC. The ICC itself was founded mainly through the efforts of the United Nations General Assembly; the latter comprised of States with their own political views. Indeed international criminal law will perform better with the realisation that it can never be wholly divorced from politics. Any attempt will be futile. However realisation and acceptance are two different matters. The development of international criminal law should not be hampered by the acceptance of power politics as a justification for a delayed definition. Ergo how long before the ICC can invoke its jurisdiction to try leaders for the crime of aggression? This concern is clearly highlighted in the Chief Prosecutor's communication regarding Iraq but the solution remains to be seen.
The analysis of civilian issues in war crimes will be sub-divided into two separate categories: (a) proportionality, and (b) the use of weaponry. In the Chief Prosecutor's communication, Article 8(2)(b)(i) and Article 8(2)(b)(iv) were specifically mentioned. These articles deal with the civilian population. They are of much importance in understanding how the aforementioned categories are interpreted within the context of international criminal law.
This means that "crimes are to be investigated and prosecuted at the national level first and foremost." "The ICC is designed as a court of last resort." National criminal proceedings will still be crucial for the prosecution of individuals accused of perpetrating international crimes. This can be seen through UK national proceedings initiated in response to the Abu Ghraib misdeeds. The deficiencies of the ICC (in relation to definitions and subjective thresholds) will not present much of a threat as long as domestic prosecutions are actively and effectively initiated. The Communication observes that national proceedings have been initiated with respect to the allegations of international crimes. Hence no action can be taken, reinforcing the view that the "[ICC] is a jurisdiction secondary to national courts." As such the development of international criminal law will rely much on the domestic sphere and the responsibility of States to initiate prosecutions. Fewer cases in the ICC do not mean a 'death sentence' for international criminal law because the latter also includes national prosecutions and international criminal tribunals. Louise Arbour suggests that fewer cases in the ICC imply that national courts are engaging in their international responsibilities, which may lead to an increase in the use of universal jurisdiction. This means that international criminal law can now further develop through its coverage of the acts of all individuals and in every State. In addition complementarity "may in fact play a regulatory role, directing interactions between international criminal law, applied by the ICC, and national criminal law." This may mean that the relationship between the international and national sphere can be moulded into more harmonious terms. This in turn will assist international criminal law to function as a more cohesive and efficient discipline. However Schabas argues that complementarity establishes an opposing and hostile interaction between international and national justice systems. In the end, international criminal law is essentially concerned about justice through prosecutions. Therefore it does not matter which system is adopted as long as genuine and effective prosecutions are initiated.
In conclusion, the issues that arise from the Chief Prosecutor's communication such as definitions and subjective elements are criticisms which need to be addressed, in order to further develop international criminal law as an efficient, effective and genuine legal body of rules. Although these criticisms arise mainly from the workings of the ICC they provide a good indicator of the growth of international criminal law as a discipline. However it is to be reminded that international criminal law is not solely concerned with the ICC jurisdiction; it includes the domestic courts where prosecutions are established through the principle of complementarity and various principles of jurisdiction such as universal jurisdiction. As such international criminal law can continue to evolve and progress through the initiation of domestic prosecutions such as those concerning the Abu Ghraib events. These national justice systems are equally as effective as the ICC if not more so. International criminal law is certainly alive and well.