The author clearly focuses the analysis of divorce within the area of classical Muslim family law. This removes any doubt as to the research region. As such this article seeks to expound on the area of classical Muslim divorce by examining the various categories of divorce such as talaq, khul and lian. In addition Esposito provides a brief illustration of the various consequences of divorce or indeed the rights and obligations of both parties. The analysis of divorce is located in the Hanafi school of thought but comparisons with the other Islamic schools of thought are noted in passing. This is readily apparent to the reader through a proper evaluation of the text. Furthermore this has been made clear to the reader by initial clarification at the first and second paragraph. Esposito's examination of divorce is mainly focused on his classification of the five major categories of divorce; talaq proper, talaq al-tafwid, khul and mubara't, lian and faskh, and apostasy. Therefore the core text is divided into five main sections devoted to the analysis of these various categories. It is nonetheless apparent that Esposito has omitted any research on the more traditional forms of divorce; ila and zihar. An investigation of classical Muslim dissolution of marriage would necessitate a detailed analysis of the various categories, and accordingly all forms of dissolution whether archaic or current would need to be examined. Thus the limitation of this article is a direct result of the omission of the aforementioned categories. In fact the topic was clearly stated to be based on classical Muslim family law, and so to a certain extent this criterion has not been fulfilled by the failure to include these less common forms of divorce. Nevertheless the limitation of this article is compensated by the coherent and structured organisation of its main text. The reader is clearly guided throughout the discussion of divorce. Indeed a layperson exploring the different forms of Islamic divorce would have no difficulties in understanding the article. This however may be another limitation depending on the intended audience, for instance whether it is an individual with prior knowledge or none whatsoever. In relation to the former, this article would serve as adequate and satisfactory background reading on which to build a foundation for more detailed research. But it would hardly assist the individual in terms of deeper understanding. This is especially so since the different categories of divorce would benefit from more elaboration and clarification. Moreover this would place this text on the same research level as the other articles that will be further analysed. This article asserts the availability of divorce to both men and women, while acknowledging the disparity between them with respect to obtaining divorce and the incidences attached to it. All in all, Esposito has managed to tread the fine balance of objectivity and subjectivity in his exposition of Islamic divorce law.
The most striking part of this article is its introductory passage; it exhibits a sense of an abhorrence of divorce especially when placed in the hands of the male oppressor. However Fyzee does not go the whole way in upholding this criticism because he then emphasizes that "in considering the institution of divorce glib generalizations are somewhat dangerous." Thus this highlights his objectivity while discussing this sensitive issue of divorce through the avoidance of formulating overly normative questions. The theme that flows through this article is that divorce is indeed reprehensible if misinterpreted and abused by certain individuals. Divorce as revealed to Prophet Muhammad was not meant to create hardship. But through human nature, customs, cultures and traditions the various methods of divorce have been somehow moulded into a different 'creature'. This aspect is clearly highlighted in the text by Fyzee. The discussion and analysis of the dissolution of marriage is located in both the Sunni and Shia teachings; there is no strong emphasis towards a particular school of thought. Furthermore this is meant to create a generally balanced overview in relation to the topic of Islamic dissolution of marriage. It is also apparent that the discussion of divorce is placed within the South Asia region which covers India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Although the Hanafi doctrine is predominant in this region Fyzee has not focused solely on this particular school of thought. This also illustrates the aforementioned point regarding the creation of a balanced overview and avoidance of a one-sided analysis. There are brief expositions of the dissolution of marriage in the English common law jurisdiction which includes case law. This suggests that Fyzee is aware that the South Asian community is inherently intertwined with the English legal system. Furthermore most cases concerning the relationship between dissolution of marriages and the legal provisions of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act 1939 were adjudicated by English judges. Indeed there is no escaping the colonialist remains of the past. A great deal of the text is also devoted to the discussion of apostasy and its legal effects with respect to the dissolution of marriage. These aspects are examined in detail. Ergo this highlights Fyzee's recognition that individuals in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh can choose to embrace other religions such as Christianity and Hinduism. Thus the right to religion is not inhibited. The fact that this is illustrated demonstrates Fyzee's awareness and acute perception of the realities of life. Indeed the institution of divorce cannot be analysed within an outdated and static environment. This is supported by Fyzee's statement in relation to apostasy, "that since the rules were formulated in Islamic jurisprudence, social conditions have changed so completely that a blind adherence to some of the rules, torn out of their proper context, would lead neither to justice nor to a fair appraisal of the system..." In short this article is concise and fairly digestible by individuals who possess some knowledge of Islamic divorce. The intended audience would therefore be individuals who are keen to further explore this area of Islamic law; individuals who wish to avoid unnecessary complexities regarding comprehension.
This article is based upon an analysis of three different cases regarding the dissolution of marriage in Islamic law. The cases are Moonshee Buzul-ul-Raheem v. Luteefut-oon-Nissa [1861] 8 Moore's IA 379, Sayeeda Khanam v. Muhammad Sami PLD [1952] Lahore 113 (FB) and Itwari v. Asghari AIR [1960] Allahabad 684. These cases are respectively discussed and analysed in turn. A brief but concise update of the dissolution of marriage in South Asia is also highlighted. The initial part of the article seeks to explore the themes surrounding talaq and khul, and provides a short discussion of these two forms of dissolution. Subsequently the article proceeds to a review of both the substantial facts and legal aspects of Moonshee Buzul-ul-Raheem v. Luteefut-oon-Nissa [1861]. This format of review is also adopted in relation to the two latter cases. These cases are analysed according to the Hanafi doctrine but this has not been clarified by the author. Instead there is an implication that such a fact is apparent since the Hanafi teachings are prevalent in the South Asia region. It would have been helpful to highlight this detail initially. It is clear that the author has chosen to examine the actual judgment of the court in all three cases although not in full detail. The selection of the cases reflect the author's research skills, and ability to choose those cases that best explains the various aspects of Islamic divorce. The author alerts the reader to the different themes he seeks to address by highlighting the key aspects at the start of the case analysis. This method not only provides clarification but suitably frames the analysis within its context. The discussion of Sayeeda Khanam v. Muhammad Sami [1952] and Itwari v. Asghari [1960] are supported by one of the primary sources of Islamic law, the Qur'an. The author has ensured that the discussion of the cases remains within the purview of Islamic sources of law. This fact is illustrated by the selection of appropriate aspects of the aforementioned case judgments that are included in this article. More importantly the author has chosen to select those cases that assert the rights of women in relation to the dissolution of marriage. In Moonshee Buzul-ul-Raheem v. Luteefut-oon-Nissa [1861], the court sided with the wife regarding entitlement to mahr and iddat allowance. In Itwari v. Asghari [1960] the court asserted that the restitution of conjugal rights against the first wife would constitute a cruelty to her. In Sayeeda Khanam v. Muhammad Sami [1952], the judge acknowledged that incompatibility of temperaments could be a ground for divorce, albeit in the private sphere. Indeed incompatibility of temperaments is a valid ground for the dissolution of marriage according to the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act 1939. However the reason for non-acceptance of this particular ground with respect to judicial divorce has not been identified in this text. It would have helped clarify the current position by providing a brief but concise discussion of this aspect. Pearl and Menski explains that this result is a consequence of "Muslim law allow[ing] for extra-judicial divorce on the basis of an agreement between the two spouses..." and subsequently highlights Muhammad Jan J's judgment. In conclusion, this article provides a good discussion of the chosen cases although a more detailed analysis reflecting the author's own criticisms would have been appreciated.
The discussion of the dissolution of marriage is placed within the sphere of the modern Personal Status Laws of eleven different states located in the Middle East and Africa. This article seeks to compare and contrast the various approaches of dissolving a marriage in Islamic law with respect to modern legislation. In addition the various methods of dissolution that ranges from talaq to tafriq are examined in this text. The different categories of the dissolution of marriage are organised according to individual, mutual and judicial methods. A rather detailed explanation of these categories is provided before a thorough examination of the personal status codes in relation to each category. The author has not clarified the application of any particular Islamic schools of thought in this instance because the present analysis is located in all the Sunni schools of thought, and also Shia teachings. Nasir's analysis is supported by Quranic verses which highlights adherence to the Islamic sources of law. This provides a clear illustration of the dissolution of marriage because the discussion is placed within the context of Islamic reasoning. This reminds the reader that secular reasoning hardly plays a role in the actual formulation of modern codes and legal provisions. The impetus for reform is derived from secular views but the support and evidence backing such formulation flows from Islamic sources of law. This fact is certainly depicted in the present article. Nasir has also effectively balanced the discussion of the various state personal codes and legislation without being particularly biased to an individual state. The summary and analysis of the different legislative provisions provided are brief but precise which lends this article a unique dimension. Thus the reader has the invaluable opportunity to examine the various methods and aspects of Islamic dissolution of marriage from the vantage point of different countries. Consequently the reader can compare and evaluate the arguments of both the Sunni and Shia schools of thought. However one of the major limitations of this article is its confusing and rather ineffective organisation in relation to subtopics. Discussion of one state's legislation is contained in the discussion of another. Nevertheless the analysis is readily understandable; effective organisation would provide the much needed clarity and coherence. This article is suitable for readers with a prior knowledge who wish to embark on a more detailed research of dissolution of marriage according to various state legislations. However individuals should be reminded that this article is not up-to-date since it was published in 2002. Further legislative reforms in individual states have been implemented since then such as the Moroccan Family Code (Moudawana) of February 5, 2004.
The author examines the manner in which the national courts respond to the petitions for the dissolution of marriage on the ground of injury caused to wives by their husbands. This assessment is placed within the context of the Maliki doctrine and there is no recourse to the other schools of thought. The reason for examining the dissolution of marriage based upon injury, in relation to Maliki teachings seems a logical and natural approach since it provides a broader and more flexible approach. The author introduces this article by providing a short but concise historical background of the Egyptian national courts and the concept of shari'a within this particular jurisdiction. This exposition attracts the reader who is then further interested to analyse this article. Naveh relies on various sources of reference which impacts on the quality of research. For instance it is apparent that he has undertaken a detailed research to discover the cases related to his statement; "The discretion exercised by this court shapes the substance and rules of the tort as a ground for dissolution..." The whole article is also written with clarity and precision because of the effective referencing and citation system, which clearly explains to the reader the concepts highlighted. This article has managed to retain a certain extent of objectivity with respect to the treatment of women and men in the national courts. There is no particularly strong bias in any direction although the title of this article serves to reinforce women's rights. Indeed there has been an increasingly wider opportunity for women to dissolve their marriages at their own initiative. Thus this highlights Naveh's sensitivity towards the issue of gender equality with respect to the dissolution of marriage in Egypt. The appendix attached seeks to reinforce women's rights and provides a clear illustration of how the Mahkamat al-Naqd (Supreme Court) deals with claims for the dissolution of marriage based on injury. The discussion was focused upon establishing injury through circumstantial evidence and the role of reconciliation. What Naveh really intends to convey to the reader is that the outcome of a case essentially depends on the court's discretion, the particular facts of the case and necessary evidence being established. This does not readily appear from initial evaluation but is a consistent theme underlying the case appendix. This text is suitable for a specialist audience. As such it requires an individual to possess existing knowledge regarding the different methods of dissolution, the Maliki doctrine and mechanism of the Egyptian national courts. Ergo it is most relevant for researching how the national courts in Egypt interpret injury within the context of Islamic dissolution of marriage. It does not provide any relevant and detailed information on how other countries construe injury and whether this ground for dissolution is accepted. However it would be an exercise of optimal utility to combine this article with Nasir's analysis of the dissolution of marriage in relation to Personal Status Laws of other countries. This article would serve as an excellent supplement towards understanding the modern legislation of Egypt and its neighbouring countries.