Norbert Elias's theory on long term processes offers a range of benefits in tracing social change. Elias aims to address problems within the discipline where theorists' have focussed their attention on the importance of individuals and the short term. The theory is arguably ahistorical and attempts to be unbound by specific focuses, such as Foucault and his range of social institutions (Van Krieken 1998 87). The long term focus allows one to establish a schema of social progress, tracing both social progress and decline and it can therefore identify significant characteristics of societies and compare nation's cultures. The individual is not neglected as the theory aims to address the individual in the form of ones socialisation as part of the ever changing development of society and the theory aims to understand the complexities behind concepts such as Kultur and Zivilisation and their importance in society. However, Elias's refutation of other theories can be seen as problematic and detrimental to the importance of individual in understanding society. Elias's attempt to provide an ahistorical theory is jeopardised by his apparent focus on violence which can be seen as a reaction to 1930s Germany. The trajectory Elias traces from the Middle Ages onwards arguably can be seen as limiting is theory and not offering the detachment and universality he may have been aiming for. The focus on the progress of society from the Middle Ages to the 'modern' period may further indicate a linear projection, even if Elias attempted to avoid this.
One benefit of Elias's theory is the attempt to rectify the short term focus the discipline has, in his view, gained and to firmly place sociology within the sciences, providing the discipline with a concrete and structured form. Elias argues that a short term focus is problematic and a change to tracing historical sources, can answer 'a large number of questions that appear complicated or even beyond understanding today can be given fairly simple and precise answers' (Elias 1992 xv). Elias claims historical evidence is vital and offers an explicit way of tracing social change in this concrete manner. Elias argues that 'only a scrutiny of documents of historical experience can show what is correct and incorrect in such [speculative] theories' (Elias 1994 xii). Elias continues to note the ability of historical evidence to offer the discipline a framework for its investigations, 'a structured sequence of continuous change serves here as the frame of reference for investigating states located at particular points of time' (Elias 1968 189). The attempts of the theory to be a universal and offer sociology an ahistorical approach places it within the sciences through its ability to create social models which can be generally applied. For example, 'the concluding model of the long term process of state formation to be found in State Formation and Civilisation, could serve equally as a model of the long term dynamic of societies' (Elias 1968 184). Elias arguably restates his theory in 1968 to reinforce the ahistorical and universal character of it, thus refuting attempts of it to be denigrated to a reaction to 1930s Germany.
Elias attempts to amalgamate the individual and larger social changes in our understanding of social change, therefore not jeopardising one over the other. Smith remarks on the importance of this dual focus, noting 'sociologists should think in terms of networks of relationships that have a 'processual nature', these figurations are caught up in long term processes that have a distinctive structure' (Smith 2001 20). Socialisation from childhood is a prime example of how individuals become intertwined within social changes, as 'the individual in his short history passes once more through some of the processes that his society has traversed in its long history' (Elias 1994 xiii). Elias through the simultaneous study of long term processes and the individual attempts to create a dynamic theory, Elias remarks that 'the relation between the individual and social structure can only be clarified if both are investigated as changing evolving entities' (Elias 1968 187). Freud is influencial here in that the ego-super ego model can be seen in Elias's theory, as Elias's aim was to 'explain differences between forms of behaviour and types of personality predominant in successive historical periods' (Smith 2001 35). Elias further refutes other theorists arguing that society cannot be reduced to fixed categories such as Parson's 'affective neutrality'. Elias remarks that 'Parson's derives himself of the possibility of discovering how the disintegrating peculiarities of different societies to which he refers are actually to be explained' (Elias 1968 186). A key example is that he argues that as society becomes more civilised the interdependencies of people increase and thus the 'connection between the individual psychological structures (so called personality structures) and figurations formed by large numbers of independent individuals (social structures) show how both long term changes and the individual are inextricably intertwined.
The ability to establish a schema of progress for social change is a major benefit of the theory. The ascendancy and decline of societies can be traced through the collation of historical evidence. Elias identifies areas such as figurations and interdependence, social bonding and identification and establishment of outsider relations as key to the development of 'modern' society. For instance, Elias identifies the centralisation of violence and the resultant passivity of the people in France as one of the key developments of its society. From this schema one is able to identify aspects which may lead to a decline in this civilising process (Fletcher 1997 178). For instance, Fletcher in Violence and Civilisation is able to refer to the German upper classes and 'clarified the group's specific decivilising processes involving, the continuity of a culture of violence among the upper classes and sections of the middle classes' (Fletcher 1997 179). This general schema thus upholds the universality of the theory. This is reflected in the recent instance of Yugoslavia. Fletcher remarks that 'the human catastrophe is a highly pertinent example of the decivilising process, occurring in the context of a disintegration of structural ties' (Fletcher 1997 182). An ability to establish a firm universal schema based on historical sources on the ascendancy and decline of societies is thus an essential benefit of this theory.
Elias's theory allows sociologists to identify the dominant and changing characteristics of a society. The example of violence shows this importance, as this characteristic has numerous effects, including affecting social relations and being integral to state formation. the characteristic of violence helps trace the transformation of social constraint and self constraint. In the Medieval Ages 'a violence [...] dominated everyday life' and sustained the authority of those that conducted it (Van Krieken 1998 97). However, throughout the period this 'violence underwent a long term process of moulding and taming' (Mennel 1992 58) and the 'monopolization of the means of violence' is accredited as characterising 'modern' state formation (Van Krieken 1998 102). The characteristic of violence is useful in the comparison of Germany to France. The centralisation of bureaucracy and violence in France is contrasted strongly to Germany as a significant and progressive social change. For instance, 'the failure of Germany coincided with the success of France, which became the leading centralised absolutist state in Europe' (Smith 2001 24). An identification of characteristics thus facilitates a useful comparison of nations and the strengths and weaknesses of cultures. Elias details other characteristics including manners as characteristic of the civilising process as well. The multiple character addressed by Elias thus ensures, that whilst large social changes are noted, the individual and how they are affected is not omitted. Mennel remarks the curve of the civilising process includes the 'refinement of outward manners, the advancing threshold of embarrassment and repugnance, [and] the hiding of what is felt to be embarrassing behind the scenes of social life' (Mennel 1997 44). The long term processes theory thus seemingly offers us both an ability to identify the characteristics of social change on a macro and micro level.
Elias's ability to oscillate between changes to the individual and larger changes is a key benefit as you can identify the relationship between the two and neither is understood out of the wider context. For example, intricate detailing can be seen within the wider context of social changes, with the prime instance being the refinement of table manners as a reflection on changes in hierarchy and class. For example, 'the ritual of etiquette both demonstrates each individual's position within the social network, and were the means by which the individual could negotiate and manoeuvre that position' (Van Krieken 1998 86). The elites' attempts to continue to maintain their privileged class can be seen through manners, as 'the moderated restraint of the emotions and the disciplined shaping of behaviour as a whole, [...was] as a purely secular and social phenomena' of the upper classes (Elias 1994 101). However Elias continues to remark upon the creation of a bourgeois identity and how the imitation of manners resulted in the removal of severe class distinctions. The process is marked through the 'development of courtly customs, their dissemination downward, their slight social deformation [and], their devaluation as marks of distinction' reflecting the reaction of the elite class to social currents, and the eventual changes in class society that occurred anyway (Elias 1994 101).
The tracing of long term processes is further important to ones full understanding of the connotations being cultural notions, Elias specifically identifies Kultur and Zivilization in Germany and civilisation in France as significant. Elias argues that such concepts themselves grow 'out of a specific set of historical situations, it too is surrounded by an emotional and traditional atmosphere' (Elias 1994 6). The contrast of these concepts is just one instance whereby the long term processes theory is useful in comparing and contrasting the social changes of different cultures. On the French notion of civilization and the German one of Kultur Elias remarks its 'process of formation, its function and its meaning are as different from those of the German concept' (Elias 1994 31). The understanding of the formation of these words is important and can be seen as reflecting class relations. In Germany 'the antithesis between Kultur and Zivilisation expressed primarily a social contrast as the German bourgeois rose to power' (Mennel 1992 36). In France civilisation was derived from civilit
 and prior to that courtosie, which reflect the continual refinement of elite manners in order to distinguish their class. An intricate understanding of the background behind certain words thus allows one to compare and understand different societies.
However, the long term processes theory arguably is problematic as Elias strongly refutes other sociologist's theories. Elias theory does attempt to be all inclusive concentrating on the long term social processes alongside the place of the individual within this, but the complete rejection of other theorists is problematic. For instance, Elias's arguably traced long term social processes from a perspective centred on violence, whilst other theorists, such as Marx focussed on social and personal relations 'in the logic of the capitalist production process, Weber in Protestantism and bureaucracy and Foucault in a range of social institutions' these perspectives are just as valid and therefore a compromise on the utility of different theories would be more beneficial (Van Krieken 1998 87). Elias remarks that 'models of long term social development has been succeeded by one in which they are primarily concerned, with models of societies in a state of rest and immutability', but arguably the need for both types of social theory within the discipline is more useful than the exclusion of one over the other (Elias 1968 191).
The attempt of the long term social processes theory to be ahistorical is jeopardised by the context in which the theory was developed. Elias as a German Jew writing prior to the Second World War places a strong focus on the place of aggression in society and thus the theory can be seen as a reaction to the German environment. Smith remarks that 'Elias's work is a way of trying to cope with his own personal situation in an upside down world' (Smith 2001 28). The focus of violence can be understood in the context of Elias being 'preoccupied with understanding the roots of the prevailing disorder that brought terror and misery' (Smith 2001 33). Elias's comparison of Germany to France in state formation can be seen as a rationalising of Germany's failings. Elias oscillation between intricate focuses, such as table manners, and distance in his theory, such as changes in violence further questions the universal application of his theory, Smith remarks that 'Elias's 'vision' contains a central tension, between merging and separation, between jumping in and holding back' (Smith 2001 21). The universal and detached nature of the theory, which is markedly one of it benefits can therefore be questioned by the context in which it was written and the concentration on violence in his theory.
Whilst Elias established that there is 'no particular beginning to the civilising process' (Elias Van Krieken 1998 106) his focus on the medieval period onwards arguably infers a linear progression from this point. Elias argues that 'the medieval standard must suffice as a starting point, without itself being closely examined, so that the movement, the developmental curve joining it to the modern age may be pursued' (Elias 1994 48 cited in Van Krieken 1998 95). The theory attempts to ensure a variable dynamic to the civilising process but, by limiting examples from the Middle Ages onwards the sources seem to infer a linear progression rather than emphasising simply the dynamic character of social changes. Mennel remarks that 'in consequence he has sometimes been charges with reviving the progress theories of Victorian times' (Mennel 1992 31). Smith remarks that 'Elias approach to the shaping of the self by the civilising process is heavily influenced by his paradigmatic, for example the royal court' (Smith 2001 40) and the use of imitation by the lower classes to copy the manners of the elites seems a simple example for the large social changes which he accredits to this. Moreover, Elias accredits the change from the use of violence to self constraint as a significant part of the civilising process and yet arguably in the medieval period the dominance of violence and its use was self constraining as this was the only means in which authority and control could be implemented.
In conclusion, whilst the environment in which Elias was writing is reflected in his work, and his examples are limited from the Medieval Period onwards, the benefits of his theory outweigh these limitations. The characteristics' of societies Elias endeavours to identify allows for their political and cultural comparison and this is a key strength of the theory. The importance of the dynamism of the theory which Elias emphasises provides a foundation for the tracing of social processes over the long term. The refutation of fixing categories allows flexibility whilst Elias does provide a structure for study through schemas of progress and a focus on the use of historical evidence to establish analysis. Elias's oscillation between micro and macro analysis is arguably very successful based on the above flexible premise, making sense of both changes to individuals, such as table manners, and the importance of aspects such as violence and its centralisation in society. Whilst other theories should not be neglected by the discipline, Elias does offer an attempt to find a compromise between a focus on the individual and external long term processes.