Georg Simmel separates social form from social content in order to provide an explicit distinction that allows for the constructive study of sociology. The analysis of social form is built on Simmel's premise that 'a collection of human beings does not become a society because each of them has an objectively determined or subjectively impelling life content' (Levine 1971 24). The importance of the social form aims to provide a firm basis to the study of society and the discipline of sociology thus allowing objective and concrete analysis to be made. This separation attempts to allow one to formulise and structure social theory and society respectively and the complexities of social form in themselves are arguably to such an extent that this explicit separation is warranted. The ideal of sociation therefore is built on the basis of social form and how individual's come together to form a society. However, problems in this division can be argued for. Social form and social content can be seen as inseparable and the standing and usefulness of social form can be jeopardised through manipulation. They can additionally be seen as too constraining on the individual and the discipline of sociology.
The separation is useful as arguably it upholds the basis of sociology and allows for social science disciplines to argue their position as not purely subjective. Social forms thus instigate 'sociology to be a science that describes social phenomena and classifies them into homogeneous categories' (Moscovici 1993 237). The externality and empirical character of social forms, allows the discipline to classify and formulise forms and establish social theory. Social forms can be seen as stable and concrete and allow for the sociologist's deeper understanding of society because they can be assessed objectively. Moscovici for instance formulise social forms into anonymous and nominated action. This formulisation provides a firm basis for the discipline and is noted by Nisbet, 'to move from Simmel's pages to current work in the study of small groups, motivation, roles, status and human interaction is not as difficult' (Nisbet 1959 480). The use of social forms allows sociology to remain a discipline in its own right, the explicit division distinguishes it particularly with psychology, which Simmel argues focuses purely on social content. Simmel remarks upon this distinction as focussing the discipline on, society, and that 'there is a science, that is peculiar to society, because certain specific forms [...] derive directly from the reciprocal actions of the individuals and groups and from social content' (Simmel cited in Moscovici 1993 237) The ability to do this sets sociology apart and instigates its presence within the field of the sciences, Simmel remarks on its ability as ' a science that describes the facts that are produced by society and not only, within the framework of society' (Moscovici 1993 238). Forms thus justify sociology as having a clear and embedded purpose, and the discipline sharing features that attribute it to the field of science.
The complexity of social forms in themselves is reason for their explicit separation from social content. Their complicated nature is important, as they are not limited as simply interaction between individuals, their intricacy and multi dimensional aspect strengthens Simmel's theory of their importance and their basis as our understanding of society. They cannot be argued as a simplistic explanation of society's foundation. Their intricacy is noted by Frisby in that 'the total meaning of the world as a whole radiates from every single point' (Frisby 1992 68). The art of conversation reflects their complex nature in their own right. Conversation in its own form, for example it is said to exhibit 'all the fortuitousness and exchangeability that characterise all means as compared to the fixed ends' (Wolff 1950 52). The dynamism of forms is reflected in social forms ability to create other forms. Tenbruck argues 'if the elements of social structure are not independent of each other, then it must be possible, within limits, to determine from a number of them something about the rest' (Tenbruck in Wolff 1959 85). In this instance, it can be seen that forms not only stem from one another but establish patterns within themselves, and are interdependent. Tenbruck remarks 'what does become actual does not find expression at random from the totality [...] the action displays a pattern', thus the complexity form and this characteristic of patterning can be directed back to ones need to understand society through them and ability to objectively assess them (Tenbruck 1959 73). A final illustration exemplifies their complexity 'life attains a more highly differentiated and more self conscious expressions in those cases where it contradicts and even destroys artistic forms' (Simmel 1978 17).
Social forms can become both abstract and autonomous and this is illustrative in their complexity. One instance is fashion, which is argued by Frisby as always standing 'as the watershed of the past and the future and thus [...] gives us a strong sense of present-ness' (Frisby 1992 74). The discipline of science and example of art provide interesting illustrations. Science is considered to have 'become a value in itself' (Frisby 1992 74) and art is understood by society as 'wholly separated from life' (Frisby 1992 74). Wolff argues that the development of these forms has led to their autonomy 'in the sense that they are no longer inseparable from the objects which they formed and thereby made available to our purposes' (Wolff 1950 41) Social forms arguably gain their own character and create consequent ramifications; Frisby remarks that the institution of law, stems from simple social forms although now is considered to have 'supreme values' (Frisby 1992 42). The judicial system is characteristic of placing clear ramifications on society if it is not abided by. An extension of the autonomy and independent power of forms can been seen in their ability to constrain individuals, Wolff argues that the form of sociability requires 'the reduction of personal poignancy and autonomy' (Wolff 1950 45) in order to create a society or gathering. . The notion of society must be considered a powerful concept and the use of abstraction is indicative of how it cannot be limited to personal social content.
The structure of social form has the dual function of providing a clear understanding for the individual on what is the basis of society, and how society operates. For example, the power of forms is reflected in that they establish a framework where 'the individual sees[s] himself confronted with rules of his own making which have outgrown him' (Elzhorn 1968 2). Simmel argues that their structural character is important in that 'these forms [...] encompass the flow of life and provide it with content and form [and] freedom' (Simmel cited in Elzhorn 1968 11). The importance of both the concrete nature of forms and the complexity of social forms is summarised by Simmel in The Conflict of Modern Culture and Other Essays, in that they uphold 'frameworks for the creative life which, however soon transcends them' (Simmel 1968 11). Frisby considers carefully the ability of forms to structure social space and argues that where Kant is not specific enough on fulfilling a solution to this problem, Simmel's social forms specifically structure social space through 'the exclusiveness or uniqueness of space, the boundaries of space, [... and for example] distance and the movement of space' (Frisby 1992 104). Social forms are accredited for 'bringing together of otherwise independent elements around a particular space, (the religious communities focus around a church)' (Frisby 1992 105). An illustration of the structure provided by social forms is Simmel's use of 'the picture frame is so far as framing has a similar significance for social groupings as for works or art' (Frisby 1992 104). Social forms are thus very useful in the formulisation and ordering of society for sociologists, in for instance, forms of institutions, and moreover the structuring of society for the individual who operates within it.
The problems of social content support how the complexity, structure and apparent distinct nature of social forms warrant their explicit separation. Simmel justifies the usefulness of the distinction arguing that the same cause may create a multiplicity of effects. For instance, 'political interests can be achieved through an alliance just as well as through conflict' (Moscovici 1993 248). Therefore it is hard for one to differentiate the different forms in which our content may take, 'in accord with our purposes, we give those materials certain forms and only in these forms operate and use the elements of our lives' (Wolff 1950 41). Wolff's example additionally shows the subjectivity of contents which arguably renders them inadequate for social analysis. Simmel argues that the focus on social form is important because it breaches the difficulty of individualisation, forms 'make individuals what they are and cause them to seek contact with others and thus to arrange their conditions reciprocally' (Moscovici 1993 248). This is a useful distinction because through understanding social forms Simmel regards their use of part of how individuals become a mass society. Simmel continues to extend this arguing that due to the individual nature of content they therefore have little meaning without interaction, as it is interaction in which this content is expressed and what forms a society.
The context in which Simmel was studying is important to the distinction he establishes between social forms and social content. This separation is helpful in ones understanding of modern concepts, including our comprehension of the metropolis, the proliferation of communications and the notion of modernity. Social forms attempt to rectify the growth of a truly individualistic culture and help in the ones 'interpretation into a largely impersonal society' (Elzhorn 1968 1). Simmel writing on the metropolis rationalises the objective nature of forms and the subjective nature of social content in that content becomes a 'retreat from excessive external stimuli [which are social forms]' (Frisby 1992 66). Social forms in the metropolis not only have an objective and overwhelming nature but are vital in the ordering and understanding of this milieu. To order the complicated world of the metropolis one has to put aside the personal social content of each individual because 'the relationships and concerns of the typical metropolitan resident are so manifold and complex' and thus they require to be organised through social forms (Levine 1971 328). The proliferation of communications is characteristic and recognised as a large part of modern society. It provides an interesting illustration of the usefulness of social forms as a theory, especially towards understanding modern society's dynamism and cosmopolitanism, Simmel remarks that 'new and rapid modes of communication aided in the diffusion of ideas and made possible the emergence and sustenance of new forms of social life' (Elzhorn 1968 1). To summarise therefore social forms are essential, especially in the metropolis, on 'how individuals actually experience modernity in everyday life' (Frisby 1992 65).
However, the distinction made by Simmel between social content and social form can be argued as severely problematic. It can be argued that social form and social content are inseparable. For instance, Tenbruck argues upon the difficulty to separate these two areas noting that 'in every given social situation, content and societal form constitute a unified reality' and Nisbet agrees that 'form and content cannot, in practice be separated' (Tenbruck 1959 72 and Nisbet 1959 480). Warfield Rawls extends on the problems of the explicit distinction noting, 'his distinction between immanent and objective form retains the dichotomy between individual and structure as the primary means of differentiating individual from institutional form' [...this] is what I have previously argued against (Rawls 1989 124). Levine further deepens this arguments eluding to the impracticality of the explicit nature of the separation, noting 'a person is never merely a collective being just as he is never merely an individual being' (Levine 1971 261). Tenbruck continues to argue against one of the foundational premises of Simmel's distinction, in that he questions whether the premise of such as separation can be empirically validated, noting it is validated 'if and only if the same content can actually be shown to exist in various and different forms and if the same forms can be found to contain different contents' (Tenbruck 1959 70).
The social content in the individual cannot be seen as explicitly isolated from society's social forms, it can agued that social forms are too influential over the individual and that 'he derives his own values and improvements from this collective' (Wolff 1950 54). The affect on the individual by social forms must be noted, as they can be seen as too dominant and thus stifle ones individuality. Social forms can been seen as having the adverse affect, of not providing a solution to the individualisation of society, but as oppressing any individualism whatsoever. Levine provides the example of the family as an 'extension of ones own personality' (Levine 1971 262). The argument is importantly continued by Levine in that he ascribes two functions to social forms which exemplify the problem of their over dominance, 'on the one hand they function as entities with an individual character [...] while on the other hand, [...] they function as higher order complexes' (Levine 1971 265). Whilst Simmel argues that social forms 'cannot and are not meant to- account for interaction itself- they are operative in it, they account for its patterns', the dominance of social forms is arguable and their affect on individual's, contents and resultant social form is debatable (Tenbruck 1959 85). Wolff additionally brings our attention to this problem remarking on the individual's 'certain faith or feeling, which assures us that the intrinsic norms of fragments or the combination of superficial elements do possess a connection with the depth and wholeness of reality' (Wolff 1950 56).
Social forms can not only be seen as dominating the individual and their personality but can be further recognised as constraining their freedom of interaction. Thus if social content cannot be expressed freely through social form, then the explicit study of social form is jeopardised. Tenbruck argues that 'by studying social form of interaction Simmel wishes to ascertain the extent to which the range of individual human conduct is restrained' (Tenbruck 1958 598 cited in Elzhorn 1968 2). An interesting example of the constraints of social forms is the use of language, it is no mere accident of linguistic usage that even the most primitive sociability [...] places so much emphasis on form and "good form"' (Wolff 1950 43). The development of patterning, which allows for the hypothesising of social forms, can be argued as indicative of how social forms are constraining on ones freedom of interaction. Wolff remarks on the resulting affect noting that, 'stylised expression occurs among equals' (Wolff 1959 49) and Warfield Rawls notes within 'sociability' 'all other objective forms are subjugated' (Rawls 1989 126). Arguably social forms establish expectations and thus conformity upon the individual. Wolff notes that 'man is constituted by [sociability's] specific character [...] but only in a certain reservedness and stylization' and that he is expected 'to function as part of the collective' (Wolff 1950 48 & 54 respectively). Thus their use is further jeopardised in that if one and society is to be understood through social forms such constraints should be lifted.
The ideal of sociation seemingly is built upon positive interaction and reciprocity both for society and the individual, Wolff notes this premise, 'sociability, if one will, creates an ideal sociological world in which the pleasure of the individual is closely tied up with the pleasure of other' and Wilson remarks on Simmel's 'methodological presupposition' (Wolff 1950 48 and Wilson 1974 1520). However, the ideal of sociation and society can quickly be jeopardised in that the individual through their own agenda and social contents has the innate ability to manipulate social form to their own ends. Wilson argues this can additionally happen naturally, 'permutations of human experience yield deviant patterns: forms of individuality' (Wilson 1974 1520). Hypothetically if this was to be extended across society the true basis of society would therefore not be known. Social form would simply become 'a deceptive lie when it is guided by non sociable purposes or is designed to disguise such purposes' (Wolff 1950 49). Wolff ascribes such action as 'social games' and notes that 'to the person who really enjoys it, its attraction rather lies in the dynamism and hazards of the sociologically significant forms of activity themselves' (Wolff 1950 50)Rawls continues to argue that this ideal is restrictive, 'sociablity is a very limited category for Simmel and sociable relations are clearly distinguished from all sorts of relations' (Rawls 1989 126). The fragility therefore of the true nature of social forms brings one to question their usefulness in our understanding of society.
A classic criticism of Simmel's social forms is that they are too restrictive upon the discipline itself. Tenbruck remarks that other scholars have commented that the 'program is deemed classificatory, formulistic and altogether too narrow to accommodate sociology' (Tenbruck 1959 61). Warfield Rawls adds another perspective to this argument against forms attacking their stability and autonomy, the social becomes less organized, as one moves to a level of rationalized [...] forms' (Rawls 1989 127). Tenbruck continues to remark that such criticism returns to the foundational argument of the discipline, 'the issue over sociology as a "general", as opposed to a "special" social science' (Tenbruck 1959 62/3). Simmel clearly establishes his stance on this issues noting that he rejects 'sociology as a general science', yet this foundational argument still remains a case in point and results in one posing the question of whether sociology should as that sociology should only be a discipline that 'deals with phenomena only in so far as they are truly collective phenomena' (Tenbruck 1959 68 & 69respectively).
Frisby provides an interesting argument against the explicit separation of social form and content in a modern context. Frisby argues that there is now an overriding tension between the individual and the collective remarking that modern culture is thus moving in two separate directions, 'towards a levelling of individuals and values and the production of even more comprehensive social circles and, on the other, the development of the most individual aspects of human subject' (Frisby 1992 76). Once again this returns to the dominance of social forms and is exemplified in the blas attitude reflected in metropolitan life, in that the 'individual mind can enrich the forms and contents of its own development only by distancing itself still further from the [objective] culture' (Simmel 1968 cited in Frisby 1992 77). A second distinction must be recognised, our understanding of social forms attributes them into a fluid definition based upon the interactions between individuals, however, patterning and the apparent growing autonomy of social forms results in an tension between fluidity and rigidity within their definition. Sherman remarks that Simmel notes this duality, 'life can express itself and realize its freedom only through forms, yet forms must also necessarily suffocate life and obstruct freedom' (Simmel 1968 24 cited in Sherman 1970 126) This argument links to the inability of a strong and complete definition of social forms and due to this difficulty they can be deemed useless in that they can be interpreted in a multiplicity of ways spanning from interaction between two individuals to the notion of the Church. Whilst the classic criticism of social forms is that they are too narrowing for the discipline it must be noted that they seemingly cover and indefinite areas and that there is little restriction, in terms of the external and empirically understandable world, of what they can encompass.
In conclusion, whilst key criticisms and observations about the failings of social forms are valid and important in ones consideration of their use, the explicit separation provided by Simmel is useful as a social theory. Social forms provide a comprehensive way to understand the basis of society and are complex enough to not be disregarded out of turn. Whilst all social theory has its restrictions social forms fulfil two essential functions, they are detailed enough to understand the complexities of society and bring individuals together into a collective, whilst they additionally strengthen the purpose and basis of the discipline of sociology.