The relationship between science and society in a democracy is ambiguous and can be seen as both compatible and oppositional. This relationship can be understood through assessing whether a democratic environment allows for science to be independent of society and progress without be disturbed and through whether the characteristics and principles of democracy parallel or oppose the discipline. Democracy's compatibility is illustrated through the value placed on science by a democracy and the trust given to the subject because of its strong ethos and ability to self regulate which in turn allows it to operate freely and independently of society. Science can be seen to uphold the functions of a democratic society, such as supporting environmental protests, supporting the authority and legitimacy of governments and providing epistemic benefits. However, a democracy allows for the open criticism of science and thus often challenges the integrity of the discipline. Science arguably needs to work in an oppositional manner and maintain elitism to allow the subject to progress. Democracy can be seen as oppositional because society places an emphasis on the importance of science, but this dependence can lead to science being dictated to by a political agenda and threaten the objectivity and autonomous progress of the discipline. Funding problems and alternative science alongside theoretical models for science moreover threaten it basis in society.
Science is compatible to democracy because the values in which it attempts to uphold are the same as those of a democracy. The freedom of knowledge production is a characteristic of a democracy, and the ability of science to be objective in its knowledge claims result in science being highly valued by democratic societies. Edel remarks upon society's recognition of science's ability to increase 'human knowledge in as many fields as possible' and science's role in 'the development of stable knowledge' (Edel 1944 702). Longino recognises this importance remarking on science's role of providing autonomous pure inquiry (Longino 1990 162). Its particular importance to democratic societies is shown in Knorr who notes that democratic societies are becoming 'knowledge societies' [...which] run on expert processes and expert systems that are epitomised by science' (Knorr 1999 1). Such parallel values are also noted by Edel who remarks science's activities as being a 'commitment to democratic goals' (Edel 1944 706). Thus a democratic environment offers an environment in which science can operate because of the high level of regard and enthusiasm given to the discipline. Merton supports this claim, noting 'the continuity of science requires the active participation of interested and capable persons in the scientific pursuits. But this support of science is assured only by appropriate cultural conditions' (Merton 1973 254). Compatibility to a democracy is consequently created through society allowing science to operate freely and independently without interference because of the value given to its role in society in upholding knowledge production.
Democracy places trust in the discipline's activities and its role in knowledge production through a belief in science's strong ethos which attempts to maintain the discipline's objective, autonomous and impartial nature. The strength of this ethos results in the imposition of strong rigours on the discipline and scientists, to ensure the values that are recognised as parallel to democracy and that this ethos is recognised by wider society. Kitcher remarks that there exists 'a core set of moral constraints that are close to being universally acknowledged, and serious attempts, at least, are made to ensure that researchers abide by them' (Kitcher 2001 127). The strength of this ethos allows science to adopt the recognised important function of critiquing democracy, its various institutions and attributes. Merton coins the term 'organised scepticism' to describe this function (Merton 1973 272). The rigour and structure of this activity is a key strength of the discipline, and therefore science is accepted in taking on the role of the 'questioning of fact concerning every phase of nature and society' (Merton 1973 264/5). Science is important in facilitating open criticism and comment which can be seen as an integral part of a democratic society. Autonomy is a recognised quality of science and part of the ethos is the preoccupation with the attempt to maintain this. Merton notes 'science must not suffice itself to become the handmaiden of theology of economy or state' (Merton 1973 260). The ethical position of science is therefore important in as part of its compatibility in society, and allows science the role of critiquing society.
Science's self regulation offers how its autonomy and impartiality in research are translated in to practice. The choice of experts is remarked to fall into a markedly stringent hierarchy. Fuller notes that 'science displays a pecking order of researchers, institutions and even subject areas that rivals that of any class based society' (Fuller 2000 10). The peer review process is another example of such a stringent regulatory technique and in practice, as Fuller notes it 'means that scientists have no choice but to share data and credit if they expect to be supported in the future' (Fuller 2000 21). Black remarks on the through nature of self regulation, noting 'the elaboration of the practical system to evaluate scientific projects, the creation of mechanisms permitting the relative significance of scientific results to be assessed, and the construction of safeguards against the growing dangers of specialisation' (Black 1972 3). The sophistication of self regulation has been at the forefront of the development of science and is essential in maintaining its compatible position. Merton comments that 'modern science has considered the personal equation as a potential source of error and has evolved impersonal criteria for checking such error' (Merton 1973 259). This strong ethos and structure creates a model for knowledge production in all other areas of society, for both academic disciplines and non academic activities to aspire to and is therefore highly compatible to a democratic environment where a multiplicity of autonomous knowledge producing bodies exists. Fuller remarks on this noting 'the experimental natural sciences have increasingly become the paradigm case of Science, the standard against which other academic disciplines and even non-academic social practices are evaluated' (Fuller 2000 7). Thus natural science is taking on an important societal role in both providing a structured model for other disciplines and a unified concept for the other sciences to aspire to.
In a specific sense, science is compatible with democracy through servicing society through epistemic benefits. Discoveries in science have, as Jacob notes supported 'creating modern Western prosperity, life expectancy and industrial productivity' (Jacob 1992 8). Medawar remarks on the acceptance of science by society because of its work in medicine, noting that 'most people believe as we do that medical science has a moral credit balance' (Medawar 1972 11). The importance of the function of science can be particularly seen in the translation of the discipline's work into technology. Marks comments on both these epistemic benefits noting that 'the rapid growth in the world in this century is primarily due to the world wide spread of industrialisation and the benefits brought by improvements in agriculture and by modern scientific medicine' (Marks 1982 490). Merton remarks how epistemic benefits allow science to be valued by society in that 'abstract and difficult theories which cannot be understood by the laity are presumably proved in a fashion which can be understood by all, that is through their technological applications' (Merton 1973 261). The use of science to support the environmental movement is a good illustration of its epistemic benefits, scientific knowledge is used to support environmental claims of protest against the actions of the authorities and this is important as it supports the activity of protest and confrontation which is an important function in a democracy. Beck notes that 'they are in any case threats that require the sensory organs of science- theories, experiments, measuring instruments- in order to become visible and interpretable as threats at all' (Beck 1992 162). Science therefore can be seen as compatible in a very specific and valued sense through its ability to uphold democratic functions, like substantiating arguments for protests, alongside being understood in its provision of other epistemic benefits such as medical and technological advances.
Science's compatibility can be seen in its ability to legitimate and support government. Fuller remarks the effectiveness of government appeal to science, in that 'appealing to scientific authority has proved to be the most palatable means for democratic governments to coerce the people of Earth' (Fuller 1997 60). Science as a force to legitimate government had arguably been recognised 'from Francis Bacon and Descartes onward, [because] scientists understood and used the power that their practices promises, so too did the elites and states they so frequently served' (Jacob 1992 7). For instance, the application of science into technology is marked as supporting this authority because this provides 'daily demonstrations of power' (Merton 1973 261). Edel outlines more specifically ways in which both natural and social sciences support democracy through maintaining public participation, through for example 'the voting machine, the radio, statistical techniques, educational theory [and] the scientific analysis of prejudice and propaganda' (Edel 1944 703/4). In the instance of Nazi science and other totalitarian states the command over science illustrates the importance of its role in legitimating government. It is remarked that the new dictatorship must recognize, as did Hobbes, that 'the State must be all or nothing, science is power' (Merton 1973 257).
However, there is a strong argument against science being compatible with a democratic society. Public interference with science is problematic due to the expertise and specific knowledge needed in the subject. Therefore arguably the characteristic of elitism in science is illustrative of how science maintains an opposing role to society in order to maintain its progress. For instance, Kitcher remarks that 'epistemically significant questions in some science may systematically be undervalued because the majority of members of society have no appreciation for the factors that make the questions significant' (Kitcher 2001 129). The importance of elitism is shown in Kitcher's emphasis on the need for science to avoid a tyranny of the ignorant. Kitcher notes that 'peoples preferences are often based on impulse or ignorance and thus diverge from favouring what would actually be good for them' (Kitcher 2001 117). Controversial research in the short term which results in long term benefits moreover asserts the need to remove public involvement. This elitism is therefore warranted for 'many of the fears of earlier generations, seem almost quaint, but comparable fears are being expressed today with equal fervour concerning issues as diverse as standardized performance tests, [and] the study of statistical difference between races and human beings' (Hull 1988 29). Key figures within the discipline such as Einstein and Darwin, further illustrate this issue, as initially their theories were markedly seen as oppositional to the views of society and needs of the wider public. Hull notes that 'The Times of London chastised Darwin for publishing The Descent of Man (1872)' (Hull 1988 29). Therefore a need for elitism due to the specific nature of science can place it in an oppositional position.
Public perception and the way in which the media present the discipline arguably results in such elitism which is in opposition to society, as science arguably does not fulfil the perception given to it by the media. For instance, science as compatible to democracy had been seen through it's the cohesive, rigid and structured nature and its ability to be a source of truth may only be a public perception. The ability to create progress in the subject is arguably built on academic discourse and criticism, therefore the discipline's requirement to maintain this perceived cohesive view makes it naturally oppositional. For instance, 'while internal success is based on the demolition of the 'demigods in lab coats', external success on the contrary, relies on the deliberate construction, adulation and dogged defence of the infallibility claims of those same demigods' (Beck 1992 164). The media recognises science's privileged place in society, as a source of truth and fact, but in this the media abuses science, creating the need for elitism. The media is noted for both scare mongering and disturbing the activities of the discipline. For example, the media 'treat Nobel prize winning scientists as experts on topics far beyond their special competence, thereby creating a new priesthood' (Longino 1990 164). Elitism arguably is a rejection of the media's ability to place extensive influence in certain figures. Furthermore, such elitism and opposition is inadvertently created by the media which is able to direct the public's focus. Dawkins remarks that the 'media preoccupation with "pseudoscience" threatened the proper appreciation of science and dampened "the appetite for wander" that it could satisfy'. (Gregory and Miller 1998 55).
The proliferation of sociological theories that analyse science can be argued as oppositional to science because this activity can challenge the integrity and objectivity of science. Many abstract models on how science can be made more watertight exist, but these models are arguably unworkable in practice. However, their mere existence questions the basis and integrity of science. In Kitcher's Ideal Deliberation, the formation is 'expected to recognise possibilities for satisfying curiosity as well as opportunities for practical intervention, long term benefits as well as immediate pay offs' (Kitcher 2001 119). However as Kitcher continues to remark there are 'actual societies in which even ideal deliberation would end in irreconcilable disagreement' (Kitcher 2001 120). The abstract nature of Kitcher's model remarks upon significant weaknesses in the practice of science and whilst Kitcher remarks upon the unworkable nature of the model the existence of the theory arguably places science in an oppositional position to society because these models continually criticise science. Similarly Fuller, outlines the model of Republicanism with the 'underlying idea [...] that true freedom requires the expression, not merely the toleration of different opinions' (Fuller 2000 13). Fuller highlights the need for an ideal environment for such a system to thrive, remarking that there would be a 'need for societies to provide the economic security and cultural resources [...] to protect their members' right to be wrong' (Fuller 2000 13). Fuller openly admits that this reality does not exist in science noting, 'even the lowest contract researchers believe that they are still contenders for tenured posts and hence think they potentially have something to gain by biting their tongues in deliberate settings' (Fuller 2000 15). Thus a democratic society is conducive to the growth of such discussion on the ideals and models that science should be attempting to achieve. Science therefore falls into an oppositional role as it cannot sufficiently fulfil these abstract models. Whilst the theories may be useful in the control and regulation of science such models also serve as a device that highlights the weaknesses and limitations of the discipline.
A threat made to science through the freedom offered to academia is extended through the existence of alternative sciences in democratic societies, which similarly have the aim to challenge the objectivity and status of science. For example, feminist science attempts 'to 'rediscover' the role women have played in scientific research and development- whether as individuals or as a group- and the obstacles, in the form of education and scientific structures, that are placed in their way' (Gregory and Miller 1998 68/9). The Anti Science Movement is a strict formalisation of how science can be seen as strictly oppositional to a democratic society. Merton summarises it as deriving 'from the conflict between the ethos of science and other social institutions' once again democracy's inability to allow science to operate freely is illustrated with the public's attempts to become the overriding judge of science. Merton remarks that 'conflict arises when the social affects of applying scientific knowledge are deemed undesirable' (Merton 1973 266). Beck theoretically outlines the problem of the public scrutiny of science and how it could send the discipline into disrepute noting that, it could potentially turn into 'criticism and perhaps even social movements, articulate[ing] itself and discharg[ing] itself as protests against science and technology' (Beck 1992 160). The freedom of the growth of anti science and alternative science movements are very much a part of a democratic society. For instance in a totalitarian state with state controlled science, such challenges arguably would be repressed, science can therefore easily been seen as oppositional to this environment and having a need to resist such challenges.
Science maintains an opposing role to society in that reliance on public funding can result in the discipline becoming dictated to by a political agenda. Project failures funded through public revenues can result in disaffection with science. It is a separation from the political agenda which places the subject in high esteem and thus an opposing role to this connection to government or funding providers is needed when the subject is determining its research agendas. Otherwise science may be perceived as only acting in the interests of government or its funding providers. Over influence on the discipline by funding providers can lead to the discipline becoming a 'service' industry. Beck remarks that 'the sciences, including the natural sciences, are transformed into, self service shops for financially well endowed customers in need of arguments' (Beck 1992 173). The problem of a connection to government is remarked upon by Beck who notes the over influence of governments would result in 'the end of the scientifically directed instrumentally rational control of the practice' (Beck 1992 172). A good example of this is given in Dwight Eisenhower's final presidential address remarking on the Cold War, which warns against the 'danger that science itself might ultimately become a ward of the state' and that the 'alliance of the military, high technology industry, and the research university- [...] now threatened political and intellectual freedoms long taken for granted' (Leslie 1992 199). A specific instance on the problems with 'Big Science' and its reliance on public funds is shown in the instance of the Super Collider. The damage created by the failure of this project is remarked upon by Fuller who notes the disaffection created towards science (Fuller 2000 2). Issues raised from science being publicly funded and the problems created by its autonomy being lost in this manner show how an oppositional position to such influence is needed to avoid dictates by governments and funding providers. Such an opposing stance therefore aims to maintain the integrity and public trust for the subject.
The overriding importance of the autonomous character of science is further illustrated in how science historically can be seen as becoming a victim of government short term agendas. The discipline as arguably is fragmented and weakened by such activities, pulling research agendas in different directions and manipulating the content of the subject. Nazi Science is an instance of how science can to easily fall victim to the political agenda. It must be remarked that is was only after the German loss in the Second World War that Nazi Science was accredited as a distortion of science's content. Such a close connection to politics therefore raises serious questions to science's benefits to society. Merton remarks that 'the situation in Nazi Germany since 1933 illustrate the ways in which logical and nonlogical processes converge to modify or curtail scientific activity' (Merton 1973 253). Arguably, therefore a wholly oppositional stance needs to be taken by scientists to avoid complete disaffection from society with the discipline, which is presently highly influential and must aim to avoid being challenged as wholly distorted by political needs. The Cold War provides another example of science's need to be autonomous because science seemingly has taken on a fluctuating status in society, whereby prior to the Cold War it was seem as the ultimate source of truth and progress, yet during the Cold War science increasingly lost its status as its developments were seen as globally threatening. The result is noted by Margaret in that now 'we have come to see science as a human artefact capable of being deeply implicated in our political as well as social interests' (Margaret 1992 2). Conant's Preface to The Copernican Revolution provides an example through his defence of science which it was under attack in this period, remarking that 'the advances are made so rapidly and on so many fronts that the laymen is bewildered by the news' (Kuhn 1970 xvi). Science can be seen as requiring an opposing role as its research agenda need to be unbound by politics. Thus in order to be seen as autonomous to these short term needs arguably the discipline must take an oppositional stance to government.
In conclusion, whilst science can fall victim to the dictates of government and the impartiality of the subject is continually threatened by problems raised by funding providers and their influence on the research agenda, the discipline remains compatible to a democratic society. The values of science seem parallel to those of democracy and the strong ethos and rigorous structure and way in which scientific investigation and activities are conducted not only provide an exemplar for other social sciences to aspire to but provide a substantial discipline which offers both recognised progress, and can be seen to both support the values and governments of a democracy. Moreover, the value placed on knowledge production in a democratic environment is conducive to the objective nature of science and the epistemic benefits offered to society through progress in the discipline result in an environment in which the subject is held in high regard.
Bibliography
Beck, Ulrich. 1992. Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. London: Sage
Black, H. 1972. 'The Problem Defined'. In Ciba Foundation Civilization and Science in Conflict of Collaboration? North Holland: Excerta Medica: 1-9
Edel, Abraham. 1944. The Relations of Science and Democracy. The Journal of Philosophy 41 (26): 701-710
Fuller, Steve, 2000. The Governance of Science. Buckingham, Philadelphia, USA: Open University Press.
Fuller, Steve, 1997 Science: Concepts in the Social Sciences, Buckingham: Open University Press:
Hull, David L. 1988 Science as a Progress: An Evolutionary Account of the Social and Conceptual Development of Science. , Chicago, USA: The University of Chicago Press.
Jacob M. C. 1992. 'Science and Politics in the Late Twentieth Century'. In Margaret C. Jacob (ed) The Politics of Western Science. New Jersey, USA: Humanities Press: 1-19
Kitcher, Philip. 2001. Science, Truth and Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Knorr Centina, Karin. 1999. Epistemic Cultures. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: Harvard University Press
Leslie, Stuart W. 1992. 'Science and Politics in Cold War America'. In Margaret C. Jacob (ed) The Politics of Western Science. New Jersey, USA: Humanities Press: 199-234
Longino, Helen E. 1990. Science as Social Knowledge: Values and Objectivity in Scientific Inquiry. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press
Marks, John. 1983. Science and the Making of the Modern World. London, Heinemann
Medawar, P.B. 1972 'Some reflections on the theme of Science and Civilisation'. In Ciba Foundation Civilization and Science in Conflict or Collaboration? North Holland: Excerta Medica: 9-21
Merton, Robert K. 1973. The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. Chicago, USA: The University of Chicago Press.
Miller, Steve and Jane Gregory. 1998. Science in the Public: Communication, Culture and Credibility. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: Perseus Publishing