The rise of professional medicine had significant implications for both class and gender within Britain. At the foremost the ordering of society in the context of the Enlightenment led to a direct conflict between rationality and empiricism that resulted in a gender discourse within medicine. The growth of women's madness and the victimisation of women for the gains of the profession were exemplified in the changing conceptual understandings of gender. The medical profession provides a key illustration of an area where Victorian ideas on domesticity were reinforced, and had significant affects on the participation of class and genders in this field. The rise of the profession can been seen as reinforcing existing ideas, especially the prevalence of Enlightened ideas and Victorian domesticity, and additionally establishing new ideas that were consequential in the reinforcement of both class and gender divisions within society.
The rise of professional medicine was arguably fuelled by ideas of the Enlightenment. This change resulted in significant affects on both the position of women in the community and had remifications for the class system. Prior to the formalisation of the medical profession, wise women provided for the medical needs of the community and this resulted in a sense of community, which was instrumental in one area whereby class barriers were transcended. Oakley notes that 'women of all classes depended upon the lay midwife to see them safely through childbirth' (Oakley 1976 24). The wise woman and midwife operated 'a system of cooperative mutual aid' (Oakley 1976 19) which upheld the sanctity of pregnancy and childbirth as an aspect of life exclusive to the female gender. Although initially there was a separation between medicine and childbirth, the profession still threatened the area, as for example, 'the stimatization of midwifery also stemmed from an ideology which saw childbirth as an aspect of women's natural and domestic' (Oakley 1976 31) function. The Enlightenment thus created a clear discourse between the competence of wise women and doctors, and the 'ideological tensions between superstition of the one hand and [the prevailing importance of] the enlightenment and progress on the other' (Donnison 1977 cited in Jordanova 1989 30) had the immediate consequence of the erosion of the competence of women through medicine and led to the erosion of the class transcendence that existed in the community wise women. Thus the introduction of male surgical midwives saw male influence into a previously exclusively female aspect of life and thus broke a previous gender barrier. However, the suppression of the lay healer led to a reinforcement of the class system which was previously transcended in this way.
Hospitalisation of women and the increasing use of asylums to resolve the issue of women's madness indicated a clear extension of male control throughout society and in childbirth beyond a rebalancing of gender influence in this area; as the use of hospitalisation for pregnancy was adverse to the exclusively female approach that previously existed. Oakley remarks this change as robbing 'women of the autonomy and control over their bodies' (Symonds and Hunt 1996 91). However, arguably there was a natural transition to hospitals because 'high levels of mortality in the 1930s promoted the political and profession demand for increased safety in childbirth' (Symonds and Hunt 1996 91). Despite, a natural emergence of hospitals this would have facilitated the reinforcement of a gender hierarchy present in medicine As illustrated with pregnancy now being considered an unnatural state. The use of hospitals therefore legitimised the inclusion of males into this female aspect of life, as 'reproduction [became] a medical condition: fraught with all sorts of dangers: [and] [...] can only be 'cured' by the authoritarian benevolence of professional medicine' (Oakley 1976 18). The rise of hospitals in conjunction to medicine thus led to childbearing women becoming under the guise of a male dominated profession.
The apparent unnatural state of pregnancy is one instance of how the rise of medicine was instrumental in causing conceptual changes towards femininity and masculinity. The polarisation of the characteristics of masculinity and femininity occurred, with masculinity prevailing as the superior gender and women were considered 'by nature, weak, dependent and diseased' (Ussher 1991 69/70). The strengthening of this gender discourse had the reciprocal affect of allowing the victimisation of women in the establishment of medicine, whilst inevitably this process led to the strengthening of this gender discourse. This victimisation aimed to maintain the patriarch basis of medicine and society in general. The extent of this and the patriarch based society is illustrated in the remark that 'any women who aspired to such a role was seen as a freak, for femininity would be appalled by the reality of madness or illness' (Ussher 1991 68). This gender discourse can clearly be seen as exploited by the medical profession who manipulated the growing distinction in masculine and feminine characteristics. For example, Maudsley reasserted masculine dominance by promoting the view that menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth and menopause were important causes of mental derangement' (Russell 1995 20).
The patriarchal motivation inherent in the medical profession is exemplified in the growth of women's madness and hysteria. Arguably stemming from the witch hunts, the use of madness and the asylum acts as an equivalent device that fulfilled the same social function. The witch hunts attempted to suppress 'women healers, [because they were in direct conflict with] [...] the association between Church doctrine, university trained medical men and the ruling classes' (Oakley 1976 29). The use of the asylum and diagnosis of madness thus provided a modern alternative that had the same results; it maintained male domination and the ruling classes control in medicine. Ussher notes 'in the Victorian era, there was no longer any need to burn women at the stake. They could be incarnated in the asylum' (Ussher 1991 88). Additionally, Jordanova's focus on the imagery of medicine provides a general example how the feminine masculine discourse was exploited in the establishment of this male dominated profession; she noted 'women have often been used to portray abstractions, such as virtues and vices, and areas of knowledge. Their role in medical and scientific imagery is fully consistent with this' (Jordanova 1989 134).
This gender discourse was extended in order to establish the profession's importance and standing within society and as part of the profession's medical advancement. The ideas of rationality and the Enlightenment are evident in the systematic process of victimisation, for instance 'the scientific/ medical claim to understand women and render her intelligible was part of science's wider project: the understanding and controlling of Nature' (Bland 1995 53). The victimisation of women was used to maintain the profession's social standing with operations and diagnosis being marked as curing society's social wrongs, for instance 'an operation is proved successful no matter what the outcome' (Russell 1995 21). The following example, illustrates a culmination of developing social standing, the victimisation of women and Enlightened ideas, James Israel, noted 'that the removal of the ovaries and amputation of the cervix had been used to attempt to cure hysteria' (Russell 1995 20). Hysteria and madness was prevalent as an area used 'to legitimize the entry of medicine into the new field of psychiatry and, secondly to, further the moral guardianship role, that medicine had taken on' (Russell 1995 22). Thus the apparent uncontrollable characteristics of femininity were used to legitimate the experimental and progressive steps the medical profession and to legitimise and extend medicine's importance in society.
The medical profession was partly responsible for the formation of conceptions of masculinity and femininity; however, the wider context of domesticity in which the medical profession continued to rise must be taken into account. It is for instance noted that 'the evidence that women's healing activities were circumvented by the domestic familial relations in the pre modern era' (Witz 1992 78). Thus the medical profession illustrates the wider phenomenon of domesticity that occurred within the Victorian period, as 'the dominant constructions of femininity were used to justify women's exclusion from political power and public space on the one hand, and the 'naturalness' of their location in the private sphere of the family on the other' (Bland 1995 48). The conflict between medicine's exploitation of this gender discourse and its natural development as part of Victorian domesticity is shown in the argument that women both embraced and protested against madness, as shown in The Yellow Wallpaper by Perkins Gilman. Thus the wider context of domesticity must partly be held responsible for the gender implications that occurred within medicine, especially with regards to the middle and upper classes who used the rise of medicine and pandered to the opportunity of female madness as a device to reassert their social status.
The fashion of medicine and the monetary value associated with medical practitioners thus had considerable implications for gender and class. Witz notes 'the market for medical services was rapidly expanding by the end of the eighteenth century and this was due to the expansion of the middle class and the growth of their incomes' (Witz 1992 79/80). Class division was reinforced by the type of medical practitioners you could employ, as 'both midwives and medical men charged for their services, which meant that most British mothers could afford midwife care only' (Oakley1984 29). The fashion of medicine can be seen as partly responsible for women's embracement of madness. Extraordinarily, Ussher notes that 'in the middle an upper class sickness and invalid ness for women were almost in vogue' (Ussher 1991 90). Thus the acceleration in the diagnosis of madness seemingly had an ironic dual purpose, allowing the male medical profession to extend control over women, as 'to throw of the chains of patriarchy was to risk a diagnosis of madness' (Ussher 1991 89) whilst the diagnosis of madness seemingly reaffirmed your social standing. Ussher continues to note 'it was the affluent women of the upper middle class who were mad or hysterical' (Ussher 1991 90) as the working class had 'their lives [...] controlled through the dual oppression of class and gender' (Ussher 1991 90). The reinforcement of class barriers through the fashion of hysteria and madness is noted by Mort, in that 'class and gender related polarities' (Mort 1987 60) 'marked out distinctive cultural identities for middle class men and women and crystallized dominant images of the labouring poor' (Mort 1987 60). Thus the idleness displayed in the hysteria and madness of upper class women reinforced class barriers, as it was unforeseeable for a working class woman to have to time to live a life of idleness.
The rise of the medical profession led within all of the above contexts to the formal, explicit and derogatory exclusion of women within the medical practice. The rise of medicine saw the creation of an elitist profession and the resultant upholding of class rigidity. The elitism of the profession and the exclusion of the unprivileged in medical practice, which were previously represented through lay healers, is shown in numerous ways. For example, the private stance that the medical profession attempted to adopt, such as the maintenance of 'medical distance from the public arena both in terms of the professional manipulation of status, which was enhanced by, for example, dissociating medicine, a polite profession, from popular entertainment' (Jordanova 1989 137). Legislation reasserted these two class and gender implications. For instance, the Anatomy Act 1833 'permitted the use of unclaimed pauper bodies for medical purposes [and was aimed at] dissociating themselves from the illicit, the profane and the unclean, as exemplified in grave digging' (Jordanova 1989 138). Moreover, legislation, including the 1858 Medical Registration Act, openly refused the admission of women into medical training at universities. Although this act did not exclude women officially from medicine, Witz notes the use of 'credentialist tactics in the institutional arena of civil society' (Witz 1992 83) to achieve female exclusion. This was not rectified until the Medical Act of 1876. Bland however, notes the 'social and ideological barriers to their entry into medicine still persisted' (Bland 1995 54), which arguably shows the success of the male dominated profession in changing the conceptual understandings of masculinity and femininity and thus gender roles in society.
In conclusion, the rise of the medical professional was heavily influenced by the Enlightenment and later Victorian domesticity. However, the profession clearly upheld the ideas present in both these schools of thought and used them to the advantage of the profession, which caused severe and arguably unrectifiable changes in the understandings of masculinity and femininity. The rise of the profession clearly implicated the strengthening of class boundaries, with symptoms of madness being used to reassert your position in the upper classes and the formalisation of training ensured that the working class had no place in this profession. The profession substantially exploited the gender discourse presented by Victorian domesticity and thus reasserted the patriarch basis of society in general and the inferior position of women, as ultimately exemplified in both the physical and mental victimisation of women.