Certain evidence suggests that the special effects created for the Elizabethan stage were more imaginative than we may previously have thought. We can glean ideas about the effects for the storm scene in the opening of The Tempest, 'The noise of thunder was created by a "roul'd bullet" (a metal ball trundled down a metal trough) and "tempestuous drumme". 6 In his book, Jacobean Private Theatre, Keith Sturgess suggests that sea and wind machines were made using 'small pebbles revolved in a drum' and 'a lose length of canvas turned on a wheel'. 7 Although the Kings Men were used to performing in a wide variety of palace and provincial halls, it would seem that the move from the Globe to the Blackfriars playhouse did not pose any serious difficulties or changes in production. 'Reconstructionists, seeking to endow the Blackfriars playhouse with detailed, special features so rigid and particular as to make it difficult for the company...are, in my opinion...seriously in error." 8 However, the Blackfriars playhouse does seem to have forced the players to be rather more cautious, and not only because of its' indoor performance area, 'the lighting was probably implied, at least at Blackfriars, since, although amphitheatres used fireworks or rosin for lightning flashes, indoor theatres avoided their offensive smells' 9 the opposition of the Blackfriars' residents, fearing noise disruption and a greater danger of outbreaks of plague due to crowds was a problem the amphitheatres built outside the city walls were free from. (See the detail from Wenceslas Hollar's 'Long View of London, (fig 1), in which the long, steep-pitched roof with two tall chimneys in the centre is thought to be the Blackfriars roof.) Burbage is now altering...the same into a common playhouse, which will grow to be a very great annoyance and trouble...yf it should please God to send any visitation of sicknesse as heretofore hath been, the same precinct is already growne very populous; and besides that same playhouse is so neer the church that the noyse of the drummes and trumpets will disturbe both the ministers and parishioners in tyme of devine service ans sermons." 10 We must assume therefore, that the Kings Men had to allow for this, even though the Blackfriars musicians were considered amongst the finest of their day. One would think they would be particularly cautious while presenting The Tempest which, as Gurr notes, 'is uniquely a musical play among Shakespeare's writings', utilizing 'instrumental music as well as song' to a degree not found in his other plays' 11 it is probable that no drums or fireworks were used and brass instruments would be replaced by woodwind.
In line six of Scene One, the Boatswain orders the Mariners to 'Take in the topsail!' In the Globe theatre, perhaps a rope was let down from the Heavens. However, it is unclear whether there would have been ropes on-stage at the Blackfriars theatre. It is likely that this line was directed to the Mariners off stage. The reference to the 'Cry within' made me wonder if it would have been possible, (at least at the Globe theatre) to see other characters on board, below deck. Although not a primary source, a conjectural reconstruction of the interior of the Globe (see fig.2) shows the Hell under the stage being covered by a hanging. If this is accurate (some reconstructions appear to show wooden panelling in place of the hanging) then perhaps the royal party could have been 'on view', if not to the audience in the upper galleries but to those sitting below them and the groundlings standing in the yard. This would have made the entrances and exits more interesting. If, for example, after Gonzalo had spoken, the audience saw him disappear through the trap to the confusion below deck. Another possibility, which would add to the spectacle, is the appearance of Ariel. Although the sprite is not mentioned in the entrances, its speech (at least we know it would had been played by a man on the Elizabethan stage) in Act One, Scene Two suggests that Ariel 'boarded the king's ship' and 'flamed amazement'. It would have been possible to lower Ariel from the Heavens at the Globe, and indeed at the Blackfriars, where flights were not uncommon. This would certainly have contributed to the excitement of the scene - indeed Ariel often appears in Scene One in today's productions of The Tempest. There is no way of knowing if it ever happened in 1610.
We know that the scenes ran quickly from one to the next - made possible with so little scenery. At the end of Scene One the ship almost magically appears to melt away and become the island, appropriately connected with Gonzalo's line "but I would fain die a dry death!" Te texts suggests that the audience would not have seen the Mariners plunging into the waves but simply heard the 'confused noise within' - below deck in the Hell. Perhaps as Gonzalo disappeared through the trap, Prospero and Miranda immediately appeared through the Discovery Space and came downstage for the first speech. It is thought that Prospero would indicate to this area of the stage when talking about his dwelling.
Further differences in performance conditions between the Globe and the Blackfriars were the sizes of the stages and, of course, the artificial lighting supplied by candles at the indoor Blackfriars. 'The need to tend and trim the candles introduced act breaks, during which the audience was entertained with music." 12 Glynne Wickham states in Early English Stages 1300-1660, that 'what was different at the Blackfriars was the regular presence of a sophisticated audience that set a higher premium ...on theatrical atmosphere... than on game-elements of a pugilistic or farcical'. 13 Although later on gentlemen in the audience were given access to sitting on the stage, this was introduced in the Hall playhouses. This would have made the already restricted performance conditions (the narrow shape of the Blackfriars is depicted on Hollar's Long View), even more cramped. These gentlemen were sitting there to be as much on display to the rest of the audience as the actors were. One can only imagine how they would feel, proudly showing off their finery during such a scene as this one, where their counterparts - the royal party dressed in supremely elaborate wedding outfits do nothing to hinder the commonly dressed yet omniscient Boatswain!
Although today the Blackfriars is scene as having been more capable of putting on a more elaborate performance, perhaps the intimacy and arrangement of the audience in a more polarized relationship - 'The provision of benches in the pit meant that this area now catered for a higher social class as the groundlings were banished to a upper gallery facing the stage..." 14 made the performance conditions appear structured, less chaotic and more polished. Although not wholly connected with the staging, perhaps the general performance quality as a result of the contrasting atmospheres in the Globe and at the Blackfriars, which, although more elite and refined, was 'inspired with morbid types' as Henry Fitzgeffrey satirised in 1620. Here, he observes strange characters as they enter the playhouse,
'A rather grotesque person now pushed her (or his) way through the crowd'.
It is impossible to describe exactly how a Shakespearean scene would have been performed in it original context. It is interesting to imagine, however, a play such as The Tempest, performed both at the Globe theatre and the private Blackfriars - thus preparing the Kings Men for the eventual presentation at Court, using the devices of the Elizabethan playhouses. In his note on Much Ado About Nothing (Shakespeare Variorum), Dr. H.H Furness says,
--------------------------------------------