The Victorian period saw a pilferer of different art forms emerging which depicted the street children that had become common throughout the urban areas of the country. The focus of both the art world and the development of philanthropy had a wide range of intentions, which throughout the period provided both constructive and unconstructive contributions towards solving the problem of the destitution of these children. Many literary and artistic forms of this kind maintained the middle class as it emerged during the process of industrialisation. Whilst, in contrast, it is clear that other artists aimed to construct the image of the 'street waif' with the aim to address the poverty and victimisation suffered by these children within Victorian society.
A strong middle class agenda that aimed to maintain their own self-definition and class values is a prominent reason for the consistent construction of the image of the street child as a 'nuisance' (Steedman, 1995) or an immoral character. The construction of the 'street waif' was often in stark contrast to the values of the Victorian middle class that upheld the class distinction. Middle class values of thrift and prudence were not present in the images and thus the contrast in values presented allowed for the middle class to maintain the social divisions that had emerged within British society. For example, 'horrified investigators described such behaviour, in terms of a savage animal-like existence and strong contrasts were drawn with an idealised, obedient middle class child' (Duckworth, 2003). The success of artwork to achieve this middle class agenda is illustrated in photography, as it became 'a natural source to draw on for the process of extending urban spectatorship into the territory of the London poor' (Mancoff and Trela, 1996). Therefore conservative middle class prejudices to the poor were upheld through such depictions. For instance, the new genre of photography provided new 'truth claims [that] served to justify something else quite old: the conviction that poverty was natural' (Mancoff and Trela, 1996). Moreover, the construction of their image in this way aimed to maintain any challenge to the domination of middle class values in society. The 'apparent' threat is noted in that 'their uncontrolled existence embraced all symptoms of social disorganisation and challenged the very foundation of ordered society' (Steedman, 1995).
Racial depictions of the street children aimed to maintain the clearly definable identity of the middle class from the working class. Mancoff and Trela note that 'the repeated illustration of such extremely evident racial and physical differences works by association to suggest the difference of the street people as a whole' (Mancoff and Trela, 1996). Such a constant effort to mark the working class and street children as different is part of the Victorian middle class culture of categorisation. Keating illustrated such classification noting that 'the streets were filled with a new and different race of people' (Keating, 1976). Thus literature and art of this type was to the middle class important in supporting the 'processes by which a society comes to represent and envisage groups within it' (Steedman, 1995). The strong sense of difference between the middle and working classes helped to develop a social structure and hierarchy, with each classes place in society clearly marked. Mayhew and Trela note the emergence of 'two distinct and broadly, marked races, [...] the vagabond and the citizen- the nomadic and the civilised tribes' (Brantlinger and Ulin, 1993 cited in Mancoff and Trela, 1996). The prominence of the influence of such art work is made explicit as 'class division [became] read as racial difference' (Mancoff and Trela, 1996). The presence of a middle class agenda to order society, with racism being an important aspect of this is therefore clearly shown. Dr. Bernado's justification of the manipulation of philanthropic photography provides a clear example. He argued the 'careful posing [...] and dirtying of faces of his subjects-was justified as a means of capturing the truth of types rather than individuals' (Mancoff and Trela, 1996).
The depiction of the street child as a social menace could arguably be construed as a conscious effort to maintain the flourishing child labour market that many industries were dependent on. It was during the process of industrialisation that led to the emergence of the middle class that was characterised by entrepreneurs and industrialists. The careful construction of the street waif image therefore worked in the interest of the middle class industrialists' and factory owners. The construction of such images is further reflected in the factory and educational laws which provide a clear indication of the intentional support of the middle class art world of the child labour market needed by the middle class industrialists. The laws 'were not conceived in a spirit of pure altruism but were interwoven with supply of young hands and the demands of industry' (Rose 1991). Keating notes that 'one penny a day can be gained by a child in bending the tine clasp round safety pins' (Keating 1976), and thus the benefits of child labour and the profits that could be gained is clearly illustrated.
The constraints and conventions of middle class society, moreover affected the construction of these images. The consistency of the images as a social menace within the majority of art work seemingly was due to artists' attempting to produce works that would be widely accepted by middle class Victorian society. On many occasions such conventional depictions aimed to either establish an artist's status or improve it. Photography, as a new genre at the time, provides and interesting example. Mancoff and Trela note that it drew 'on traditional aesthetic authorities as part of a strategy to justify photography's status as an art' (Mancoff and Trela, 1996). Moreover, theatre was further affected by such strong conventions and the portrayal of the street child 'phenomenon' was exploited by artists; William Traver's 'The Watercress Girl' is remarked as being 'clear and simple enough to satisfy the most homely playgoer' (Steedman, 1995).
An emerging Victorian middle class fascination with society and the social sciences in this period was seemingly fuelled by illustrations of the 'street waif'. The intellectual debate that occurred marked a clear interest in street children and yet seemed to provide a means for the middle class to avoid finding a resolution for the occurring destitution. Ideas of both repulsion and fascination are explicitly illustrated by 'Place [who] defends his interpretative code by both agreeing and disagreeing with Kay and thus reasserting the nearly equal pulls of fascination and repulsion' (Childers, 1994). In turn such intellectual debate thus supported the inertia of the middle class that had become typical of this period towards the problem of street children. Moreover, such illustrations often maintained existing middle class debates, such as the process of civilisation and 'the virtues and disadvantages of town and country living' (Steedman, 1995). Mayhew and Thompsons' are noted for employing tactics 'to assert the limitations of ameliorative reform' (Mancoff and Trela, 1996). The affect of intellectual debate on creating inaction towards the problem is further exacerbated by the problem starting to be dealt with regards to the issue of demoralisation rather than destitution. For example, Chadwick's report 'notes 'there is every indication that a solution to their "demoralization" is possible' (Childers 1994). The discussion and observation of the problems faced by street children seems to have accordingly replaced any constructive action by the middle classes and the acceptance of a 'culture of poverty' (Mancoff and Trela, 1996) is abundantly clear.
In contrast, realistic depictions of the poverty faced within Victorian cities was constructive in addressing the underlying problem as it raised society's awareness and was foremost in changing attitudes. It is noted that there was, 'a massive transmission of information about child destitution that even by the mid-century made the details of childhood in poverty well known' (Steedman, 1995). The wide range of information would have arguably acted as a prominent means of pressurising society to address the problem. Artists' depictions did not simply illustrate of the street child 'phenomenon' but presented the victimisation of these children and, for example, the dangers of child prostitution. Arguably the accumulation of these works would have collectively acted as a critique of government inaction. Steedman notes that Mayhew 'was well aware of a common prejudice against "girls selling watercress [as] we know in many cases that is an excuse for begging"' (British Parliamentary Papers, 1861 cited in Steedman, 1995). His awareness of this provides an indication of his attempt to overcome this middle class chauvinism in his works. Arguably, realistic depictions were successful in changing the attitudes held by Victorian middle class society, from the children being regarded as savage to being seen as a victim. The contemporary commentators of the period are noted for making 'great efforts to know these children' (Steedman, 1995) and in doing so made observations, in contrast to anticipated middle class expectations. For example, their homes did not present a 'malodorous horror but a floor scrubbed three or four times a week' (Steedman, 1995). In helping to change the social prejudice that existed, such works, even if in avertedly, supported the middle class and their philanthropic organisations, such as John Groom's Watercress and Flower girl Mission and the Emily Loan Fund. Therefore the conscious construction of the way in which the street waif was depicted was vital in supporting an attempt to start to address the problem of child poverty and simultaneously supported middle class work on the issue.
The negative depiction of the street waif was important in supporting a strong middle class agenda that aimed to maintain their class identity and convictions. The large amount art work supported a strong fascination with this social 'phenomenon' and fuelled an intellectual debate that supported Victorian middle class morals and values. However, realistic depictions by some artists not only challenged middle class convictions and social categorisation but provided a forum in which the underlying problem of severe destitution in urban areas could finally be brought to the attention of Victorian society as an important social problem.