'Doing the Business' by Hobbs explores the interrelationships between the working class and detectives operating within the East End area of London. The analysis is set in the 1980s and the author aims to establish the importance of entrepreneurship as characteristic of the working class in the East End of London. Hobbs reaffirms that the importance of entrepreneurship is vital in the functioning of police in this area. Thus through the commonality of entrepreneurship the author attempts to establish a third relationship, that the culture of East Enders is mirrored in the culture of the CID division that functions within the East End of London. Hobbs argues this emanates from the commonality of entrepreneurship being vital in both for the inhabitants of East London's survival and the success of police work in this area. Therefore, the book attempts to deal with this commonality in establishing the place of entrepreneurship an integral and fundamental part of East End life as well as emerging as a necessary aspect of the work of detectives in this area. Resultantly, Hobbs attempts to establish the uniqueness of this commonality both for the people of the East End and its use by the police who function within the area. The author calls upon numerous techniques in order to analyse and establish these three relationships, including ethnographic study, interviews, case studies and close analysis of other theorists.
A third of the book outlines the emergence of the Metropolitan Police and the CID division and its particular focus on the maintenance of law and order in the working class areas in London, particularly the East End. Hobbs provides a detailed chronology of the emergence of the distinct area of the East End and its relationship to the rest of the Capital. Hobb's further detailed chronology of the CID is important as it establishes both the East End as a unique area of London and the CID as an elite department of the police force. This is vital in the founding of his analysis of the relationships between the East End and the CID and how its culture came to mirror the culture of the area. For example, before the establishment of a unified police force Hobbs not the disunity of policing and the inherent corruption that existed, noting 'the policemen continued according to tradition to sell justice' (Parliamentary papers cited in Hobbs 1989 26). Hobb's extends the uniqueness of the CID division noting that 'when the presence becomes invisible, covert and indistinguishable in appearance from the policed, it has been traditionally perceived as un-British and therefore threatening' (Hobbs 1989 34). Such detailing therefore establishes an image of the CID division through history and sets up his argument for the defining feature of the department, entrepreneurialism being its unique and dominant feature.
Hobb's continues to establish the unique function of the CID through the use of the case studies, including the Great Train Robbery. These are greatly important as it adds depth to the relationship between the CID and their use of entrepreneurship in the investigative process. Hobbs notes 'these cases help us to understand , how a formal organisation evolves 'naturally' as a response to forces unrelated, or even opposed, to the formal rules and priorities of an administrative structure' (Hobbs 1989 46). Thus a good grounding for the establishment of the three relationships is used by Hobbs, however the detail given and space within the book given to this, is arguably detrimental to the exploration of the three relationships in further depth.
The relationship between the working class in the East End and their development of entrepreneurial skills is substantially argued and sustained by Hobbs. The author closely analyses this relationship and how it comes to characterise the East End and an area functioning in a unique way. Hobbs notes the entrepreneurial skill that emerged as an inherent part of East End life and that was 'created by the area's relationship with the City and by unique economic and employment structures, the origins of which are located around the banks of the Thames' (Hobbs 1989 115). The book provides a detailed and through analysis of the life style and culture of the East End and Hobbs establishes that the potency of the East End culture had not only led to the uniqueness of the London area, but entrepreneurial skills becoming inherent in the working class in its urban milieu. Hobbs consideration of the youth of the area aims to substantiate this relationship through the idea of the entrepreneurial culture being transmitted from 'generation to generation' (Hobbs 1989 117). The dedication of a chapter of this book to the detailing of the culture and sub cultures of the youth is arguably to the loss of the further exploration of the relationship between entrepreneurial skill and the East End. Arguably this is due to his East End background. Thus there is seemingly an attempt b the author to firmly establish the zeal of the East End and the uniqueness of the area's culture. Hobb's concentration on sub culture and youth illustrates this, as he duly notes in his first chapter his scholarly background in this area. Adversely, Hobbs systematic breakdown of the types of jobs in the East End does add the additional dimension of the relationship between the working class and entrepreneurial skill as he comments on the varying success and practice of this in the every day lives of East Enders and in how its application has emerged because 'East Enders exist on the brink of the City of London's legitimate commercial enterprise and legality' (Hobbs 1989 140. Thus the author successfully uses the recognisable characteristics of the East End to establish the emergence of wide spread entrepreneurialism.
The relationship between entrepreneurial skill and the work of detectives in the book is established in the penultimate two chapters. Firstly, Hobbs is adamant to assert that the entrepreneurialism of the CID division is what characterises and separates it from the uniform branch of the Metropolitan Police. Hobbs firmly establishes this during his chronology of the police force at the beginning of the book and reasserts this later towards the end of the book, stressing the elite reputation of the department and thus its uniqueness from the rest of the force. In doing this his argument is persuasive through the assessment of the different entrance criteria of the CID and the detectives 'performance' in the courtroom. Hobbs reasserts the place of entrepreneurship in the force and its legality as an important factor of policing through the process of paperwork and bureaucracy. Thus the entrepreneurial skill employed by the detectives in the East End is firmly established by the author.
The relationship between the East Enders and the detectives being similar due to the commonality of entrepreneurialism is problematic. Arguably, Hobbs does not explore this vital third relationship enough, and this arguably is due to the time spent on the detailing of the chronology of both the police force, the East End as an area, and the lifestyle and culture of the East Enders. The book suggests that the relationship of the detectives who use entrepreneurialism in their work mirrors the lives of East Enders, who are dominated by the need for this skill in their day to day lives. This relationship is presented as inherent in the area. Hobbs notes that 'sharing much of their working environment with working class entrepreneurs, some of it is bound to rub off on the detective and this is increasingly likely when much detective work is in itself entrepreneurial' (Hobbs 1989 197). There is an indication that the employment and commonalities held between CID agents and East Enders is a conscious construct of the CID agents in order to pursue their work. For example, 'the essence of CID power lies in their skill in utilizing working class vocabularies, both; linguistic and presentational to enhance their police function' (Hobbs 1989 207). Hobbs states 'the relationship between the demises of East London and the CID is symbiotic, appropriately based upon the trading of moral identities' (Hobbs 1989 216). Although this relationship and the employment of entrepreneurialism is clear in the book in both the cases of the East Enders and the detectives Hobbs could have established whether the commonality between East Enders and detectives was inherent or a conscious construction on behalf of the CID, which is a failing of the book. The title suggests that the parallels are caused inherently through the commonality of entrepreneurialism, but some of the evidence arguably suggests otherwise. The title and content of the book suggests that the employment of entrepreneurialism consequently results in the two groups sharing in common features. Although Hobbs strongly and substantially argues that entrepreneurialism is a key and dominant feature in the lives of the East Enders and the detectives, arguably the existence of the commonality between the two groups does not necessarily lead to the ability to draw close parallels between them. A singular parallel of the presence of entrepreneurialism is arguably the only one that can be drawn, even through there seems to be an inherent suggestion that further parallels would exist in the functioning of the two groups in the same area. This vital and interesting third relationship, which encompasses the other two relationships that the book explores is only developed in the penultimate two chapters of his book and could have been explored further.
The book explores three interesting relationships that co-exist in the East End of London and Hobbs substantially explores the relationship between both the detectives of the East End working class to entrepreneurialism. However, the inherit or conscious construction of the third relationship could have been explored further. Hobbs does however provide an interesting insight into the lives of both East Enders and the working of the CID in this area. One of the book's strengths is the affect of the City on the East End and the emergence of its unique character. Hobb's additionally provides an interesting foresight on how the area will be changed with the further development of the City and changes in London's economic markets, which he firmly establishes as affecting the people of the East End area and its characteristics.