Associations are greatly important in Tocquevillian theory because their existence is argued as a fundamental characteristic in distinguishing a democratic state Tocqueville identifies association as the paramount feature which establishes democracies as an advanced state, in comparison to aristocracies and their existence is considered as upholding the functions of this type of society. Associations act to maintain democracy once it had emerged, especially resolving the initial problem of isolationism, which Tocqueville considers inherent in the transition to democracy. Moreover, associations play an essential role in encouraging and nurturing political participation in society through the collective activity, whilst maintaining the identity and importance of the individual. Their presence is identified by Tocqueville as greatly important through as they maintain the importance of public opinion in shaping the direction of government and act in areas of day to day life that are considered beyond the requisite of government.
At the foremost associations are important in Tocquevillian theory in establishing the advanced position of a democratic state in contrast to aristocratic societies. Associations are used to illustrate how the rigid hierarchical system of an aristocratic system results in structural and repressive development of ones identity and likewise hinder the development of other positive social results. For example, Simmel notes 'in the earlier situation the individual was wholly absorbed by and remained orientated toward the group' (Simmel 1964 151). The multiplicity of associations available to the individual in a democratic society thus allows flexibility in the development of a person's identity. Associations provide the opportunity of it being shaped in many different directions. Tocqueville recognises associations as important because they uphold the importance of the individual whilst maintaining a sense of society through their collective activities. Simmel notes how associations readily uphold the importance of the individual, noting that 'the mere fact of multiple group affiliations enabled a person to achieve for himself an individualised situation in which the groups had to be orientated towards the individual' (Simmel 1964 151). Thus associations are in stark contrast to hierarchical systems which arguably repress the individual and firmly place them within a social group or class. Moreover, Tocqueville identifies additional positive affects, such as equality, created by associations, 'there in fact exists a necessary relation between associations and equality' (Heckter and Horne 2003 321). More so the electoral system can be seen as a prime example of where a collective sense of society through association is created, Heckter and Horne note it 'brings together in a permanent manner a multitude of citizens who would have always remained strangers to one another' (Heckter and Horne 2003 318). Tocqueville's identification of the positive results of associations for both the individual and society thus reasserts the archaic position of aristocracy.
Individualism is identified as a key characteristic of a democratic state and Tocqueville establishes associations as maintaining this key feature. However, the importance of associations is extended through their role in stopping the rational development of democratic societies, in an extreme form, emerging as an alienated and thus dysfunctional society. Associations are noted as encompassing the vital role of maintaining a sense of society and collective activity whilst not stifling the development of the individual. The development of isolationist societies is rationalised as stemming from equality, whereby inherent self interest consequently leads to individual alienation and then barbarism (Simmel 1964). Lively notes the effect of extreme individualism commenting that, 'isolation robbed man of that contact with others, that mutual co-operation, that feeling of involvement and personal responsibility' (Lively 1962 130). However, Tocqueville argues that this initial isolation found to be characteristic of a democratic society is removed through a natural emergence of association, as people identify their self interest as similar to one another and therefore start to act together as it is recognised as being collectively beneficial. Tocqueville notes 'private interest is never contrary to the general interest' (Boesche 1985 38). Thus Tocqueville's rationalisation for the apparent natural emergence of association, in the pursuit of self interest, has the affirmative affect of creating a sense of society and a provision for both collective and self interests. Tocqueville notes that 'the free institutions which the inhabitants of the United States possess [...] remind every citizen, and in a thousand ways, that he lives in society' (Bowen and Phillips 1945 105). The natural emergence of association is reaffirmed by Poggi who notes, 'the individual citizen can accomplish something, particularly in the public sphere, only to the extent that he joins with others and acts collectively' (Poggi 1972 41). Associations therefore have the twofold affect of stopping the extremity of alienation within a democratic society and maintaining the sense of the individual and the society in which it functions.
Associations not only stop the development of alienation but additionally emerge as a replacement for previous powerful aristocratic individuals. Their importance is noted in that 'if individuals cannot create some artificial substitute for them, I see no barrier against any sort of tyranny' (Mayer 1962 114 cited in Lively 1962 128). Moreover, they stop the extension of equality leading to tyranny , as Tocqueville notes, 'it is clear that if each citizen, [...] does not learn the art of working with those like him to defend [society], tyranny will necessarily grow with equality'. (Heckter and Horne 2003 319). Associations therefore seem fundamental in breaking a process whereby democracy falls between the existence of an aristocracy and a tyranny. Heckter and Horne, note how associations both act as a replacement for functions provided by aristocrats and stop equality leading to tyranny, noting that 'just as the aristocracy had incidentally protected general liberty in the defence of their own 'liberties', so the new association could prevent the extension of state power in expressing or defending its own viewpoint or interest' (Heckter and Horne 2003 129). Thus associations have come not only to be characteristic of democratic society but to epitomise it and form the distinctive characteristic that distinguishes them from both aristocratic and despotic forms of society and stops any movement towards these forms.
Associations actively continue to uphold the democratic state, because they are instrumental in facilitating collective action on behalf of the common concern of its individual members. Tocqueville describes this process as the 'science of associations'. For example, Tocqueville notes 'many citizens possess the moral qualities and technical skills required to organise voluntary groupings, which pursue in an orderly fashion the various interests shared by particular sections of the citizenry' (Poggi 1972 58). Associations therefore hold an especially important political role as they act as a fundamental way of pressurising government and limiting it. They act as a device where 'every kind of opinion and grievance [can find] expression in voluntary bodies, which sought to achieve their ends by persuading a sufficient volume of support to put pressure on the government or the public conscience' (Lively 1962 129). Tocqueville continues to argue that associations not only facilitate a collective and united voice on certain political issues but, particularly in a federalist system, emerge de facto as political bodies. Tocqueville notes in 'a republican democracy, [...] it centralizes governmental affairs and entrusts administrative affairs to locally constituted public bodies' (Poggi 1972 52). Tocqueville establishes that governments inherently attempt to expand and thus 'the formation of permanent groupings that encompass large numbers of like-minded individuals' (Poggi 1972 47) leads to associations becoming 'de facto agencies for the conduct of public affairs and thus limit the expansion of governmental activity' (Poggi 1972 47). Associations therefore act as not only a device where political opinion is expressed but as a viable alternative for some social functions, that would otherwise be undertaken by government, And thus lead to the threatening of a democratic state.
Thus through the political function of association they have the dual affect of strengthening a link with government as well as maintaining the independence of the individual. The distinction made by Tocqueville between civil and political associations establishes this dual function. Hall summarises this twofold distinction noting that 'civil associations have to do with the private economic interests of the individual, with commerce and industry' whilst political associations have to do with a 'certain number of individuals who have undertaken to "cooperate in a stated way in order to make these doctrines prevail"' (Tocqueville 1966 233 cited in Hall 1995 143). The individual therefore is maintained through their ability to participate in both types of association. The distinction is vital as civil associations are noted for particularly maintaining the autonomy of the individual and their independence from government. For example the existence of 'autonomous local public bodies provide one of the means whereby citizens [...] achieve common purposes' (Hall 1995 143). Their importance however is closely linked to the existence of political associations, as Manent comments 'individuals are more inclined 'to join political association, which appear to them to be without danger because they risk no money in them' (Manent 1996 116) and their separation from civil association results in them being 'considered as large free schools where all the members of the community go the learn the general theory of association' (Manent 1996 116). Hence civil associations facilitate and support political associations and visa-versa (Heckter and Horne 2003 324). The distinction between types of association and the two distinctive affects they create is important as it upholds both of Tocqueville's key features of democracy, the individual and the social grouping, allowing both independence and autonomy whilst allowing collective political participation.
The political importance of associations can be extended further as they result in the spread of authority and stop government failure; and their success upholds an argument for limited government. Tocqueville on the issue of government failure questions 'what political power could ever carry on the vast multitude of lesser undertakings which the American citizens perform everyday with the principle of association' (Bowen and Phillips 1945 108). Tocqueville's support of a federalist system in Democracy in America presents the importance of associations as additionally creating a key combination of political participation, a sense of society as well as spreading governmental authority. Tocqueville comments 'if the object be to have local affairs of a district conducted by the men who reside there, the same persons are always in contact and they are, in a manner forced to be acquainted and to adapt themselves to one another' (Bowen and Phillips 1945 103). Political associations are thus particularly important as they once again refute any attempts of a few individuals to possess the majority of the authority, and maintain the sense of social unity and political participation through this political function.
Tocqueville argues associations play an important role as a mark of civilisation, and function in nurturing skills and characteristics within individuals that contribute to society as a whole. The civil and political association distinction and the distinctive affects provides one instance but moreover Poggi notes 'voluntary groupings offer the citizens a training ground in which to practice participation and acquire the skills of leadership' (Poggi 1972 58). Simmel continues to remark on the importance of associations in reinforcing diversity within society noting that, 'the number of different social groups in which the individual participates, is one of the earmarks of culture' (Simmel 1964 138). Associations are marked by Simmel as nurturing the social responsibility and citizenry in that the greater the participation of an individual in different associations the more 'likely [they are] to be aware of [their] citizenship' (Simmel 1964 138). The multiplicity of associations accessible to the individual is arguably a mark of civilisation because they can adapt easily and accommodate the demands of society. Associations is have a significance in creating culture and civilisation because they fulfil an inadequacy found in the government, to meet the diversity of the specific needs of different individuals (Simmel 1964). Thus the role of associations plays an important social and cultural role, and upholding ones awareness of their citizenry and adjoined responsibilities.
In conclusion, associations are identified by Tocqueville as fundamental within society for numerous reasons. They allow abstract comparison with other types of states, notably tyrannical and aristocratic, and are essential in his analysis of the advanced position of democratic societies. Associations' characteristics of individual choice, and the combination of collectivist and individuality they encompass results in them epitomising this democratic state. Associations are fundamental in maintaining political participation and political vitality in society through particularly maintaining the importance of the individual. They not only function on a political level but are vital in the upholding social and cultural diversity. Overall, associations are given such great importance by Tocqueville because of their adaptability, whereby they function as a moderator between the autonomy of the individual and the importance of collective groupings. Tocqueville regards associations with such importance because this feature facilitates and upholds the two key features of collectivism and individuality which Tocqueville attributes as the most important features of a democracy.