These scenarios raise some contentious issues regarding the availability and utility of judicial review. The central concepts in all three cases are the Wednesbury test for reasonableness and natural justice, most notably the issues of bias and procedural fairness. Broadly speaking, a claim for judicial review can be founded on illegality, irrationality or procedural impropriety, as expounded in the GCHQ case. These principles are not mutually exclusive and the reasonableness umbrella further incorporates an assessment of whether all relevant considerations were taken into account and irrelevant factors were excluded. Judicial review has grown beyond Wednesbury to incorporate the pursuit of improper purposes, which will prove instrumental to the claim of student Z. Student X's claim that the policy is irrational clearly demonstrates the problems of such rules that "bypass the legislature and foreclose the possibility of parliamentary scrutiny". It is clear in this case that the panel possess a wide discretionary power, which opens the door to the possibility of them acting ultra vires.
It will be interesting to consider how the Wednesbury test and the rules of procedural fairness stand up faced with such challenges. Many commentators contend that Wednesbury is becoming obsolete and since "the rules of natural justice are not engraved on tablets of stone", it may be possible for the students to invoke emerging concepts such as fairness or proportionality. Nonetheless, the reviewing court has only a "supervisory jurisdiction" and may not review the merits of each case. It is imperative that the court affords the panel the margin of appreciation it deserves. If not, the reviewing court risks undermining the legitimacy of the disciplinary process.
The Judicial Review Procedure requires applicants to have standing to bring their case. The test is one of "sufficient interest", and X, Y and Z should have no problems as they are all individually affected by the panel's decisions. Under the ECHR, they all pass the narrower "victim" test, which will be necessary if any of them choose to frame their case in terms of fundamental rights. A school is clearly a public body exercising a public function, so this procedural hurdle can be easily overcome.
X can bring a case on the basis of the panel's failure to consider the medical report, under the broad ground of procedural fairness and error of fact. As Lord Reid said, "anyone who has to exercise a statutory discretion must not shut his ears to an application". Natural justice requires that applicants should have the right to a reasoned decision taking account of all relevant considerations. The concept of natural justice can be problematic, but Craig helpfully defines it as "a manifestation of fairness". Fairness requires the court "to engage in a difficult balancing operation" of the individual interest at stake, the benefits from the additional procedural safeguard and the administrative costs of this. Here, there is visible evidence of failure to consider a very relevant report, which results in a denial of justice via this error of fact. The medical evidence has the potential to discredit the second positive test. One can surmise that the cost will be reasonable, especially since X has provided the report himself. The panel may argue that the court is interfering in their discretion but it is important to remember that the "discretion of a statutory body is never unfettered". This concept of fairness may include requirements beyond the traditional ambit of natural justice, for example a duty to act on evidence, such as a medical report. The court must allow for a degree of deference regarding the expertise of the decision-maker. However, in Tesco, it was held that the court should decide what constitutes a relevant consideration, leaving the decision-maker to attribute to it "such weight as he thinks fit".
The next stage of the court's task is to consider the policy itself. The test in Wednesbury is that a decision is "so unreasonable that no other reasonable decision-maker could have reached it". This is clearly "an onerous standard of review", but Wade suggests that in practice, courts "lower the threshold to fit their more exacting ideas of administrative good behaviour". Irrationality is linked to abuse of power and captures decisions that are "so unreasonable as to be verging on absurdity". A commonly cited example is banning red-headed teachers, which unfortunately for X, is a far cry from his complaint relating to his own wrongful act. The policy at issue here is a general rule together with an automatic punishment on a second offence. The general rule that drugs are banned cannot viably be challenged and the existence of such a rule actually means that "like cases are more likely to be treated alike". However, the sanction of automatic expulsion constitutes a blanket policy, against which case law has taken a hard line. In Osman, it was held that a blanket policy "constituted an unjustifiable restriction of the applicant's right to a determination on the individual merits of their claim".
However, "the court may not decide either on the validity of the desirability of legislation". Parliamentary sovereignty must be retained, which for Hart is the "ultimate rule of recognition". However, the court is entitled the procedure unreasonable, as it "assumes that Parliament cannot have intended to authorise unreasonable action". It is important to look at Parliament's intention regarding the delegated legislation, as emphasised in Padfield. The policy is to prevent drug abuse in schools, a perfectly legitimate aim given that the use of cannabis is illegal. Nevertheless, the court is likely to uphold the school's policy because it concerns illegal activity and the court would be strained to say that the decision-maker has "taken leave of his senses".
It will be difficult for X to prove that the policy is irrational under the Wednesbury test, which itself has been criticised as "an unfortunately retrogressive decision". Indeed, as seen above with its inclusion of wider concepts of fairness, "the Wednesbury test itself is moving closer to proportionality". The threshold of review is lowered in fundamental rights cases, such as Brind and Bugdaycay. X could centre an argument on the unreasonable deprivation of his right to education, but this cannot be compared to the right to life. The margin of appreciation does not "cover so many degrees of latitude as that afforded by the traditional Wednesbury doctrine". The definition of disproportionate action of "taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut" fits in well with X's argument that the policy is disproportionate. In reality, all he probably needs is drugs counselling and a warning or suspension. It is arguable that the legitimate aim of stamping out drug abuse cold be achieved with a more lenient policy applied with more regard to the facts of each case. However, Lord Irvine warns against judges straying into a review of the merits of the case, saying that it "will lead judges into dangerous territory".
Student Y's action centres on the requirements of fairness and natural justice relating to fair procedures. The rules relating to bias can be expressed by the Latin maxims nemo judex in sua causa and audi atleram partem. Y's argument against the first teacher appears unfounded given that the complaint was dismissed. However, the second strikes a chord with the Pinnochet case, where Lord Hoffmann was held not to be impartial due to his involvement with Amnesty International. The rationale is that justice must not only be done, but must be seen to be done. Therefore, an open supporter of a cause, as in this case, is inherently biased, even if there is no evidence that they have not acted impartially. The campaigner's bias fits the Gough test, namely that a decision-maker is biased "if motivated by a desire to favour one side or the other". This subjective test has now been replaced by a wider objective test in Porter, namely "whether those circumstances would lead a fair-minded and informed observer to conclude that there was a real possibility...that the tribunal was biased". In the present case, it is probable that an observer would conclude that the panel was biased, in the form of the campaigner but not the first teacher. Rowbottom welcomes the reform as "especially necessary" and it is also founded on "the necessity of ensuring public confidence", as stressed in Lawal. A similar guarantee exists within article 6 of the ECHR, which concerns the right to be heard by an impartial tribunal.
The third prong of Y's bias argument could be framed in terms of a procedural legitimate expectation that her case would be listened to. However, such reasoning, including Lord Denning's, is disapproved by Cane, who argues that such an approach "enables the court, in the name of procedural fairness, to judge the merits of the case". Nevertheless, the courts are generally willing to uphold a procedural legitimate expectation, as in Ng Yuen Shiu. Furthermore, Y can use Ridge v Baldwin, the rules of natural justice and article 6 ECHR to demonstrate her right to a fair hearing. Evidently, falling asleep negates any possible argument that her case has been heard. Therefore, the court should rule that Y may have her case reheard, substituting the second member of the panel and ensuring that all members remain awake!
The same principles apply as in X's case regarding the factors that should be considered. Notwithstanding the fact that Z has tested positive for cocaine, the panel are wrong to consider his poor grades. Z has a strong argument, providing that there is concrete evidence that the grades played a part in the panel's decision. Thus, irrelevant considerations "provide the court with a weapon of great range and flexibility". There is a broad range of case law on this issue, from failing to consider the moral arguments against a stag hunting ban to considering feminist ambitions when keeping wages inflated. However, it was held in Tesco that if both relevant and irrelevant considerations influenced the final decision, as is the case here, then it is not unlawful if the decision would have been the same in the absence of the irrelevant considerations. Cocaine is considerably more serious than cannabis and therefore the expulsion may be lawful in spite of the irrelevant consideration of the grades. This is a different situation from X's case, where the court was dealing with a failure to incorporate a relevant report.
Prima facie, it appears that the panel have expelled Z pursuant to an improper purpose. "Powers are granted for certain purposes", which here is the control of drug abuse, not saving money. In Hanson and  Ferguson, authorities acted ultra vires in dismissing teachers to save expenditure. This was held to be an improper purpose not authorised by the statute. Z can rely on this precedent to argue that the school had an ulterior motive in expelling him. However, it could equally be a coincidence if the severity of Z's actions alone justifies his expulsion. As Wade points out, "the action will be lawful provided that the permitted purpose is the true and dominant purpose behind the act". Yet, the financial incentive points strongly towards an improper purpose, as did the political purpose in Porter. In another education case, Tandy, lack of resources was held to be an improper purpose, which adds further weight to Z's case. The court is likely to find in Z's favour, rendering the decision void.
It is certain that the existence of an appeal to a Local Authority Board would strengthen the legitimacy of the expulsion process. However, it is not compulsory, as "natural justice does not require that there should be a right of appeal from any decision". A probable effect of the existence of an appeal would be to preclude judicial review at this stage for X and Z, as Parliament intended that the appeal is the correct channel for airing grievances with the decision-making process. This point was also emphasised in the recent case of Marcic. In Calvin, it was held that an impartial and fair appeal can cure defects in the original procedure. Here, this goes some way to addressing Y's concerns that the panel is biased, although she is most likely to succeed in getting judicial review notwithstanding the existence of a statutory appeal. The cases may be able to bypass the appeal if the competence and speed of the alternative statutory remedy are unsatisfactory. For example, it may be difficult for the students to appeal if they have been expelled with no reasons given. However, Lonrho shows that there is not yet a general requirement to give reasons. In any case, if an appeal existed, it would be a better route to justice as it will be possible for the merits of the case to be reviewed and not merely the procedural issues.
To conclude, the three scenarios illustrated pose some interesting problems regarding the scope of judicial review and the adequateness of the Wednesbury test for rationality of administrative decision-making. X has a solid case based on procedural unfairness and the panel's error of fact. The court can demand that the medical report be considered by the panel via a mandatory order. However, the court does not have the power to dictate the weight that should be given to the report. However, the line of argument based on the validity of the policy is considerably weaker. Wednesbury is a high standard to reach and it is highly unlikely that a court will sympathise with X's argument. Proportionality would potentially provide a better recourse, although it is not yet the universal test for ultra vires actions. Y has a strong case to have her case reheard by a new panel, excluding the anti-drugs campaigner. Z's case should be successful on the grounds of the panel irrelevantly considering his poor grades. The line of argument based on an improper purpose is reasonably watertight, but is liable to fail if the court considers that the closure of the department is merely an incidental consequence of Z's serious cocaine offence.
Nevertheless, all three cases illustrate the importance of natural justice playing a significant role within the judicial review system. Cases such as these are important so that the system maintains its integrity and the confidence of the public. There have been fears of degeneration into a "nightmarish and dehumanising" situation where the state becomes omnipotent. To avoid the occurrence of scenes from one of Kafka's novels, for example, where crucial evidence is ignored or there is blatant bias, it is vital that aggrieved citizens stand up for their rights when they are victims of injustice.