This situation is centred on exclusion clauses, a notoriously contentious area of contract law. The question raises some interesting issues regarding whether Slowe and Wheezy, and more specifically their driver, can rely on the exclusion clause regarding the breaking of Laura's phone. An initial assessment does not look favourable for their part. Judges have accorded exclusion clauses "the narrowest effect possible" and they traditionally approach them on the assumption that it was "inherently improbable" that the consumer would have agreed to the exclusion of negligence liability. It will be necessary to examine whether the clause is incorporated into the contract, how rules of interpretation affect it and whether the driver as a third party can rely on the clause. The crux of the problem is to analyse whether the clause can be struck down under UCTA, which represents a "statutory endorsement of the post-war policy of consumer protection". A more recent potential statutory recourse is UCCTR. Moreover, the problem demonstrates "the willingness of business enterprises to make use of sweeping exemption clauses", sidestepping the consumer's interests.
The first stage is to ascertain whether the exclusion clause has been validly incorporated into the contract. It must be remembered that "one party cannot unilaterally, after the conclusion of the contract, impose on the other onerous conditions without consent". It is possible for incorporation to exist notwithstanding the fact that Laura has not signed anything. Scrutton LJ in L'Estrange held that "in cases in which the contract is contained in a railway ticket or other unsigned document, it is necessary to prove that an alleged party was aware, or ought to have been aware, of its terms and conditions". "The agreement is looked for objectively" and it is irrelevant if the claimant has not read terms and conditions that were brought to their notice, as happened in Parker. Nevertheless, courts are generally less willing to find incorporation where one party is a consumer, as Laura is here.
For the clause to be incorporated, Laura must have had notice of it, a key sticking point in this case. Printed notices containing conditions have been held to become part of the contract, for instance in Watkins v Rymill. However, the ticket must refer to the notice. Laura's ticket made no reference to any conditions. Although Laura had no actual knowledge of the clause, this does not necessarily negate Slowe and Wheezy's claim. In Parker, it was held that there must have been "reasonably sufficient notice". Incorporation by reference is possible but this must be explicit. For instance, in Henderson, if conditions are on the back of a ticket, the ticket must say "see back". The test is objective and factual and in the present case, the notice element of incorporation is weak. The notice above the ticket-office is not referred to on the ticket, which itself made no reference to any conditions. Laura's case is helped by Lord Denning's red hand rule, expounded in Spurling. He said that an unusually harsh clause "would need to be printed in red ink with a red hand pointing to it". Furthermore, there is authority for the view that all terms must be "brought home" and accepted into the contract.
Despite the existence of a notice in this case, it is crucial whether Laura found out about it in time for it to be incorporated. A contract for the sale of a bus ticket is concluded on payment of the fare. Clauses cannot be introduced into a contract after its conclusion, a principle illustrated by Thornton and Olley. In Thornton, the exclusion clause was displayed on a sign inside a barrier-controlled car park. In Olley, the clause was displayed in the claimants' hotel room, yet the contract had been concluded at reception. Both these cases fit the facts of Laura's case. Laura had no opportunity to revoke the contract even if she were to read the notice inside the bus. A similar argument was made in Burnett, where "the defendants were in effect seeking to alter the terms of a contract already made".
Since the exclusion clause is not thus incorporated into the contract, the defendants will seek to bring about incorporation via the principle of imputed knowledge. This is usually done by way of custom or past dealings. The court will make a finding of fact based on the frequency and intensity of past transactions. This contract is on standard terms, which are presumably not varied. There is no evidence to suggest that the company does not take its standard terms seriously. Despite the consistency, Laura has only made this journey occasionally before. However, it is difficult to argue a course of business, as Laura is a consumer. In Hollier, the court refused to find a course of dealing where a consumer had made three or four transactions in five years. A similar decision would be made on the present facts. The test for a course of dealings is now a reasonable man test. A reasonable man would not be led to believe there was any relationship with previous business. There are no documents and no oral agreement that the contract is on the same terms as previously.
Despite the difficulties proving incorporation, it is nonetheless necessary to consider the other facets of the case. Exclusion clauses are prima facie interpreted as any other clause in the contract. Lord Wilberforce stressed in Ailsa Craig that "one must not strive to create ambiguities by straying construction". Nevertheless, the courts are historically more favourable to limitation clauses, so this clause is likely to be treated adversely by a court. Before the enactment of UCTA, the courts used rules of construction to mitigate the effects of exemption clauses. However, Lord Hoffmann has stated that "almost all the old intellectual baggage of "legal" interpretation has been discarded". It is still necessary to verify that the driver knocking Laura's phone from her hand fits into the ambit of the exclusion clause. A test was developed in Hollier: "a clause excluding liability for negligence should make its meaning plain on its face to any ordinary literate and sensible person". The words of the clause expressly exempt the negligence of the company's employees, thus fitting the Canada Steamship
 test. There is not much ambiguity in this case but the clause is always interpreted in the consumer's best interests under the contra preferentum rule. In this case, this involves a rigorous examination of the clause under UCTA.
Generally speaking, the doctrine of privity of contract prevents third parties from having rights under a contract to which they are not party. The Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 applies to this case. The driver is conferred a benefit under s 1(1)(a) and is named in the contract as a member of a class ("its servants") to satisfy s 1(1)(b). Exclusion clauses are covered by the Act by virtue of s 1(6). The driver could equally rely on the common law, in the shape of the rule in The Eurymedon
The next stage is to determine the clause's validity under UCTA. Clauses excluding liability for negligence resulting in loss or damage to property are not automatically void under the Act. UCTA is relevant even if the clause is a non-contractual notice purporting to exclude liability in tort, thus "the title of the Act is somewhat misleading". Clauses like the one in this case are covered by s 2(2). S 2(3) prevents Slowe and Wheezy from arguing a defence of volenti non fit injuria. The onus of proof that the clause is reasonable rests with the bus company. Once all this is settled, it can be subjected to the reasonableness requirement under s 11. This states that the clause is to be assessed "having regard to all the circumstances, which were, or ought reasonably to have been, known or in the contemplation of the parties when the contract was made". The test is not rigid and "decisions are likely to be made on a case by case basis".
This can be given some flesh by applying the three common law tests from George Mitchell, namely the risk the defendant has taken in undertaking the transaction, the reward from this risk and the possibility of insurance at a reasonable cost. The weight given to these tests varies from case to case. They are financially motivated and morally neutral, unlike the considerations set out in Schedule 2. The court will look at the potential that the bus company could have insured themselves against this risk without dramatically affecting their prices. It is unlikely that insurance would be economically prohibitive to the company. Regarding Schedule 2, Laura, although she is a law student, had only minimal knowledge of the trade and very few past dealings. The relative bargaining strength of the parties is similarly swung in Laura's favour. There is no evidence that Laura had an opportunity to use an alternative service, which further adds to her claim that the clause is unreasonable. Therefore, Laura has a solid, if not watertight, claim under UCTA to have the clause declared void.
Laura can pursue a parallel cause of action under UCCTR. She has the requisite standing as this is a non-negotiated contract and she is a consumer, namely someone "acting for purposes which are outside his trade, business or profession". Laura overcomes the hurdle of Regulation 6(2) as she is not challenging a core term of the contract. The Regulations turn upon the concepts of fairness, good faith and "significant imbalance against the consumer". Although "there can be no one single test" of fairness, the grey list of terms in Regulation 5(5) "is the most authoritative guide to what fairness entails". The relevant provision to this case is contained in paragraph 1(b), namely "inappropriately excluding or limiting the rights of the consumer". The wideness of this provision shows how "the reach of the Regulations is much broader" than UCTA. Additionally, "the determination of fairness will take into account the entire contractual package", which makes Laura's claim more likely to succeed. Under the Regulations, the unfair term is not binding but the contract continues "if it is capable of continuing in existence without the unfair term". A key point about the Regulations is that enforcement occurs by complaint to the OFT. Often, this is better because "private law enforcement does not provide an effective way of regulating the standard inclusion of unfair terms in adhesion contracts". However, Laura is not seeking to change the general scheme of contracts of carriage. Pragmatically, her aim is to claim compensation for the loss of her expensive mobile phone.
Laura's cause of action in this case can have three prongs. Firstly, she has a strong argument that the offending clause displayed inside the bus is not incorporated into the contract. Therefore, the bus company and its driver cannot rely on it to exclude themselves from negligence liability. As Lord Denning said, it would be "unconscionable" for them to exempt themselves from liability in this way. Given that the rules of interpretation provide little assistance, Laura's second line of attack should be under UCTA. She can forcefully argue that the clause is unreasonable, using s 2(2), s 11 and the Schedule 2 criteria. If successful, Laura will be able to sue Slowe and Wheezy for the cost of her mobile phone. However, the court may not buy into this reasoning; as such clauses are relatively common in contracts of carriage. If so, Laura can claim that the clause is unfair under the wider test of the 1999 Regulations. In this instance, the clause only becomes voidable and there is no guarantee of her being able to claim substantial damages.