It cannot be denied that the European Commission occupies a "central position" within the framework of the EU institutions. The Commission has come a long way from its humble beginnings in the 1950s. The Commission's "influence usually looms large", as it possesses legislative, executive, administrative and judicial functions. It has been at the heart of the Single European Market project and much EU policy emanates from the Commission. However, it does not necessarily follow that the Commission is the government of the EU, even if it views itself thus. The traditional image of the Commission is of a monolithic supranational bureaucracy and for many euro-sceptics "the European Commission is a natural bogeyman". Yet, it is far from being omnipotent and lacks some crucial features of a government. Indeed, it can be argued that it is "a bit of a dog's breakfast" as it suffers from "structural fragmentation". Furthermore, the Commission has been plagued by allegations of corruption and for it to be a proper government, it needs legitimacy and accountability.
It is firstly appropriate to consider what is meant by the term government. It is important to remember that the EU operates under a "sui generis" structure. Therefore, one cannot really compare the Commission to any of the national governments of the member states. Nevertheless, any pseudo-governmental body must have authority and a means of exercising control over the people or states it governs. A government should propose and pass legislation in the interests of the people. This should span a wide range of policy areas including the basic welfare of the people, as well as global issues such as defence. In democratic countries, governments are elected by the people, to whom they are accountable. In many systems, the Government is accountable to a Parliament, whose job it is to scrutinise legislative proposals. Governments can be organised in many ways, but it is a common feature nowadays to have a large civil service and bureaucracy. Governments generally have a cabinet of ministers, each responsible for a particular policy area. The government is led by one person, in Britain the Prime Minister or in Germany the Chancellor, who has ultimate authority.
The role and functions of the Commission by no means form a perfect parallel with the classic notion of a government. The Commission's official powers set out in Article 211 EC do not do justice to its real job. The Commission, as "a collegiate, vertically-organised institution", is at the heart of the EU and acts as its engine. It has a plethora of functions and is not characterised by "any rigid doctrine of separation of powers". Dionyssis Dimitrakopoulos divides its functions into two categories. The first contains systemic roles, namely maintaining the EU as a credible system of governance, for instance by monitoring the implementation of the Treaty. The second comprises sub-systemic roles, namely policy initiation and formation. To achieve this, the Commission has a strong underlying philosophy, which was expounded by Jacques Delors during his presidency. The Commission has developed "a strong sense of Europe's destiny" and is viewed as "the conscience of the Union". Ideologies often exist in a government and this lifts the Commission over and above the realms of a mere secretariat. Additionally, the Commission plays an important role in the "projection of an external EU image" regarding, inter alia, trade and CFSP. This provides the EU with the requisite sense of leadership for a government. Additionally, it has the final say when the Council of Ministers is split and circumstances dictate that the EU must make a decision.
The right to legislate is a fundamental trait of any government. However, the Commission's legislative role is not quite watertight. Although the Commission proposes legislation, the Council and European Parliament make numerous amendments in order to get laws passed. This echoes to a certain extent the workings of a government, in that laws need to be voted through a chamber of representatives. Yet, the Commission's proposals often get diluted into a form far from its original idea. Nevertheless, "the Commission's control of the policy agenda is formidable" and it has an almost exclusive right of drafting under the First Pillar. Furthermore, it enjoys delegated legislative power from the Council in certain areas such as agriculture. The Commission acts as a "motor of integration" by developing the Community's overall annual legislative plan. However, this is a far cry from the Queen's Speech or a political party manifesto in that it is vaguer than would be expected from a true government.
Every government has executive functions and the Commission is no exception, for example it is "guardian of the treaties". It is the Commission's role to supervise the application of Community norms in the member states. This is a unique function, not present in most national governments where enforcing the law is the domain of the police and the courts. Furthermore, the Commission has significant executive powers in the field of Competition Law. By virtue of Articles 81-88, it can investigate and decide whether a firm or a member state is in breach of Community Law. In addition, the Commission has the authority to use executive instruments, where the Council has delegated it the power, without recourse to the legislative process. Such power is matched by many governments, for example the French government issuing ordonnances.
Like every government, the Commission has a degree of control of how it spends its budget, especially the vast budget of the Common Agricultural Programme. However, its spending discretion is "more constrained than a typical national executive". For instance in UK v Commission, the ECJ overturned a Commission decision to fund 86 social exclusion projects. Furthermore, the Commission has "important negotiating and managing responsibilities, for example with prospective new member states. In reality, the bulk of the Commission's workload is administrative and there appears to be an ever-present tension between its bureaucratic and political functions. These administrative functions, such as drawing up and administering the budget, add weight to the argument that the Commission acts in some ways like a government for the EU.
When one comes to the Commission's judicial functions, the similarities with the notion of a government become sparse. The Commission has the power to instigate Article 226 EC enforcement actions, which are used where the Commission believes a member state to be in breach of Community Law. It is certain that its "role as Community prosecutor is a vital one". The Commission has even more powers in certain areas, namely state aid and competition, where it acts as both investigator and initial judge. Although such decisions are reviewable by the CFI, the Commission has a degree of discretion that goes beyond the normal powers of a government. It is a fundamental democratic principle that judicial decisions should be independent of government interference. Yet it is still not clear whether the Commission really is a government or not. It has been suggested that its judicial powers "provide it with a significant tool for the development of Community policy". This worries many as it indicates that the Commission may be stepping beyond its remit of being a proposer of legislation and a prosecutor.
The head of a government is vital to its organisation and activities. The Commission is headed by its President who may like to perceive himself as chief of an EU government. His powers were increased by the Treaty of Nice to the extent that the Commission shall work under the President's guidance "to ensure that it acts consistently, efficiently and on the basis of collegiality". This means that he or she is "much more than a first among equals", despite the fact that the Commission's work is based on the principle of collective responsibility. The President plays an instrumental role in shaping Commission policy, "promoting major ideas" and determining the future direction of the Community. This role increased under Prodi, who successfully attempted to "presidentialise" his post. The President's role is a similar role to a head of government, except heads of government have more powers at their disposal. However, the crucial distinction is the method of appointment. From a cynical perspective, the President is "selected by an unsavoury method of national horse-trading and elite manoeuvring". Although the President is appointed for a fixed term, he is not democratically accountable to the citizens of Europe, whereas an unsatisfactory head of government can be ousted by the people at the next general election.
A classic and essential feature of a government is a system of ministers, each responsible for a specific area of policy. In this respect, "the Commission is organised much like domestic governments", in that the college of commissioners acts as a core executive. The college is organised so that each commissioner has their own portfolio, such as environmental policy. In common with typical cabinets, it meets weekly and is "bound by the standard of collective responsibility". This notion is particularly important because of the fear that commissioners may not be wholly independent of their partisan interests. Yet, the current "sectoral and functional specialisation of services" generally leads Commissioners to defend the interests of their own portfolio. Nevertheless, the Commission is much less open than a conventional government. In Andy Smith's words, "the college of commissioners is very much a black box" especially because its meetings are held in secret. The method of appointment is a far cry from an elected cabinet, despite the fact that the Commission became increasingly "ministerial" under Prodi's leadership. However, the President can ask a commissioner to resign and has control over their appointment, such as in the recent case of Rocco Buttiglione, the Italian candidate whose controversial views on homosexuality led many MEPs to feel that he was unsuitable for the post.
It is important to remember that there is more to the Commission than just the college of commissioners. Decisions and draft legislative proposals often have their roots in a lower part of the hierarchy, namely the Directorates General and the cabinets. There are Directorates General for all major areas, which broadly equate to government ministries. However, contrary to popular perception, the DGs are far smaller and "extraordinarily resource-poor" in comparison to their national counterparts. Nonetheless, the bureaucracy performs similar tasks, such as policy development and distribution of revenue. The cabinet system consists of teams of advisors who work alongside each commissioner. Sadly, political advisors have become an integral part of any modern government and it cannot be denied that the Commission operates a spin-machine. Their influence is often criticised and it is argued that cabinets "take over too much of the substantive policy-making", which is compounded by the fact that the "chefs de cabinet" are empowered to set the agenda for the college's meetings.
Given that "the Commission has a duty to provide leadership for the EU" and that it shares a number of features of a government, it is paramount that it is free of corruption. Over the years, countless concerns over fraud and mismanagement have been voiced, culminating in the resignation of the Santer Commission in 1990. However, the organisation is becoming more government-like and Prodi promised to "transform the Commission into a modern, efficient administration". It is difficult for anyone to keep a reliable check on the Commission as it tends to always possess the most information. Governments tend to be closer to their scrutinising body, namely the national parliament. Nevertheless, the administrative and regulatory tasks of the Commission are subject to scrutiny by the European Parliament and commissioners periodically face "question time" in the EP, in a similar vein to ministers being grilled in the House of Commons or Bundestag. Furthermore, the "arcane comitology procedures" give at least symbolic assurance that the Commission's proposals are being scrutinised by national experts within the Council. A key stumbling block in attributing the title of "government" to the Commission is that it lacks "direct, suffrage-based legitimacy". Resignations in the Commission are rare compared to most governments where a culture of standing down exists if a minister's position becomes untenable.
This is closely linked with the issue of the legitimacy of the Commission. It can be argued that the Commission can never be a government of the EU unless the people of Europe respect it in such a way. It is difficult to harness much popular support for the Commission and it is widely perceived as remote and detached. This is hardly a desirable image for any kind of government. However, the EU needs some kind of regulator in order to prevent large countries over-promoting their national vested interests, yet currently the relationship between the Commission and the citizens is not one of "rulers and ruled". The Commission can be modelled as a "broker and negotiator" between the member states, in which case one would not expect the citizens to have a close relationship with it. Neither would it be possible to label such an organisation a government. Indeed, there is no true European government that is answerable to the electorate.
The debate on the status of the Commission may come down to the old conflict between supranationalism and intergovernmentalism. Intergovernmentalists contend that the Commission is an agent of the member states, working "to pursue common interests of the membership. For example, Andrew Moravcsik claims that the Commission is a "neutral arbiter". Conversely, other commentators argue that the Commission acts as a high authority, through its "supranational dynamics". Both arguments are persuasive, which points to a conclusion that that the Commission cannot be a government, especially if its authority is not widely acknowledged.
To conclude, the Commission does not have a clearly defined role, mainly because the Treaty is somewhat ambiguous on its functions and it has evolved in a "highly fragmented" fashion. In some respects, the Commission is very like a government. It "fulfils many of the traditional tasks of government" and these legislative and executive functions fit into the archetypal model of a cabinet of ministers and a civil service. However, its role as a law enforcer renders it "a curious hybrid". However, the Commission is "far from being a European government" in many other respects. It does not carry out any front-line policy management functions that would be expected of a government. Neither does its method of appointment provide it with sufficient legitimacy to be well-accepted amongst the European electorate. Therefore, the Commission is not quite the government of EU, but it is "far more than a mere secretariat to the Council". Whatever label one attributes to it, it performs a vital role within the European Union and is at the epicentre of many fields of EU law and policy.