Environmental law inevitably affects every citizen of the EU. The issues transcend national boundaries, for instance regarding river pollution or global warming. Therefore, the EU has gradually formed its own body of environmental law, "populated by a staggering array of actors and interests". Now, "the EC regulates the 'European environment' as a whole", using a range of legal principles such as the precautionary principle, the polluter pays principle and the integration principle. Yet, these have emerged out of an ad-hoc evolution, which can lead EC environmental law to be viewed as "a bundle of paradoxes". There is a conflict between the furtherance of the Community's economic aims and environmental protection. There are concerns that "the policy for the environment is primarily directed towards the completion of the internal market" and cannot therefore be an autonomous area of policy-making. Nevertheless, Lord Clinton-Davis claims that "environmental policy has been one of the great success stories of the Union". This could be pre-emptive, given the feared ignorance of environmental issues amongst the new member states.
At the outset of European integration, the priority was maintaining peace by way of economic integration and the creation of a common market. Thus, environmental legislation up to 1972 "mirrored the economic approach of the EEC Treaty". The environment was protected as a secondary and perhaps inadvertent consequence of some economic directives. The Community's attitude to environmental protection at this time was "incidental", and "inarticulate". In 1972 international cooperation on environmental matters began with the UN Stockholm conference. This led to the Paris summit, where the Community declared that "economic expansion is not an end in itself". This assertion proved instrumental in the "attempt to wrest EC government out of the narrow economic sphere". It is essential that a credible environmental strategy is developed in conjunction with economic goals and not subsidiary to them.
The first EC environmental measures were founded on the approximation of laws, under Articles 94 and 308 EC. Article 94 allows measures that secure the harmonisation of laws affecting the common market, for example regarding the lead content of petrol. The rationale is that differing environmental standards distort competition, thus jeopardising the efficacy of the common market. Industrialists would have to spend more in some states to meet their higher standards hence many measures are "attempts to ensure a level playing field". Article 308 is a residual power where it is "necessary to attain, in the course of the operation of the common market, one of the objectives of the Community", for instance the Wild Birds Directive . Again, the focus is on economics, which left the Community without a coherent environmental policy.
A major turning point came following the SEA in 1987, which "gave a considerable impetus to environmental legislation". It provided a "constitutional base" for introducing environmental legislation and "the objectives of the Community's environment policy were enshrined in the Treaty". Most environmental legislation is now passed under article 175, whereas the harmonising procedures are used in limited circumstances. The TEU added the environment to Articles 2 and 3 of the EC Treaty. Following TEU, decisions on the environment are made by QMV coupled with co-decision, which makes the process easier and gives a more prominent role to the European Parliament and its Green MEPs. This represents a fundamental shift in the balance of power underpinning the legal order. Before, the member states could protect national environmental interests via their vetoes. Furthermore, TEU improved Article 2, which now refers to "a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment". By virtue of the ToA, Article 6 includes the environment, requiring environmental considerations to be integrated into every aspect of Community law and policy. These developments show that the EC has articulated a desire to pursue sustainable development whilst respecting the environment. Nonetheless, the SEA was something of a "tacit bargain" between the "green troika" and the environmentally lagging countries.
There are various new principles that underpin EC environmental law, such as the precautionary principle and sustainable development. These often appear nebulous and there is ambiguity surrounding the meaning of a "high level of protection". The EC is drifting away from traditional command and control regulation in favour of more flexible instruments, such as target standards and tradable permits. It has been acknowledged that command and control "has reached the limits of its environmental effectiveness". There was no improvement in water quality evident from 25 years of regulation. It promotes an unnecessarily high level of uniformity, whereas target standards allow member states to choose the most cost-effective means respecting geographical and assimilative variations.
The precautionary principle has been defined by the Environment Commissioner as to "take action where the science is not clear, but where there is reasonable cause for concern" and is an important legal principle currently in force. However, while specifically mentioned in article 174(2), it is "infamously vague and without concrete definition". It is similar to the prevention principle also cited in article 174(2), but lowers the risk threshold as there is no need to prove a causal link. Nonetheless, the cases of Pfizer and Alpharma elevate its status to "a legally binding norm that may be subject to challenge". However, it is uncertain whether the principle can be used as a sword to an action. The ECJ would only review its compatibility with the Ozone Regulation on the grounds of a "manifest error of appraisal". Additionally, the degree of risk needed to invoke the principle is not settled, illustrated by the discrepancies between Pfizer and Alpharma. Moreover, although the precautionary principle "could benefit hugely from a more explicit framework", it helps environmental law to carve out its own field of policy.
The polluter pays principle means that "an entity directly or indirectly responsible for damage to the environment must bear the costs". However, it is not failsafe at protecting the environment due to its economic basis. A company may find it more economical to pay for its pollution than invest in changing its harmful practices. The EU has banned state subsidies being granted to polluters to help them meet their environmental obligations. The principle has lost support and the Commission has admitted that the Cohesion Fund Regulations conflict with its application. One further principle listed in article 174(2) is that environmental damage should be rectified at source. This moves environmental law up the policy agenda as it requires environmental considerations to be examined at the outset of all major projects under the EIA directive.
Another influential source of EC Environmental Law is the Environmental Action Programmes, which are best described as "political declarations of intent". The first four set out founding principles and concentrated on emission limits and targets. The fifth programme reflected the new policy instruments mentioned above and typifies the modern approach to environmental protection. It is drawn up on the principles of sustainable development, preventive and precautionary action and shared responsibility. The sixth programme builds on this bottom-up approach. It projects more accountability, public awareness and self-regulation. A change in the attitude of companies is vital, in that "the EU aims for a situation where environmental care is as important to companies as customer care". This can only be achieved once environmental law attains the same specific prowess as areas such as trade or the economy.
In the ToA, Article 6 was modified to say that environmental protection requirements must be integrated into all other Community policies. This key principle stems from the theory that "the notion of a common market implies an environmental element". Each Community purpose in article 2, including the environment, is of equal value. Thus, "the Community cannot adopt any measures that lead to the deterioration of the quality of the environment". Each Council formation, such as transport, is required to produce an environmental strategy, with a goal to promoting sustainable development. However, strategies should be viewed with caution as the Commission is segmented into DGs that do not always co-operate. Thus, "unravelling the EU's tangled policy on vehicle pollution is as hard as cleaning a sooty engine". Furthermore, the integration principle "is not always easy to apply in practice" and it is unlikely that the Commission will allow it to trounce their economic ambitions for Europe.
Certain member states feel that horizontal policy initiatives are eroding their discretion in environmental protection. It is feared that member states may use the subsidiarity principle to restrict the emergence of new EC environmental law and force the Commission into submission. The EU institutions are now competent to enact directives in areas that directly affect national industries, although there are subsidiarity safeguards in article 174(4) and article 5(2). However, it is difficult to determine which environmental objectives can be better attained at Community level. Regional policy is necessary but member states cannot be let off the hook as several view environmental protection as "a barrier to development". If pollution standards were set nationally, this would distort the single market and "endanger the whole rationale of the Community". Subsidiarity has hampered the SAVE programme, which was "crippled by member states' amendments in relation to subsidiarity". The principle of minimum harmonisation means that member states are free to set more stringent standards under article 176. The sting in the tail is that such measures can fall foul of article 28 regarding free movement of goods. Restrictions must be proportionate by not going beyond what is necessary to achieve environmental protection.
The Action Programmes and the Treaty improvements make promising reading for environmentalists. However, the environment's rise to a specific area of policy-making is marred by a fundamental inconsistency between economic growth and environmental protection. One of the aims of the EU is to secure the competitiveness of industries operating within the common market. Environmental measures can fall foul of Article 28 such as in Aher-Waggon and Danish Bottles. It is certain nonetheless that environmental protection cannot be left to market forces as "competition tends to stimulate increased production". It is now broadly accepted that "Community Law must be applied with regard not only to the economic, but also to the environmental objectives of the Treaty". In Walloon Waste, the ECJ said that "a choice has to be made between competing interests, namely economic gains and environmental protection". It is not yet evident whether this choice has been consciously made.
The role of the courts must not be underestimated regarding the rise of environmental law to a specific policy area. The ECJ's record is "almost entirely positive" regarding environmental protection. For example, in ADBHU, the Court held that "the directive must be seen in the perspective of environmental protection, which is one of the Community's essential objectives". The ECJ has been accused of excessive activism, especially in cases such as Danish Bottles. Here, a Danish rule that drinks should be sold in reusable bottles was challenged as contrary to Article 28. The Court held that the "mandatory requirements" relating to non-discriminatory rules outlined in Cassis could be extended to include environmental protection. This was extended in Walloon Waste to favour environmental protection when the measure appeared to be discriminatory. A ban on imported waste into the Walloon region of Belgium was justified because of the "special character" of waste. Moreover, all the decisions mentioned point towards a green outlook of the European courts.
Many of the legal principles analysed so far mean nothing for the environment unless they are implemented. The implementation process has improved due to the creation of the "New Legal Order" in Simmenthal. This is enhanced by the concept of direct effect that emerged in Van Gend. Environmental provisions can be relied upon by individuals if they are unambiguous and confer individual rights. Directives are only vertically directly effective, but fortunately, the definition of an emanation of the state has been widely construed by the Courts, promoting environmental protection. Nevertheless, direct effect is not universal and it has been criticised that the ToA "failed to establish a citizen's right...to a healthy environment". Directives are "flexible means of ensuring harmonised standards". Hence, they are often vague, such as the Bathing Water Directive, which led to some member states failing to submit poor quality sites for inspection. Other directives can be unimplemented altogether, including the Drinking Water Directive. Another difficulty centres on enforcement. The disparities between member states' procedures support the conclusion that "poor enforcement is the black hole in the EU policy process".
The accession in 2004 of ten new member states creates some big challenges regarding harmonised environmental protection. The Commission announced that it "is of the view that it is one of the main tasks of the candidate countries to implement EC environmental legislation". This could prove troublesome, given the emergent nature of industry in certain Central and Eastern European countries. Moreover, "their challenge is to ensure that they do not repeat the two decades of environmental neglect that occurred in Western Europe". Jos Manuel Barroso has boldly announced that "we must put growth centre stage". It is vital that this does not usurp the environment's role as a specific area of EU policy. Enlargement means that there are fewer Green MEPs to lobby for the environment. Perhaps of greater concern is that "the draft constitution is not strengthening the environmental aims and policies of the Union". It is worrying that after so much progress, "a new era of a paler green hue" may be on the horizon.
EC environmental law has taken great strides towards becoming a specific area of policy-making, yet it is still a tier below the EU's economic aims. However, there is still a lack of overall policy coherence, underpinned by a shifting agenda and early ad-hoc evolution. A turning point was the SEA in 1986, which occurred on the back of increased global awareness and disasters such as the Sandoz chemical spill in 1986. The elevation of the environment has been catalysed by the adoption of legal principles, most notably the precautionary principle and the integration principle. Nevertheless, the environment is not yet fully integrated into the spirit of the EU, despite Article 6 of the Treaty. Moreover, EC environmental law is of "patchwork character" and has feet in many camps of EU policy-making. Its inconsistencies are best explained by shortcomings in implementation. Furthermore, the incongruity still exists between economic growth and environmental protection. A truly successful and prioritised EC environmental policy can only be reached once each member state acknowledges and fulfils its role in the "shared responsibility" for protecting the environment.