Environmental law and policy without a doubt affects every citizen of the European Union. Environmental issues inevitably transcend national boundaries, for instance regarding river pollution, acid rain or global warming. Therefore, the European Union has gradually formed its own body of environmental law and policy, which arguably has more than merely a symbolic function. Indeed, around 80% of UK environmental law derives from the EC, generally by way of directives. However, the evolution of EC environmental law and policy has not been a smooth journey. Many euro-sceptics feel that the "regulatory rather than redistributive" nature of EC environmental law and policy represents a fundamental loss of national control. There is a central tension between the furtherance of the Community's economic aims and environmental protection. Nevertheless, Lord Clinton-Davis claims that "environmental policy has been one of the great success stories of the Union". This could be a pre-emptive judgement, given the feared ignorance of environmental issues amongst the ten new member states.
At the outset of European integration, namely the Treaty of Rome of 1957, the priority for the member states was maintaining peace following the destruction from World War Two. The means to this end was economic integration and the creation of a common market. Thus, all legislation in the period up to 1972 had solely economic underpinnings. Appearances can be deceptive, for example the 1967 Directive on Classification, Packaging and Labelling of Dangerous Substances was not aimed specifically at protecting the environment. The Community's attitude to environmental protection at this time can be described as "incidental", and "inarticulate". It was not until the UN Stockholm conference in 1972 that international cooperation on environmental matters began to take shape. This was shortly followed by the Paris summit, in which the Community declared that "economic expansion is not an end in itself". Such an assertion proved instrumental in the evolution of EC environmental law. In order for a credible environmental strategy to develop, it is essential that it is developed in conjunction with economic goals and not subsidiary to them.
The first EC environmental measures were founded on the premise of the approximation of laws. This was achieved under Articles 94 and 308 EC and is an example of the Commission flexing its interventionist muscles. Article 94 provides for measures that secure the harmonisation of laws affecting the common market, such as the Directive on the lead content of petrol. The rationale is that differing environmental standards distorts competition, thus jeopardising the efficacy of the common market. Industrialists would have to spend more in some states to meet their higher standards. Article 308 is a residual power where it is "necessary to attain, in the course of the operation of the common market, one of the objectives of the Community", for instance the Directive on Conservation of Wild Birds. Again, the focus is on the common market and this led to directives being introduced in a largely ad-hoc fashion and this left the Community without a coherent environmental policy.
A major turning point came following the ratification of the Single European Act (SEA) in 1986. This provided a legal basis for the introduction of new EC environmental legislation and "the objectives of the Community's environment policy were enshrined in the Treaty". The Maastricht Treaty (TEU) added the environment to Articles 2 and 3 of the EC Treaty. Following TEU, decisions on the environment are made by way of qualified majority voting coupled with the co-decision procedure, which makes the decision-making process easier and gives a more prominent role to the European Parliament. This represents a fundamental shift in the balance of power underpinning the legal order. Before, the member states could protect national environmental interests by way of their vetoes. Conversely, the increased role of the EP allows for pressure from Green MEPs to influence new legislation. Furthermore, TEU improved Article 2, which now refers to "a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment". By virtue of the Treaty of Amsterdam, the environment is included in Article 6, requiring environmental considerations to be integrated into every aspect of Community Law and Policy. The post-SEA developments mean that the EC has intentionally articulated a desire to pursue sustainable development whilst respecting the environment.
There are now various new principles that underpin EC environmental law and policy, such as the precautionary principle. This has been defined as to "take action where the science is not clear, but where there is reasonable cause for concern". This appears a vague concept and there is further ambiguity surrounding the revised Article 2, as it is unclear what exactly is meant by a "high level of protection". Similarly, the EC is drifting away from traditional command and control regulation in favour of more proactive policy instruments, such as target standards and tradable permits. There has been an acknowledgement that command and control is not always cost effective as it promotes a perhaps unnecessarily high level of uniformity. Furthermore, the European Commission has modernised its outlook and is relying more on expert advice, such as from the European Environment Agency.
Another source of EC Environmental Law that has been influential in its evolution is the Environmental Action Programmes. These are not legally binding and are best described as "political declarations of intent".
The first was published in 1973 and set out 11 principles on which Community environmental policy is based. The second, third and fourth concentrated mainly on emission limits and targets, which reflects the type of regulatory directive being created at this time. The fifth action programme mirrors the new types of policy instruments mentioned above and typifies the modern approach to environmental protection. It is drawn up on the principles of sustainable development, preventive and precautionary action and shared responsibility. The sixth programme, which covers the period 2000-2005, builds on this bottom-up approach. It projects more accountability, public awareness and self-regulation, for example through voluntary participation in eco-management audit scheme. At the same time, it has not lost sight of its core priorities, namely climate change and the sustainable use of resources.
The Action Programmes and the improvements to the Treaty make promising reading for the environmentalist. However, underlying the evolution of EC environmental law is a fundamental inconsistency between promoting economic growth and protecting the environment. One of the fundamental aims of the EU is to secure and promote the competitiveness of industries operating within the umbrella of the common market. In addition, environmental protection is sometimes sidelined by the principle of the free movement of goods. Environmental measures, especially when a member state imposes more stringent standards than in a Directive, can fall foul of Article 28. This can be illustrated by Aher-Waggon GmbH and the Danish Bottles case. It is certain nonetheless that environmental protection cannot be left to market forces as "competition tends to stimulate increased production". The member states have broadly accepted that adverse effects on competition must often be outweighed by environmental concerns. It is now the case that "Community Law must be applied with regard not only to the economic, but also to the environmental objectives of the Treaty". Although all the objectives of the Community are supposed to carry equal weight, it is generally accepted that the most pressing issue for most EU citizens nowadays is the economy. Therefore, the Commission has reached a compromise by increasingly using economic instruments such as subsidies and taxes to promote environmental protection. However, it can be argued that the use of state aid and subsidies to help certain countries meet their target standards undermines the principle of a harmonised common market. In Walloon Waste, the Court of Justice said that "a choice has to be made between competing interests such as economic gains and environmental protection". It is not yet evident whether this choice has been consciously made.
A key factor in the evolution of the Community's environmental law and policy is the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance. The ECJ's record is "almost entirely positive" with regard to promoting environmental protection. For example, in ADBHU, the Court held that "the directive must be seen in the perspective of environmental protection, which is one of the Community's essential objectives". Such an acknowledgement came as the Commission was going to through one of its more proactive phases in issuing numerous directives on noise. The ECJ has been accused of excessive activism, especially in cases such as Danish Bottles. Here, a Danish rule that beer and soft drinks should be sold in reusable bottles was challenged as contrary to Article 28. The Court held that the "mandatory requirements" relating to non-discriminatory rules outlined in Cassis de Dijon could be extended to include environmental protection.
This was extended in Walloon Waste to favour environmental protection when the measure appeared to be discriminatory. The Court held that a ban on imported waste into the Walloon region of Belgium was justified under the Cassis principle and was not discriminatory because of the "special character" of waste. It appears that the ECJ was politically motivated by a policy to promote environmental protection, although it must be remembered that such exemptions only apply in the absence of Community measures on the subject. The CFI is also active, notably its recent rulings in Pfizer and Alpharma, which elevate the status of the precautionary principle to "a legally binding norm that may be subject to challenge". Moreover, all the decisions mentioned point in the same direction, namely towards a green outlook of the European courts.
An important principle that has developed since its formal birth in the ToA is the integration principle. Article 6 was modified to say that environmental protection requirements must be integrated into all other Community policies. Each council formation is required to produce its own environmental strategy, with a goal to promoting sustainable development. For example, regarding transport, proposals have been made for the increased use of fiscal measures such as road pricing to help cut emissions. The principle has been described as "a break with our traditional sectoral decision-making" and therefore is perhaps difficult to reconcile with the subsidiarity principle. Member states may feel that horizontal policy initiatives are removing their discretion in environmental protection. It is feared by some commentators that member states may use the notion to restrict the emergence of new law at EU level and force the Commission to take a lower profile. However, Neil Hawke argues that such initiatives have so far had little impact and additionally, it is unlikely that the Commission and the Council will allow the requirement to integrate environmental concerns to trounce their economic ambitions for Europe.
It is one thing evaluating the evolution of EC environmental law and policy, but many of the developments analysed so far mean nothing for the environment unless they are implemented. The implementation process has improved during the past decades, especially due to the creation of the "New Legal Order" in Simmenthal. This means that EC Environmental Law penetrates national legal systems and this is enhanced by the concept of direct effect that emerged in Van Gend en Loos. If an environmental provision is unambiguous and confers rights on individuals then an individual can rely on it. However, directives are only vertically directly effective, meaning against the state. Fortunately, the definition of an emanation of the state has been widely construed in the cases of Foster v British Gas and Griffin v South West Water. This is another indication of the willingness of the Courts to promote the cause of environmental protection.
Nevertheless, much of the problem in this area lies with the directives themselves. Directives are "flexible means of ensuring harmonised standards", where flexible is the operative word. They are often vague, such as the Bathing Water Directive, which led to some member states failing to submit poor quality sites for inspection. Some member states fail to implement some directives at all, for instance the Commission brought a direct action against the UK for non-implementation of the Drinking Water Directive. Another difficulty centres on enforcement. Member states do not want Commission enforcement officers usurping the role of their own Environment Agencies. Indeed, the disparities between member states' procedures support the conclusion that "the implementation and enforcement of environmental legislation remains the weakest link in EU environmental policy".
It is probable that one of the most significant phases in the evolution on EC environmental law is yet to come. The accession in May 2004 of ten new member states creates some big challenges regarding harmonised environmental protection. The European Commission announced that it "is of the view that it is one of the main tasks of the candidate countries to implement EC environmental legislation". This could prove troublesome, especially given the emergent nature of industry in certain Central and Eastern European countries. Another major concern is of a return to the dark days of focussing solely on the economy at the expense of the environment. Jos Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission, has boldly announced that "we must put growth centre stage". Enlargement means that there are fewer Green MEPs to lobby for new provisions. Perhaps of greater concern is the fact that "the draft constitution is not strengthening the environmental aims and policies of the Union". It is worrying that after so much progress, "a new era of a paler green hue" may be on the horizon.
To conclude, EC environmental law and policy has undergone sweeping changes in the past 50 years. However, there still appears to be a lack of overall policy coherence, underpinned by a shifting agenda and the early ad hoc evolution. A turning point came in 1986 with the Single European Act, but the real reason behind the change in outlook was an increased global awareness of environmental issues. It is highly likely that the disaster at Chernobyl and the Sandoz chemical spill into the Rhine in 1986 were the real catalysts for action. It is interesting to conclude by considering how EC environmental law and policy evolved to its current integrated stage. Functionalists would argue that integration has its own internal dynamic, which spreads co-operation through all policy areas. Yet, the environment is not yet fully integrated into the spirit of the EU, in spite of Article 6 of the Treaty. Moreover, the "patchwork character" of EC environmental law can be best explained by shortcomings in its implementation. Furthermore, the incongruity still exists between economic growth and environmental protection. In any case, a truly successful EC environmental policy can only be reached once each of the 25 member states acknowledges and fulfils its role in the "shared responsibility" for protecting the environment.