The prime reason for the popularity of melodrama in the latter half of the eighteenth and throughout the nineteenth centuries was its inclusion of all those ingredients ensuring audience appeal. Melodrama, quite simply, entertained. Similar to the enormously popular soap operas of today, the content of any typical melodrama would doubtless include emotions of comedy, tragedy and sentiment expressed through easily identifiable stock characterisation. These characters fulfilled their roles in a series of comic, often tragic, highly emotional nail biting scenarios, guaranteed to go down extremely well with any audience in need of an entertaining evening at the theatre.
An interesting question however, lies in how the genre succeeded in appealing to such a wide audience; 'The taste for melodrama was ubiquitous and classless; it was by no means a kind of theatre appealing only to the lower classes." How was this achieved throughout a period in which the tastes and desires of the mass audience were liable to change and hunger for something different? How did melodrama bring audiences back to the theatres at a time when the government was concerned with the decline of drama's popularity? More importantly, how did it keep the audiences coming back?
These are the questions I will explore in this essay. Using three plays, The Murder in the Red Barn, The Bells and Camille, I will identify their similarities as popular melodramas as well as the different aspects of each, which were created in response to the changing contemporary social climate of the period.
The Murder in the Red Barn has become a legend. The play has all the popular elements of melodrama, the villain, William Corder, charged for the murder of the poor, innocent village maiden- Maria Martin. The death of Martin's child, the respectable father figure and his wife's mysterious dream by which the murder was discovered.
The fact that this play is based on an actual event however, is the prime reason why it reflected the contemporary social climate. Maria Martin was murdered in the Red Barn. Her lover, William Corder, was arrested on suspect of the murder, brought to trial and executed at Bury St Edmunds in August 1828. The play serves as a suitable opening to my discussion as it demonstrates a centre ground for what the audiences of the time were seeking.
Although the true-life incidents alone were incredibly popular amongst the people, the facts of the highly complex event were changed radically to make it even more popular on the stage. Even before the trial of William Corder, the elements of the case were being sensationalised by media hype. As the Nineteenth Century progressed, new elements of were grafted on to the story until, when the play was performed in 1877, the murder had been perfectly primed to create maximum appeal for the audience. However well the murder fitted with the trends on stage, the story was altered, as were the characters of the people involved. Subplots were created in keeping with the typical melodramas contemporary audiences would have been used to.
For example, little of Maria's true character was conveyed in the play - she had to be presented as the typical victim. She has very little to do on stage other than wait anxiously for Corder and follow the instructions he gives her. Her dialogue is sugary and innocent,
The fact that the real Maria had had incestuous affairs with first Corder's brother, Thomas, then a married man, Peter Matthews before William, and moreover, that she had given birth to three illegitimate children, is erased from the narrative. The theme of the 'fallen woman' did not become popular amongst audiences until later melodramas. The audience are only presented with Maria's anxiety to legalise her union with Corder.
Although it is true that the real Maria had a sister- Ann Martin, the subplot of Ann's relationship with Timothy Bobbin, was created purely as a form of comical relief running parallel to the central narrative. Their comic roles, together with the gypsy type character Johnny Raw, were popular to melodrama and were therefore added to satisfy audience expectations. They bear no relation to the murder narrative,
Many of the elements of The Murder in the Red Barn are similar to the typical traits of a Gothic drama. A few to include would be the thrill of the unknown, great mystery and darkness and stereotypical settings- secluded and ominous in order to inspire terror. According to the confession of the real William Corder, he shot Maria on his arrival at the barn before he buried her. Horrific as this must have been, melodrama made it even more so. After Maria's exclamation, 'Oh William, William, to thee I trust for future happiness!' Corder enters and a sinister atmosphere builds throughout their dialogue, in which the true characterisation of the villain and the victim are allowed full glory,
This precedes a violent struggle, in which Corder attempts to stab her twice before succeeding,
Although the character traits and settings in the play are typical of the Gothic genre, a clear shift in audience taste and social climate is demonstrated in The Murder in the Red Barn. That is, a moving away from the sublime in the narrative, replacing it with real life events to place the audiences' familiar ground on the stage, as was the desire in the nineteenth century. Both the audiences of the play and the thousands of people eager to acquire a souvenir from the actual crime scene were quick to admit that they really only cared about the entertainment provided by the incident. Justice was not considered much of an importance, 'Every one of them was anxious to carry away something memorial...pieces of the barn-door, tiles from the roof, and, above all, the clothes of the poor victim, were eagerly sought after.'
Although The Murder in the Red Barn played for very few nights at the large permanent theatres in London, it was immensely popular at the Coburg Theatre, typical as one of the Surrey side theatres, for drawing an audience united in their desire of gory delight,
Leopold Lewis' The Bells complicates the melodramatic form somewhat. The reason for its overwhelming success when it opened at the Lyceum Theatre in 1871 was the result of an audience seeking something new. In answer to this, the play breaks free from the confines of the conventional melodrama.
At first hand, the synopsis of the play, with the character of the Burgomaster Mathias so central an importance, appears to reflect the mass audiences' desire to be presented with a really fine villainous character,
Henry Irving's portrayal of Mathias however, illustrates a more complex reflection of the contemporary social climate during the Victorian era.
I will focus firstly on the portrayal of the Burgomaster. Henry Irving's philosophy on acting was similar to the re-enactment of the Maria Martin's murder, in that it was based around the Gothic style. The elements of The Bells reflect the period of the 'Modern Gothic'. A prime difference between The Murder in the Red Barn and The Bells is the move away in the latter from the stereotypical 'character' melodrama. Although a few of the familiar traits are still apparent, this is a play in which a single character (encompassing in many ways the villainous, heroic, victimised and omniscient character qualities in himself) is analysed.
There is no doubt that Henry Irving's interpretation of the role was immensely popular, '...the applause came down like thunder as Irving appeared in the doorway...'
However, his portrayal of Mathias was criticised by some for not upholding the original intentions of the author of the proceeding French version, Le Juif Polonais,
'Irving's Mathias was "not in accord with the intent of the author...who had drawn a far simpler and less tragic figure," an outright scoundrel, bluff and hearty in manner, who fears nothing but discovery and is untroubled by moral qualms'. It was Irving's reading of the character and performance style that ensured the success of the play with the audience. The social climate had changed since the beginning of the nineteenth century, when the murder of Maria Martin had caused such a sensation amongst people fascinated with crime and the entertainment it provided. The end of the century saw a shift to the late Victorian fixation with morality, which had been reflected increasingly throughout the century in melodrama. For example, in Wilde's Lady Audley's Secret, adapted for the stage in 1863, Lady Audley's are exposed and she receives her comeuppance at the end.
The original character of the Burgomaster was written more as the traditional villain. Irving's performance appeals more to the emotional side, 'He had re-imagined a man who could fit in with the images he has conjured up: a conscience haunted wretch whose naked fears would take the audience by the throat." This it did. The fact that Mathias' guilty secret goes with him to the grave and is only discovered in the dream scene, does not fail to illustrate his suffering. The guilty conscience communicated by Irving was so heart wrenching that the issues of morality and justice were highlighted more clearly. Supposedly it was almost unbearable to watch Irving's Mathias living out his secret.
As Irving presents it, the sorrow that eventually kills Mathias is the form of justice in this play. Much of its complexity lies in determining whether he is the villain. Certainly his action in killing the Polish Jew proves him so, although his reasons for doing so and his overwhelming remorse throughout the play are anything but villainous. He gains sympathy from the audience when he recalls in his monologue how the Polish Jew's gold saved his family from ruination, 'That gold did us a good turn- without it- we were ruined.' The comfortable life and the respect he has earned as the Burgomaster stem from his crime. He loves his daughter and wants her to marry the clever Christian with a fine dowry. He wants to give his family a good life and when accused by the President in the dream scene for being 'a man full of cunning', he replies, 'No, I am a man of simplicity.'
It is interesting that both the victim in this play- the Polish Jew and the good and virtuous Christian are characters the audience cannot really identify with. The Jew is foreign and consequently - particularly in the 1800's - would have been regarded as a strange and distant figure in the minds of English audiences. The memories of Mathias' friend, Walter, recall him as 'well-made' and 'vigorous' with a fairly brusque manner, 'But the Jew, without replying, first opened his cloak and then unbuckled a girdle which he wore around his waist. This he threw upon the table, and we all heard the ringing sound of the gold it contained.'
Christian's goodness and sensibility is heightened to such a point that his character becomes annoying. The audience witness the dreadful anxiety of Mathias and such comments as Christian's 'Money gained by honest labour is the only profitable wealth', however true, succeed only in gaining more sympathy for the villain.
A further importance The Bells played in responding to the tastes and desires of the mass audience in the nineteenth century was the style of acting used by Henry Irving. This style created the spectacle on stage during a play that depended less on the visual clues the majority of melodramas depended on to make them a success.
To further complicate the melodramatic form, The Bells offers very little opportunity in its locations for truly spectacular scenery. The absence of this shows another change in melodramatic for at the end of the Victorian era. Previously, poor acoustics in theatres meant the script could not be relied upon to convey meaning to the audience. In The Bells, iconography's importance continued, but the spectacle was acknowledged through Irving's gestures, rather than mesmerising backdrops.
'It (the dream scene) was rendered impressive, not by trick or artifice, but by sheer acting power." Although the incredibly pronounced and exaggerated gestures used by Irving conveyed very obviously the feelings experienced by Mathias, the audience was required to think more about what was happening to him as the central character. Moreover, Irving's 'eminently picturesque' gestures allowed the spectacle produced on stage to compliment the dialogue instead of completely overpowering it, as had been the case in earlier melodrama.
The slight move away from spectacle derived through scenery was perhaps an anticipation of the audience beginning to desire a more realist approach on stage which became clearer and clearer towards the end of melodrama's popularity,
Although Dumas Fils' play Camille was first performed before The Bells, I have chosen to discuss lastly because, in my opinion, it is the most complex of the three plays. On one level, it has similarities with both The Murder in The Red Barn and The Bells, on a more complex level, it confuses the melodramatic genre by tackling a problematic issue in society and changing the and changing the way it was perceived in the contemporary social climate.
Firstly, the play having been adapted from Dumas Fils' novel, The Lady of the Camellias, illustrated a shift to a new literal mass audience. More people were able to read; therefore, watching plays adapted from their favourite novels became enormously popular. Moreover, Queen Victoria's love of the theatre meant that it became the social gathering to be seen at rather than a place to be avoided.
Camille was performed almost twenty years before Henry Irving first portrayed Mathias in The Bells. Similar to the confusion of whether his character is a true villain in the play, in Camille too, it is difficult to identify this character.
Central to the play is the character Marguerite, a Parisian courtesan. At the time it was written, prostitution was spiralling out of control. In England it was seen as the evil of society. Although it had been regulated and legalised in France, the general view of it was expressed by Dumas Fils, 'French society is headed toward universal prostitution', propelled by what he called, 'a tumour in the brain...a virus in the blood." Taking the courtesans' reputation on board, Dumas Fils set out to frame his ideas about society through the play, its over riding theme being that if people fell socially they could always return to respectability. He tried to give the problem prostitution caused a new perspective. He achieved this by presenting his audience with a courtesan who is eventually revealed to have a heart of gold. In many ways the play portrays society as the villain, forcing even the virtuous prostitutes to lead a life of sin and become figure of ill repute. In Camille, Marguerite is unable to lead the quiet life she desires with her lover Armand, and is forced back to her old lifestyle in Paris after his father persuades her that marrying his son will ruin their respectable family.
Indeed the differing attitudes towards the courtesan and her lifestyle are illustrated in Camille through two parallel characters- Baron De Varville, Armand's rival and Duval, Sr. his father. However neither character appears villainous in their attempts to separate the lovers. Armand's father is a likeable character and acknowledges that he was wrong to interfere at the end of the play. It is easy to sympathise with the Baron who, in the few times he makes an appearance, plods after Marguerite (who makes it clear she dislikes his company) eager to do anything to please her,
In Stephen Stanton's introduction to the well-made play, Camille is defended as being more than a Romantic drama, 'The play has a sort of implicit corrective undertone that keeps it from being an uncompromising apologia for free love. The courtesan's life is shown to be trivial and stupid; aside from Marguerite herself, the women are repellent.'
The play enjoyed enormous success- more so than the novel, when it was published. Its sensation however drew much criticism. People were concerned that it would empower and glamorise the life of the courtesan at a time when she caused such a threat to society. Moreover, it was criticised for painting an unrealistic picture of the courtesans' world, 'Zola claimed that one of his primary goals in writing Nana was to protest against the false picture of vice conveyed by such sentimental versions of the courtesan as Marion De Lorme and La Dame aux Camelias'.
If Dumas Fils did not impress the critics, he certainly impressed his audience, disguising his actual opinions of the issues in the play in order to make it more accessible for the people. Similar to the case of Maria Martin, the stage version Camille was much altered from the novel, The Lady of the Camellias. Stephen Stanton offers one view on the reason for this,
This is apparent in Dumas Fils' approach to the play. In order to illustrate his social concern and at the same time make the play entertaining, he plays with his audience's expectations and then twists them. The portrayal of Marguerite is a prime example of this. At the beginning she appears as a character exactly how everyone perceived prostitutes in society. She is not a likeable character, 'My dear friend, if I were to listen to all the people who are in love with me, I should have no time for dinner.' It is only after we get under this faade we are able to sympathise with her. The novel describes more clearly the harsh and gritty realism of 1848 society. In his attempt to reform society, Dumas Fils was obliged to romanticise the narrative to make it more appealing. The play's ending, for example, in which Marguerite dies, conforms to what the audience would have expected and wanted. She dies beautifully, surrounded by people craving her forgiveness. In the novel she dies alone, describing terrible symptoms in her letters to Armand, 'I am...covered in plasters which burn me.' 'I coughed and spat blood all night.' She admits her past lifestyle is to blame for her illness. In the play, her past is forgotten, 'Rest in peace, Marguerite. Much will be forgiven you, for you loved so much.'
Stephen Stanton refers to Camille as 'Strong wine in a tempting bottle'. It does indeed hide much grim reality with romanticism, but this was Dumas Fils' response in appealing to the contemporary social climate in 1852. His novel, which clearly suggests that Marguerite's character is an exception, despite being more realistic, did not enjoy the popularity amongst the mass audiences. His adapted play did. 'The story of Marguerite is an exception. I repeat; had it not been an exception, it would not have been worth the trouble of writing it.'
This illustrates how the melodramatic genre reflected the contemporary social climate. It aimed to please its audience, and this it did. It offered escapism within the confines of familiarity- melodrama never failed to disappoint audience expectation. By bringing contemporary issues, opinions and situations to the stage and making them entertaining, melodrama achieved its aim in responding to the tastes and desires of its mass audiences.
--------------------------------------