In this study, we intend to address whether globalisation cost job in Britain by examining whether the increase in cross-border flows of goods, capital, and labour had caused adverse impacts on the employment statistics of British labour market. We take international trade relative to domestic production, foreign direct investment (FDI) relative to GDP, and international migration flow relative to population as key indicators. Exploiting the time- series data drawn from several archival sources, we apply multiple-regression to see whether the changes of these factors are associated with the changes of employment statistics, and if so, how. Analyses at two levels are performed: national analysis investigates whether the change of the three indicators are associated with the change of the employment rate of British labour force (and that of each age group) at national level, while industry analysis utilize the industry-specific data on trade and employment to test the association between the annual changes of the two.
Does globalisation, as asserted by its opponents, cost job in Britain? To address this issue, we first need to clarify what processes should be considered as globalisation here.
Globalisation has in the past decade become a popular concept widely used in explaining many different phenomena. Central to this notion is the increased interdependency between national societies due to the improvement of communication and transportation technology, but the manifestations of this trend vary widely, and cause the formulation of a definition applicable in all discussions extremely difficult. Current discussion of globalisation includes three dimensions: economic, cultural, and political (see table A). Such a wide scope and complexity of the processes discussed as part of globalisation make any claim of its general effect on any subject over-simplistic, and calls for more sophisticated analyses that 'unpack' the notion of globalisation and give different factors individual assessment.
Source: Entry 'globalisation,' The Penguin Dictionary of Sociology, 2000, p 153, table compiled by author.
Among the various aspects of globalisation, we first focus on the "increase of cross- border flows of market factors, e.g., goods, capital and labour" in this study, and use the national statistics on trade, capital flow (specially the amount of foreign direct investment) and migration flow to measure it. The three factors are chosen because they are most often mentioned in public discussions of labour market outcomes, and thus have greatest relevance to the current debate. In the past few decades, the shares of the three factors in either GDP or population have all been increased considerably (see Figure 1-3, next page).
Conventional discussions found in media and political debates usually focus on the direct effects of the components of the three factors that are more visible from the domestic perspective, such as the number of jobs created by inward FDI, the number of jobs lost in the layoffs accompanying corporate 'downsizing' and 'outsourcing,' and the competition with the imports from low-wage counties and foreign immigrant. Such an approach has two major shortcomings. First, it does not count in the contribution of outward components, namely export, emigrants, and some outward FDI (see Table B). Second, analyses in this current, while based on the number of job created and cost directly, tend to overlook other indirect influence on the whole labour market.
To avoid the two faults, we take a different approach in this study. First, to obtain a better-balanced assessment of the increase of cross-border flows of market factors, we draw the key indicators of each factor from the statistics of both inward and outward components in our major analysis. Second, to include the indirect effect into our assessment of employment condition, we rely on the aggregate indicators of labour market instead of the counts of job loss or job gain associated with individual events.
In summary, we intend to address whether globalisation cost job in Britain by investigating whether the increase in cross-border flows of goods, capital, and labour had had caused adverse impacts on the employment statistics of British labour market.
Sources: Data of trade, investment and GDP from UK National Account, ONS. Figure compiled by author.
Sources: Data of investment and GDP from UK National Account, ONS site. Figure compiled by author.
Sources: Data of population from Population Trends 110, ONS site. Data of migration from Dabson, J.al. (2001) International Migration and United Kingdom: Recent Patterns and Trends. Home Office RDS Occasional Paper No. 75, p.64. Figure compiled by author.
Two levels of analyses are performed in this study. National analysis is aimed to address the main thesis by investigating how the changes in the quantities of international trade, FDI, and migration flow are associated with the change in gross employment rate (and that of each age group) at national level. This approach constitutes the main part of this research, but is at the risk to be restricted by the limited sample size of annual national data (available since 1959, N = 42). Therefore, we incorporate industry analysis as a supplementary analysis, which utilizes the industry-specific data on trade and employment to test the association between the changes of the two.
Despite the shifted scopes and focuses of the two approaches, the logics behind their design are basically the same. Therefore I will only focus on national analysis to be discussed in detail in the following sections, and leave the industry analysis to be addressed shortly in the end with emphasis on its difference from the national analysis.
In summary, two analyses concerning the application of multiple regressions on existing archival data are developed in this study to address whether globalisation cost job in Britain. National analysis investigates how the change in gross flows of trade, FDI and migration, as shares of GDP and population respectively, are associated with the changes of the national employment rate of British workforce and those of different age groups. Industry analysis, based on the comparable industry-specific data on trade and employment since 1990s, explore the association between the changes of the two factors. Both analyses are to certain degree restricted in terms of data availability and the applicability of findings. Nonetheless, both can still provide valuable information in responding to current debate.