The recent advances made in real analysis are fascinating, and predominantly led by one man - Augustin-Louis Cauchy, whose work on the subject (Cours d'analyse of 1821 and Rsum of 1823) is widely available. His methods are far removed from previous attempts to make the calculus rigorous.
He starts by defining concepts which had previously given problems to eminent mathematicians such as Lagrange; namely infinite quantities (both positive and negative), infinitesimals and limits of functions. Furthermore, he has introduced an idea that is crucial to his work: that of continuity of a function. This has allowed him to prove many new and useful theorems relating to the nature of functions on intervals.
From this basis, Cauchy then defines the derivative as the limit of a ratio. This is interesting in itself; as such a limit does not necessarily exist, we must entertain the possibility that some functions may not even admit a derivative. Alongside this, he produced a rather simple example of a function which contradicts Lagrange's strong belief that all functions can be expanded as a Taylor Series. The function , when expanded as a Taylor Series is zero at all points; however, the function itself is only zero at points where its argument is zero, hence the contradiction. Not only did this disprove the idea, but it destroyed the foundations on which Lagrange and his contemporaries had based their arguments about the differentiation and integration of functions.
Cauchy also goes on to define the definite integral by returning to Leibniz's conception of it as the limit of infinitesimal sums. He splits the area under a graph, between two boundary values, into n equally spaced sub-intervals, and sums the area of each of these. Then, letting the width of each of these sub-intervals tend to zero, he takes the limit of the sum and thus attains a value for the integral. Using this definition, he proves the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, and deduces the existence of the indefinite integral, something which has previously been assumed.
Some people have said that his proofs are suspect, most notably Abel. In 1826, he highlighted an exception to one of Cauchy's theorems pertaining to sums of continuous series (notes, pg.40), based on previous work by Fourier (whose 'Thorie analytique de la Chaleur' was published in 1822 and gives an interesting argument on the theory of heat diffusion). However, this theorem can be shown to be correct in cases where the functions converge on a defined interval, something Abel's exception does not do in Cauchy's prescribed fashion. This leads me to believe that Abel may have misunderstood some subtle point put forward in his definitions. In some of his proofs, Cauchy also seems to take certain properties of functions for granted, or assume properties which need not be assumed, as in his theorem on the mean value of the derivative. Some may say this is careless and that, from someone claiming to be bringing rigour to the calculus, he should be more careful. Nevertheless, in my opinion, Cauchy has progressed far further in this field than any of his contemporaries, and so need not be criticised for the smallest of implicit assumptions.