On 14 December 1994 The Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan of the Nation of Islam called on African-American men of all classes to join a 'Million Man March' in Washington D.C. through the organisation's newspaper The Final Call. The civil rights movement from the 1970s was characterised by court cases, the production of films and documentaries related to earlier moments in the struggle, occasional Civil Rights Acts, and riots. The Million Man March, therefore, stands out as a renewed attempt at mass action. Convened by a black nationalist, Muslim organisation, this would be an event of major significance and far more complex and controversial than conventional civil rights protests. Situating the proposed march, which occurred on 16 October 1995, in its historical context is crucially important.
Reading the Million Man March as being fundamentally based on gender is but one possible interpretation. The March could be read in terms of race - situated in the rich historical tradition of the African-American struggle for civil rights, or held as another example of angry black separatism if one subscribes to the popular image of the Nation of Islam. The March could be analysed as a political protest, prompted by African-Americans feeling under-represented and ignored by those in political power, for example. The march could be a protest about the economic situation for African-Americans. Declining industry, poor educational standards, and racial discrimination in the workplace were together creating an escalating crisis of unemployment and underemployment, particularly for men. Alternatively, the March could be read as a religious event, initiated by the Nation of Islam and supported by many other black Christian churches to re-introduce black men to spirituality in order to 'save' the race. Of course, in reality the March was convened for a complexity of reasons, and it was aimed at African-Americans of a vast array of political, occupational and religious persuasions. Race and gender are the two categories that permeate and complicate every potential angle of analysis, so they will be used to analyse the Million Man March here.
Debates over contemporary interpretations of the so-called "Negro problem" - arguments as old as slavery itself - had once again become more urgent as the African-American condition was perceived to have reached a crisis point, particularly for men. Events such as the beating of Rodney King in March 1991 and consequent Los Angeles Riots in April 1992 after the acquittal of his police officer assailants, and the O. J. Simpson trial intensified strength of feeling among both blacks and whites, and the situation became increasingly politicised. Meanwhile, the intellectual climate in the United States was particularly characterised by a crescendo of debate over constructions of gender. Although there was a first wave of black women's movements in the US at the turn of the nineteenth century, the second wave that began in the 1970s was a far more significant movement, which changed paradigm of what became gender history because it prompted the emergence on men's studies in response from the 1980s. Intellectuals such as Orlando Patterson began arguing that African-American men were the most isolated group in American society. The Transition
 Symposium on 'The Crisis of African American Gender Relations' and Farrakhan's Million Man March are two manifestations of a critical moment, when race relations, gender relations, and discourses on the racial uplift of African-Americans, intersected.
The following inquiry will situate the Million Man March within the intellectual discourses on crises of the African-American community, particularly with respect to African-American gender relations. Intellectual historiographical gender discourses were transmitted through to popular consciousness largely by means of mass media representations. The Million Man March captured America's attention for a number of weeks. One of the main aims of the March, according to Farrakhan along with the great majority of participants, was to force the media to reassess their generally negative portrayal of African-American men. Therefore, the mass media coverage of the March merits investigation. The top five daily newspapers by circulation in 1995 were The Wall Street Journal (1,823,207), USA Today (1,570,624), The New York Times (1,170,869), the Los Angeles Times (1,053,498), and the Washington Post (840,232). The four largest commercial news channels were the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), American Broadcasting Company (ABC), and Fox. The Central News Network (CNN) also commanded very large audiences. Of these, CBS, CNN, The Wall Street Journal, USA Today, and The New York Times and have readily accessible archives on the Million Man March. Media representations of the March offered by these mass media sources to the American public concerning gender will, then, be analysed.
Any investigation into the Million Man March should begin with its conceiver, chief organiser, and keynote speaker the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan of the Nation of Islam. A highly intelligent, articulate, and socially conscious individual, Farrakhan had strong views and charisma beyond any African-American leader of that time. Either loved or loathed, Farrakhan, as many African-Americans and others agreed, was "the only one who can pull this magnitude of people together." He wrote, at infamous length, detailing the purpose of the rally, most usefully in his initial 'Minister Louis Farrakhan Calls for One Million Man March' and also in his own two hour and nineteen minute monologue delivered on the afternoon of the event. It was his vision that the crisis in gender relations underscored the march.
The Nation of Islam (NOI), which boasted several hundred thousand members in 1995 from a potential population of 32.3 million African-Americans, may strike one as an unlikely convener such an event. Yet, the NOI has always been synonymous with black pride and activism for racial uplift. The brotherhood was established by Elijah Muhammad in Chicago in 1930. The NOI declared their aim to be the resurrection of 'the spiritual, mental, social and economic condition of black men and women in American and the rest of the world." Farrakhan, originally a calypso musician, rose to prominence upon the assassination of Malcolm X in 1965, replacing him as the imam of Chicago's Mosque No. 7, and as spokesman for the NOI. Following a doctrinal schism in 1975 after Elijah Muhammad's death, Farrakhan revived his branch of the NOI to bring it closer to the vision of the movement's founder, while his rival Warith Deen Muhammad brought his more into line with Sunni Islam. Gender aspects of the NOI as an organisation, and the values of Farrakhan as its leader should be considered first, in order to ascertain the essential gender values behind the March in the eyes of its conceiver.
Gender issues and relations are central to NOI teaching. Two fundamental tenets are self-respect and respect for others, and believing that the family is the backbone of society - certainly in keeping with so-called traditional American values. Yet, the NOI also holds values on gender and gender relations that often seem extreme to mainstream American society. A useful source for Farrakhan's thinking of the roles of men and women is a speech made to rally African-American women around the 'Millions More Movement' ten years after the Million Man March. Although it must be remembered that Farrakhan was anxious to include women far more in the 2005 movement in answer to criticism about their exclusion in participating in 1995, the speech is still indicative because it is rooted in doctrine that has remained the same since the founding of the NOI. Moreover, Farrakhan was too zealous a 'racial uplifter' to temper criticism of his female audience: 'I point out the evils of Black people like no other leader does." Citing the teachings of Elijah Muhammed, Farrakhan lectured on the importance of women to God, the Prophet, to men, and to civilisation throughout his career.
NOI doctrine prescribes definite gender roles, which conform to conservative ideals. Elijah Muhammad raised the status of women in the eyes of God and men, but at the same time argued for the "natural sequence": 'God is the head of man, man is the head of woman, and woman is the head of the child. When this natural order functions properly, there is joy and peace.' The man should be the maintainer - protector, provider and guide for his wife, children and community. Women should comfort and console men, so that they would have peace and quiet of mind. Women were also responsible for raising children. Yet, the male-female relationship should be overwhelmed by love and respect. However, the Million Man March was not a recruitment drive for the NOI. It sought to include African-American men of all political, economic and religious groups who were willing to participate. Mobilising the fractured community around the protection of common interests was foremost in Farrakhan's intentions. He understood the importance of tempering NOI views in the interests of African-American unity.
True to his credentials as a scholar of African-American history, as well as a moral leader, Farrakhan traced the crisis in African-American gender relations to the experience of slavery. The Willie Lynch mentality wrecked men and women. The white master emasculated enslaved men in the eyes of enslaved women by making enslaved women dependent on the master rather than on fellow men. Women were supported as independent and equal labourers. The master physically abused enslaved men to the extent that women were so afraid for the safety of their sons that they were conditioning to unwittingly 'break' male children. Farrakhan argued that this experience left a legacy of strong, self-reliant black women, who create and suffer from weak men. He also criticises contemporary black women for allowing themselves to become morally corrupt, which, he argued, corrupts men and the community in turn. 'Civilisation now is in a degenerate state because the woman is in a degenerate state, and there are no holy men.'
Given Farrakhan's belief that women were the most important agents for racial uplift, it is very interesting that he chose to mobilise men for a mass rally instead in 1995. At this moment there being 'no holy men' problem was the more tangible crisis for the African-American community, and American society as a whole. Passionate debate over the condition of African-American men had re-emerged since the Rodney King incident. Farrakhan lists the worrying life experiences of black men at the time in the common currency used by the media. Apparently it was highly likely that an African-American man would experience growing up in a fatherless household, live in a "hood" with its attendant drugs, crime and violence, would underachieve in education, experience unemployment or incarceration, face low marriage rates and high divorce rates, and suffer poor health and a low life expectancy. Fearlessly, Farrakhan confronted his audience: 'we must also make the Black man know his sins. We cannot, in this modern time, keep on blaming white people for our shortcomings.'
Farrakhan proposed a patriarchal and conservative social order. He wished for marchers 'to declare to the Government of America and the world, that we are ready to take our place as the head of our families and our communities and that we, as Black men, are ready to shoulder the responsibility of being the maintainers of our women and children and the builders of our communities.' On the other hand, Farrakhan is extremely complimentary of African-American women: 'You have always been by our side. In fact, you have been in front leading us. Were it not for your boldness, your courage, intelligence, and forthrightness, we as Black men would have very little." A highly critical account of Farrakhan, set on drawing exact parallels between the Nation of Islam and the Ku Klux Klan, accused Farrakhan of lionising black women in his March rhetoric, 'to obscure his previously stated view of their subordinate role.'
Other speakers at the march had more to add about gender relations. The other main organiser of the March Benjamin Chavis Muhammad had recently been dismissed as executive director and CEO of the NAACP for a sexual transgression. The mayor of Washington D. C. Marion Barry was also known for his sexism. Rev. Jesse Jackson was given the most coverage by the media after Farrakhan. He identified that the mass media despised and attacked black men, but believed that the March was about relatively poor life conditions for African-Americans, over a crisis in gender relations. The Civil Rights Movement heroine Rosa Parks and poet Maya Angelou were some of the few women who spoke. The strongest message, of course, came from Farrakhan. He was the figure in the strongest position to publicly offer such sensational criticism of African-American men and women.
The Nation of Islam and Louis Farrakhan's vision of the gender roles of African-American men and women are a contribution to the discourses on definitions of gender, the origins and nature of the crises in gender identities and genderrelations, and body of arguments about overcoming them. The effect of slavery on the gender identities and relations of African-Americans has long fascinated historians and social scientists. Slavery was a sexualised institution, and white mastery over the gender identities, roles and gender relations of enslaved people had profound consequences for gender and sexuality during slavery and after abolition. A brief account of major historiographical trends in these discourses will follow, to provide a context for the determining scholarly thinking about African-American gender relations in 1995.
On the historiography of African-American masculinity, historians such as E. Franklin Frazier (1939) emphasised matriarchy in the slave and emancipated family. Stanley Elkins (1959) went even further, arguing that slavery had effectively infantilised African-American men, an dhad created "Sambos", through to the present. These arguments heavily influenced Daniel Patrick Moynihan's 'The Negro Family: The Case For National Action' report for the Department of Labor (1965). The Report suggested that black 'superwomen' were responsible for the ills of the African-American community, and devastated African-American male self-esteem by recommending that they join the armed forces - further alienating men from women.
The civil rights movement generally served to heighten gender conflicts. In addition, during the Black Power era historians attempted to place men in the dominant position in the slave family, and emphasised the femininity of black women in order to restore the masculinity of black men. Some examples include John Blassingame (1972), who argued that enslaved men were recognised by their white masters and own slave community as head of their slave family. Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman (1974) argued that enslaved men were dominant overall, but women were in charge of the home. Eugene D. Genovese (1974) denied that enslaved women had 'male' characteristics. Herbert Gutman (1976) believed that enslaved men protected their slave family, and his work ignored women in the main.
By the 1970s the time was more than ripe for black feminists to emerge, to write their sex into the history of African-Americans, to defend themselves against stereotyping black women as 'Jezebel', 'Mammy' or 'Sapphire', and to emphasise the 'double burden' black women have faced through history - oppression for being female and for the colour of their skin. The black feminist movement again threw the crisis of African-American masculinity and gender relations into relief, and so inspired renewed interest in men's studies by the late 1980s. Black feminist intellectuals such as Angela Davis and Jewell Jackson McCabe were later amongst the strongest critics of the Million Man March requesting that women should not attend.
The works of sociologist, historian, social commentator and cultural critic Orlando Patterson provide a convenient beginning point for reconstructing the intellectual discourse about gender in the troubled African-American community at the time of the Million Man March. He was the highest profile black intellectual to engage with the African-American gender crisis. Patterson's article 'Blacklash' was published in Transition in 1993. Slavery, argues Patterson, was an 'ethnocidal assault on gender roles'. Domination of white over black was achieved primarily through the emasculation of the African-American male. Subjected to degrading sexualised treatment themselves, prohibited from living meaningfully independent lives, and unable to protect sisters, romantic partners, and daughters from physical and mental harm, enslaved African-American males were denied access to both African and Euro-American models of masculinity, in most senses of the word. This vein of subjection continued after emancipation, bolstered by popular consciousness of lynching and subtler racism including employment discrimination.
Meanwhile, Patterson argues that the crisis of masculinity has been exacerbated by the relative success of Afro-American women at integrating into wider American society, as well as improving their own social and economic position. Slavery brought African-American women closer physically (working for and with the master's family in the master's home), and sexually (if through enforced means) to Euro-American society. Euro-Americans have always been more familiar with Afro-American females, and, therefore, black women have more life opportunities than men. Furthermore, women have always had the role of motherhood as their most important vehicle to self-actualisation.
Patterson argues that the annihilation of African-American masculinity by white society during and after slavery has provoked black men to turn on themselves. His commentary on African-American males as "an endangered species" and work on the "cool pose" were at the cutting edge of scholarly thought and popular consciousness in the United States. Patterson argues that African-American males are primarily responsible for the sorry state of gender relations within their community, which is, in his opinion, was the greatest internal problem facing the Afro-American community. Whether or not Orlando Patterson's pre-occupation with slavery is correct or helpful, Blacklash was certainly successful in dramatising the problems facing African-American men to both intellectuals and wider American public, propelling the crisis of African-American gender relations into the heart of African-American intellectual debate.
Blacklash was published at a critical point and was so controversial that Transition felt it necessary to host a symposium, 'The Crisis in African American Gender Relations' in 1995 to allow fifteen scholars and writers from the wide spectrum of concerned intellectuals to offer their own critiques of Patterson's arguments. The speakers variously described Patterson's account as "absurd", "tired", or "contradictory", to say nothing of accusing him of "sedition" and "mother-blame". The timeliest criticism of Patterson with regard to the Million Man March came from bell hooks and Elsie B. Washington. They challenged Patterson's deliberate failure to question the system of patriarchy, a system emphatically supported by Louis Farrakhan. As with intellectuals so taken with discussing the gender crises in the African-American community, one might expect them to have recognised the Million Man March as an important moment for re-affirming masculinity and femininity, and potentially repairing gender relations.
Unfortunately, the Million Man March, one of the largest protest marches, and the largest gathering of African-Americans in the history of the United States, under the most controverisal black leader of the era, has, so far, received very little scholarly attention. Intellectual snobbery, perhaps, has meant that gender historians and social scientists have not seen fit to seriously engage with the arguments of Louis Farrakhan. Alternatively, the very limited political impact of the March could have created the impression that the event was ineffectual, and thus not worthy of further inquiry. Yet, 'Not since Martin Luther King Jr. came to Washington in 1963 has any civil rights march been so thoroughly debated in the press." Indeed, there has been scholarly interest in the treatment of the March by the mass media. The only journal article written about the march to date is an editorial in The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education (1996), which summarised a number of media representations of the event. Therefore, the Million Man March should be studied and remembered because it compelled the mass media and American public to reveal and reconsider their perceptions of African-American men.
In addition to being an event focused on the internal community to persuade African-American men to atone their sins against themselves, their women and their communities, the Million Man March was also a major public relations exercise. Louis Farrakhan wanted to lead black men in convincing the rest of America that 'we should no longer and never again be looked at as the criminals, the clowns, the buffoons, the dregs of society." The following chapter will attempt to recreate the experience of the mass media coverage of gender issues raised by the Million Man March, and analyse representations of African-American gender identities and gender relations comparatively across the various publications. The consensus among scholars seems to be that the March 'produced the usual patronizing comments that liberal white journalists often make about blacks." But an investigation into what may indeed have been 'patronizing comments' will reveal more about American society than an intellectually lazy and unhelpful generalisation. As more than a hundred and fifty articles were produced by numerous different media sources, it is not possible to examine every piece in turn below. Instead, themes that emerged through articles in The Wall Street Journal, USA Today, The New York Times, CBS, Fox News and CNN concerning gender will be commented on.
The Wall Street Journal was the best-selling newspaper in the United States in 1995, but primarily reports on international business and financial news. However, The Journal is reputed for its libertarian editorials and comments, and liberal views on some social issues. Most editions include one or two stories on racial issues, even if only on "black "crimes, but the newspaper was hardly a rich source of information or forum of debate for the Million Man March. In fact, The Wall Street Journal featured only four reports about the March in total, appearing between 11 and 19 October. Whereas USA Today, America's second best-selling newspaper, concentrates on domestic news, so was a powerful opinion-former. The newspaper covered the March for fewer days than The Wall Street Journal - between 13 and 17 October - but in more detail with eleven stories in total. The New York Times is the newspaper one would expect to find the most extensive and varied discussion of the March. The first story about the March appeared on 6 October as a stub on the front page, and after making the cover on seven separate days, direct reporting disappeared by about 25 October, giving a total of around fifty directly related articles by almost thirty different journalists in the main news and supplementary sections.
National television news in the United States is designed to grab the viewer's attention with accessible, concise and sensationalist reporting. The most watched networks, CBS and Fox, have not preserved their reports on the Million Man March. It is likely that coverage was very limited, given their brief reporting on subsequent similar marches. Some references can be found to the 1995 event in CBS coverage of the 'Million Family March' on the capitol in 2000, and in the almost identical reports circulated by CBS and Fox about the 'Millions More March' in Washington D. C. in 2005. The lack of enthusiasm of CBS and Fox to report imaginatively on the March - beyond undermining the Nation of Islam and Louis Farrakhan - is disheartening, because they could have informed so many Americans. CNN is another popular news broadcasting network, both for Americans and international viewers. CNN carried the widest coverage of the Million Man March of any US television network, lasting between 13 and 17 October - with fifteen directly relevant reports. 2.2 million households in America tuned into Farrakhan's speech - more than any other speech that year, including the President's State of the Union Address.
The Million Man March having such a controversial organiser guaranteed that the event would generate substantial press attention. However, Louis Farrakhan's leadership was a mixed blessing. Most reporting about the March was fixated on Farrakhan, rather than on gender issues. Besides the obvious temptation for newspapers and television news programmes to point out that organisers Louis Farrakhan and Benjamin Muhammad were widely regarded as sexist, another popular criticism of the Million Man March was that the event would be divisive to the African-American community. In fact, this was the concern of the opening article on the March published by The New York Times. Bob Herbert, was another New York Times columnist, this time for the 'Opinion/Editorial' pages, who had a very negative perspective about the March. He strongly argued that the event was on 'the theme of inclusiveness turned upside down.'
These arguments outweighed reporting about the message of the March crossing class lines, although this clearly happened. Michael Marriot of The New York Times on the Sunday following the March argued most persuasively: 'shattered were notions that black men could not reach across, class, religious and regional lines to achieve solidarity of cause." Steven A. Holmes was a New York Times journalist who described the type of men in the crowd. 'There were black men in business suits, black men in blue jeans and hooded sweat shirts. There were plenty of teen-agers and a large number of men in their 40s and 50s who said they remembered the 1963 March on Washington." Another New York Times article confirmed that professional African-Americans identified with the message of and attended the March. A survey conducted on the Mall by Howard University confirmed that participants were of higher than average education levels and earned relatively high incomes for black community.
The purpose of the March was also a common subject. The press broadly appeared to understand the themes of the March, largely due to the prolific writing on the subject by Louis Farrakhan prior to the event. The first mentions of the Million Man March in USA Today and The New York Times paid particularly close attention to the event being a "holy day of atonement and reconciliation" for black men. Most interpreted "atonement" as African-American men atoning for their neglect of their women and families, along with Farrakhan's rhetoric. Don Terry's articles did so repeatedly, as did those of Michael Janofsk and Desda Moss. Others read the theme to mean atonement for anti-social behaviour. Others presented the March as a principally religious event. On the other hand, television networks barely mentioned atonement.
In the opening Wall Street Journal article Joe Davidson and Alejandro Bodipo-Memba recognised the theme of responsibility in the March accurately. Benjamin Muhammad was quoted as saying, it was primarily an introspective event designed to inspire black men "to take greater responsibility for the uplift and care of the black community."' On the Thursday after the March. Albert R. Hunt of The New York Times added, 'Ever since the Moynihan report three decades ago, which detailed the breakdown of the family, blacks have been criticized for failing to face up to this crisis.' Hunt praised the March speakers Jesse Jackson and Kweisi Mfumes for talking about family and paternal responsibilities before Phil Gramm or Dan Quayle even knew there was an issue.' He concluded by asserting that 'never was the question of family joined as forcefully and visibly as it was on Monday." There was some discussion in most press sources about Louis Farrakhan inviting Gen. Colin Powell to speak at the Million Man March. Farrakhan wanted Powell to speak because he was an excellent role model to young black men about taking responsibility, and could inspire them to build responsible communities. Several articles explicitly explained that, unusually given its location, the March was not a direct political protest aimed at the federal government. Davidson and Bodipo-Memba made the further important point that, 'Unlike most demonstrations here, the march, actually a massive rally, doesn't cite the government as its main target.
The articles most in tune with intellectual debates concerned the obvious patriarchal message of the March. Don Terry's next article appeared on 15 October. Witnessing the preparations for the March, he was the first non-feminist to mention the word 'patriarchy', as adorning one of the banners. Historian Donna Franklin argued that 'The Million Man March was a missed opportunity for black men and women to come together and reaffirm their commitment to restructuring and fortifying the two-parent egalitarian black family.'
The exclusion of women from the March, and the reaction of prominent black women and black women in general to Farrakhan's request were some of the most favoured themes seized upon by the mass media, particularly by The New York Times and CNN. 
The New York Times 'Opinion/Editorials' editor criticised how black women had been pushed into the background, and reported on Angela Davis and Jewell McCabe positively. Davis was a founding member of African American Agenda 2000, a small group of black feminists formed in opposition to Farrakhan's Million Man March. She argued, "No march, movement or agenda that defines manhood in the narrowest terms and seeks to make women lesser partners in this quest for equality can be considered a positive step." On the other hand, Desda Moss of USA Today pointed out that the March was endorsed by the National Black Women's Political Congress and the National Council of Negro Women.
On the reaction of black women generally, in the same article as previously mentioned, Terry argued that the idea of unity was laughable because black women have been told not to come." Charles Bierbauer of CNN concluded, 'Farrakhan has angered many black women -- the bulwark of the community -- by excluding them from the march." Other articles attempted to present a balance of views. The main article in USA Today about women's reactions to the March was by Andrea L. Mays on Tuesday 17 October. The article avoiding settling on a conclusion by quoting numerous varied reactions. These ranged from Kimberle Crenshaw of African American Agenda 2000, who argued that gender exclusion from the March was as great a problem as racism, to University of Toledo student Shanae Gibbs, who saw the marchers as saying a big "thank you" to African-American women. Norma Quarles of CNN made perhaps the best effort to explain the attitudes of black women to the March. She argued that although black women were 'united in their support of black men' they were 'deeply divided on how the view the message of this march." No newspaper or television station could generalise on what black women really thought of the March. A small number of women, did, indeed, attend the event. Holmes reported that some men shouted "Women go home!" However, he suggested that for the most part they were welcome. He also was also under the impression from women who did attend the march that they thought that too many of them present would distract the men. Accounts of the March emphasise the warm reception given to female participants at the March.
On the first day of The New York Times reporting on the March, a very interesting point about gender issues surrounding the Million March was highlighted. Testament to how uncomfortable the press and African-Americans were with discussing homosexuality in their community at this time, the article 'Gay Blacks in Quandary Over Farrakhan's March' by David W. Dunlap was the only one to cover such subject matter in the mass media. Although homosexual African-Americans were aware that their absence from the March could be interpreted as their acquiescence to Farrakhan's views, most felt too unwelcome to participate. The article, however, failed to pin down a homophobic comment by the Nation of Islam leader since 1993.
Several interesting accounts in an anthology of the experience of fifty participants in the March were included from homosexual African-Americans. There was, in fact, a pre-March rally for homosexual black men, which featured prominent speakers, gay and straight, from around the United States, including the openly gay mayor of Cambridge, Massachusetts Kenneth Reeves. He acknowledged that the March 'was the first time that many March participants had ever seen Black homosexuals openly, visibly and unabashedly acknowledging themselves as part of the Black community.' Keith Boykin described his nervousness before the March, and the 'not negative' reaction of other marchers and passers-by. He recorded the presence of hundreds of homosexual black men and a handful of women. His group chanted "We're Black! We're Gay! We wouldn't have it any other way!" Even this did not provoked criticism from anyone in the crowd. In addition to suggesting that homosexual black men could show all black men how to care for their brothers, Boykin also argued that homosexual black men could help black women overcome patriarchy. Boykin criticised the March from a homosexual African-American's perspective, lamenting the absence of an openly gay speaker, as well as highlighting that the March did not address the key problems of the spread of HIV/Aids.
There was much speculation on the consequences for the capital of so many African-American men marching on the Mall. On this issue, old stereotypes of criminal and sexually dangerous black men were omnipresent across the media, except in The Wall Street Journal. Karen De Witt's sensitivity towards the March in earlier articles was completely counteracted by her final article, which appeared on the day after the March. While on the one hand reporting the surprisingly 'somber, disciplined, relaxed and friendly' atmosphere of the March, she contributed to perpetuating the negative image of African-American men by the press, by describing how white Washingtonians had disappeared on the day of the event. She also quoted a woman who was afraid to walk three blocks to work in expectation of so many black men roaming the streets. The scare-mongering by most media outlets prior to the March, based on age-old stereotypes and ignorance of the experience of other Nation of Islam events was resoundingly unfounded, and further damaged perceptions of African-American men.
The Wall Street Journal and USA Today made the point to explain what other African-Americans were supposed to be doing if they were not at the March in Washington. Organisers had asked women - and men who could not come to the rally - to stay home from work or school to mark a "holy day", and to avoid spending any money as a demonstration of black economic power. Davidson of the Journal stressed that although the absence of black men at work was noticeable, in the same phrase explained that the men and women who did not attend remained at home with their families and did not shop. A CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll suggested that 5 per cent of black men, and 7 per cent of black women planned to observe the event by refraining from working, shopping or sending their children to school. The reference to African-American women is very significant. Although only men were supposed to attend the march, reportage of the poll treated boycotting at home as equally important to marching. This line or argument is fairly unique to CNN among media representations of gender issues surrounding the march.
White attitudes to the march were not widely reported on, but when they were, sentiments were shockingly prejudiced. Sam Howe Verhovek's article in The New York Times offered some examples of white attitudes in Dallas, Texas. They ranged widely, and were contradictory - the predictable "a white rally would not have been allowed," questioning why black women and other minorities were excluded, black men cause a lot of problems in American society, it could have turned into a riot, "Get out, get a job, take care of your family, and don't kill people", to the march was unnecessary - it is easier for black people to get jobs compared to white people, and "I thought all that was over in the 1960s. It's like, get a life."
Finally, there were a number of articles regarding media analysis of mass media representations of the March. Until 8 October, the New York Times was preoccupied with the O. J. Simpson verdict and the dramatically divisive effect it had wreaked on racial divisions, as well as the usual suspects of black crime, drugs and violence, for its race relations news. Karen De Witt of The New York Times gathered some opinions from the subjects of the March themselves, interviewing African-American men in the quintessential masculine domain - the barbershop. 'The men here also see the march as a way to counter what they view as the media's overwhelmingly negative images of blacks, particularly black males. Both an American journal and German commentator agreed that a 'racist slant was in fact visible in most of the media coverage of the March, with reporters repeatedly noting how "disciplined" the crowd behaved. Apparently it came as a surprise to them." However, in the immediate aftermath of the March, Michael Marriot enthusiastically reported, 'What much of America witnesses on the evening news was the sight of hundreds of thousands of black men, respectful and responsible, in search of solace and solutions... The most striking feature was probably how the participants contrasted with the many prevailing images of black men as dangerous and dysfunctional." However, as has been argued, media representations of the March varied widely, even within the same publication. Moreover, by 23 October, one week after the March exactly, the event had all but left the pages of the New York Times. Discussions had shifted back to definitions of race, drug sentencing, and to O. J. Simpson. This suggests that although the exemplary conduct of the March participants may have affected interested journalists, one event was most certainly not enough to alter long-held prejudices on African-American men.
Louis Farrakhan intended the Million Man March to send its message to the United States and the rest of the world, so it is worth considering how keen the media outside were to report on the March. The following chapter will comparatively consider newspaper coverage of the March taking Germany and Britain as example. In Germany, archived articles are only available from Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ), Die Welt and Die Zeit. In a country more committed to Christian values and the welfare of its population than Britain, one might have expected the values of the Million Man March to appeal to the German reading public more than the seven surviving articles suggest. The British tendency towards having more interest in current affairs in the United States and more similar racial issues, combined to ensure that British newspaper coverage of the March was far more extensive in volume of articles than in Germany. The Times, The Independent and The Guardian with their Sunday counterparts together produced forty-eight articles directly related to the March. However, German articles on the March in Die Welt and Die Zeit are far more detailed than any produced by a British newspaper. However, this is probably due to the fact that Germans were less informed on racial issues in the United States, and so required more explanation.
The FAZ, a self-styled 'liberally conservative' publication, contributed two articles to the German discourse on the March. Essentially straightforward reporting was in the vein of: 'Die Hauptstadt der Vereinigten Staaten rstet sich fr die mglicherweise gr
te Demonstration, die sie je erlebt hat." The FAZ presented the March as being in the tradition of African-American protest, and commented on the crowd controversy. In this instance the FAZ hardly fulfilled its aim of provoking thought from its readers about gender issues raised by the Million Man March.
Slightly more impressive was coverage from Die Welt, a self-proclaimed 'liberal cosmopolitan' publication with a right-of-centre political leaning. It is regarded as comparable to the Daily Telegraph, which, incidentally, appears not to have reported on the Million Man March at all. The only article on the March in Die Welt was 'Eine Million Mnner marschieren fr Louis Farrakhan', published on 18 October. The article focuses on race relations rather than gender relations, and ascribes African-American problems to white supremacy. However, the author manages to correctly interpret the message about reforming troubled masculinity and morality, and improving gender relations, by closely quoting Farrakhan's speech and the pledge he begged of March participants. Describing the crowd as an "Ozean des Friedens", the article is hopeful that African-American men can improve themselves.
The most interesting contribution to German gendered discourses about the Million Man March by a newspaper was Michael Schweilen's 'Der Traum wurde zum Alptraum' published in Die Zeit on 20 October. The newspaper is known for its detailed and sophisticated articles, but still concentrates mostly on contemporary problems of, primarily lower class, African-American men, rather than on gender crises. On the one hand Schweilen sensationally depicts the troubled African-American male. He writes about gangs, drive-by-shootings, guns, and drugs. Venomously he argues, 'So tumb sind die Killer, da sie nicht einmal wissen, wie solche Magazine wieder zu laden sind. Schlau allerdings sind sie, wenn sie Crack arbeiten, die Billigvariante von Kokain." His comment would have been far from politically correct even in the United States. He explains white fear of African-Americans eventually coming to dominate, quoting a survey by the Washington Post which suggested that white Americans perceived the African-American population as being twice as high as it actually was, and believed that the average black person was financially better off than the average white American. In addition he argues that white Americans perceive crime to have a black face, and young black men as being 'eine Generation von Straftten." 'Deren gefhrlichen Wohngrtel passieren die Weien auf dem Weg zur Arbeit und zurck zu ihren Suburbs... Auf der Fahrt durch die schwarzen Viertel verreigeln sie die Tren ihrer Autos und halten ihrer Handys parat, sollten sie einmal einen Unfall haben und anhalten mssen.'
Yet, Schweilen juxtaposes his own arguments about the ruin of African-American men with background information on the gulf between the races with regards to de facto residential segregation, discrimination in employment and promotion, and a racist criminal justice system. He suggests that problems of the African-American community are caused by government and white racism, along with the self-destructive behaviour of African-American men. He did not address the legacy of slavery, or of racism since emancipation on African-American masculinity and femininity, and fails to grasp the point that the African-American community had long been experiencing a serious crisis of gender relations. He understood that the main emphasis of the March was atonement, but interpreted atonement as being for criminal behaviour, rather than for poor treatment of women and families.
German newspaper coverage of the gender values associated with the Million Man March was, then, unremarkable in the main. It can be reasonably assumed that television coverage examined gender to an even lesser extent. The only published work on the Million Man March originating outside the United States was written by the German Frank Kelleter of the Centre for European and North American Studies at the University of Gttingen. Despite the title Con/Tradition: Louis Farrakhan's Nation of Islam, the Million Man March, and American Civil Religion (2000), only the introduction and first chapter concern the Million Man March. Kelleter analyses the March along three lines of enquiry - firstly as a turning point in the history of black protest, secondly as a social and economic reaction to the new white politics of resentment, embodied by the Republican Contract With America, and finally, Kelleter devotes most of his essay to analysing the March as a theological event. On the other hand, Kelleter's discussion of Farrakhan's patriarchy suggests that some German commentators were, in fact, attune to gender discourses. He strongly argues the black feminist line that Farrakhan saw single mother-headed households as 'blasphemous perversion', and by coaxing men to atone, what sounded like an open confession of male guilt turned out to be an attempt to re-establish male leadership in family affairs upon closer inspection. He argues that Farrakhan was a 'black Ronald Reagan', supported by most lower class African-Americans, who identified little with other prominent African-American leaders who tended to be liberals. Kelleter quotes Hugh Price, the head of the National Urban League, who described the March as 'the largest family values rally in the history of the U. S." Kelleter also provides a useful summary of media representations of the March.
Meanwhile, British newspapers offered explicit contributions to gender discourses. The Times published 'Washington Mass Rally Rekindles Black Pride - Million Man March - Washington' for example. 
The Independent ran such articles as 'Black Women Elated as Men Find Self-Respect' and 'What are Women to Make of Farrakhan?'. 
The Guardian offered 'All Men are Misfits in the No-Wage Age' and 'So Where Were You Last Monday, Sisters?' to name two. The richness of British media debate on African-American masculinity, femininity and gender relations was, however, incomparable to the varied intellectual commentaries that permeated some of the mainstream media representations in the United States. The disparity in understanding the Million Man March as an important moment in African-American gender history in Britain and Germany can, then, be explained by the culturally specific discourses on gender, and varying interest in African-American studies in each of the three countries. While Farrakhan was notably, but not remarkably, successful in compelling the mass media in the United States to declare their perceptions of African-American masculinity, femininity and gender relations, his message hardly crossed the Atlantic.
In conclusion, the Million Man March of 16 October 1995 was a unique event in the tradition of African-American activism because it was fundamentally based on reforming gender identities and reconciling gender relations. The fact the around one million African-American men attended the event is testament to how dire they found their condition at that moment, and to how central they perceived resolving the crises in masculinity and gender relations to be to their future uplift.
Although African-American gender studies had reached the forefront of intellectual debate in the United States at the time of the March, scholars paid surprisingly little interest in the programme of the March. Two of the most evident parallels between gendered discourses and the March concern patriarchy and a new paradigm of media reporting on race. bell hooks argued, quite correctly, that 'After abolition black men 'wanted black women to conform to the gender norms set by white society. They wanted to be recognised as "men", as patriarch, by other men, including white men." This sentiment is unquestionably dominant in Farrakhan's vision of the March, and appealed to the vast majority of African-Americans both at the March and at home. Secondly, Orlando Patterson identified a new paradigm in race relations during his discussion of the Thomas-Hill hearings. Patterson interpreted the fact that the defendant and accused were both African-American was incidental to the case, for the first time. There is some evidence to suggest that elements of the mass media were attempting to interpret race as incidental to issues of gender identities and gender relations. CNN, The New York Times and USA Today reporting of President Clinton's speech on race relations, for example, usually took pains to ascribe his plea to end domestic violence to all men, regardless of skin colour. However, the Million Man March was a decidedly black affair, so only this element of media reporting comes close to the ideal of non-racist media reporting, which has yet to come.
The greatest impact of the March with regards to gender was the effect such a monumental day had on those who participated. The fifty accounts of the March in Atonement recalled nearly every time that the most important themes were unity and atonement. Participants recollected the spiritual, brotherly atmosphere of the crowd, which included Muslims, Christians, and Jews, all classes and men of different sexual orientations. Acknowledged that they must improve their relationships with black women and their families featured very highly too. The weight of testimonials indicate that gender observations outweighed political and economic concerns. Moreover, models of African-American masculinity have long held that black men actually reject "rugged individualism" relative to their white counterparts. To quote Nathan Reed: 'The sight of African American men-a million strong-inspired me to become the best that I can in everything!" In the aftermath of the March, there was a spirit, a glow that stayed with the participants for days, even weeks. The sentiments and effect on the subconscious of African-Americans are near impossible to assume. But some concrete activities directly associated with experiencing the March can be discerned. Many thousands registered to vote in order to take responsibility for themselves and their community on a political level. Black men adopted their brothers in prison, involved themselves in big brother programmes, and adopted children.
It is a tragedy that intellectuals did not use the Million Man March constructively in their work, and that media coverage favoured petty snipes at Louis Farrakhan and endless speculation on the size of the crowd. Both academic and mass media producers of knowledge failed to earnestly engage with the real issues behind the March. Yet, some of the media did self-consciously attempt to reconsider their perceptions of African-American men and portray them more fairly to the American public. Farrakhan may not have changed media and public attitudes as far as he had hoped, but the memory of Million Man March as a dramatic and successful demonstration of estimable and idealistic black manhood has endured, most importantly with black men themselves. Sizeable support for the Million Family March of October 1996 and Millions More Movement of October 2005 from both the African-American community and wider community inside and beyond the United States.