Orlando Patterson (b. 1940) is a prominent thinker on the status of Afro-Americans in the United States amongst other interests. His work Rituals of Blood: Consequences of Slavery in Two American Centuries (1998) contains three essays - on gender relations, religious aspects, and images of Afro-Americans in popular culture. Exploring Afro-American masculinity and the implications of its being in crisis for the Afro-American community is the most important theme in the book. Both the infamous Moynihan Report of 1965 and Patterson's Rituals of Blood trace the origin of the contemporary troubled state of the Afro-American community back to the experience of slavery. However, unlike the Moynihan Report, which effectively blamed Afro-American 'superwomen' for the ills of the Afro-Americans, Patterson seems to lay the largest proportion of blame at the feet of underachieving, irresponsible Afro-American men. Once Patterson's account of the impact of slavery on Afro-American masculinity has been summarised, the convincing elements of his argument will be examined, followed by a critique. Most attention will be paid to Patterson's first essay on 'Broken Bloodlines: Gender Relations and the Crisis of Marriages and Families Among Afro-Americans' because this is relevant to most Afro-Americans, while religion is much more difficult to generalise about, and prominent Afro-Americans in popular culture represent a tiny minority of the community.
During slavery, domination was achieved primarily through the emasculation of the Afro-American male for Patterson. Slavery did not allow Afro-American males to continue their traditional African gender roles, and also denied them the chance to be husbands or fathers in the conventional Euro-American model. Subjected to degrading sexualised treatment themselves, prohibited from living meaningfully independent lives, and unable to protect sisters, romantic partners, and daughters from physical and mental harm from masters and other more powerful men, enslaved Afro-American males were denied their masculinity in most senses of the word. This vein of subjection continued after emancipation, bolstered by popular consciousness of Ku Klux Klan activities, in the deeply racist American South in particular. According to Patterson this has so-far irrevocably ruined Afro-American masculinity. Now Afro-American men are destroying themselves, destroying each other, and hurting those who love them, all while imagining that they look "cool". Afro-American males are primarily responsible for the sorry state of gender relations within their community. This irreconcilable gender disagreement is, in Patterson's opinion, the greatest internal problem facing the Afro-American community today.
The current crisis of masculinity has had the following effects. Patterson argues that Afro-American males experience a tragic life cycle, which originated from their particular experience of slavery, and a life cycle which they now largely self-perpetuate. Afro-American males are born to be raised in troubled households, perform poorly in education, often participate in criminal activity and so suffer incarceration, and die relatively young too. They apparently deal inadequately with relationships with Afro-American women and thus experience most of their lives single, involving low marriage rates, high divorce rates, and sixty per cent of them abandoning their children to impoverished single-mother households, so beginning the cycle again for the next generation. In addition, Afro-American males lack extensive or meaningful kinship or social networks to compensate for unstable family units. Afro-American males are thus isolated from other Afro-American men, Afro-American women, and isolated from American society as a whole - in fact they have always been, and are still, the most isolated group in American society.
Some of the problems Orlando Patterson identifies for Afro-American males can indeed be linked convincingly to their experience of slavery. Troubled Afro-American males are prone to feel that the only way that they can assert their devastated masculinity is to dominate Afro-American women. This is manifested through domestic violence towards women, even through to highly visible misogynistic elements of popular culture. Black feminist writers including Patricia Hill Collins and Deborah Gray White would agree here. Patterson continues, convincingly, that the crisis of masculinity has been exacerbated by the relative success of Afro-American females at integrating into wider American society, as well as improving their own social and economic position. Women have always had the role of motherhood as their most important vehicle to self-actualisation. Furthermore, slavery, Patterson argues, brought Afro-American women closer physically (working for and with the master's family in the master's home), and sexually (if through enforced means) to Euro-American society. Euro-Americans have always been more familiar with Afro-American females, and continue to be more comfortable with them. Therefore Afro-American women have more life opportunities than men.
On the other hand, Orlando Patterson's seamless linkages to the Afro-American experience of slavery are not entirely convincing. None of Patterson's arguments linking the experience of slavery to the contemporary crisis of Afro-American masculinity are very tenuous, but there are many decades now between slavery and freedom, great achievements of the civil rights movement, and many examples of happy and successful Afro-Americans for every ill to be primarily blamed on slavery. The "cool pose" simply did not exist on the plantation. Enslavement of ancestors, however traumatic in Afro-American male consciousness may be a very partial explanation, but is not sufficient, and is no excuse for laziness in schools, wasteful consumerism, violence against other men and women, or crack dealing for example. After all, it is only a minority of Afro-American men who behave in this way in any case.
A further criticism of Orlando Patterson's account of the impact of slavery on Afro-American masculinity concerns his definition of Afro-American masculinity itself. His reliance on statistical evidence of problems in the Afro-American community leads Patterson to focus on the majorities suggested by this type of evidence. Patterson thus creates a 'typical' Afro-American male. He then writes of this typical male's 'identity', when he should be scrupulously avoiding perpetuating or creating new stereotypes. There is no typical Afro-American male, so Patterson should speak of 'identities' instead. However, his final essay, 'American Dionysus: Images of Afro-American Men at the Dawn of the Twenty-First Century', does introduce further complexity to his previous internal, 'typical' problem-oriented analysis. Here Patterson actually undermines his depressing construction of the troubled Afro-American male from his first essay 'Broken Bloodlines' by revealing that the typical Afro-American male is not a criminal, but more god-fearing and conservative than the average Euro-American. In addition, in the 'American Dionysus' essay the interaction between different racial groups features far more strongly, in the way that it should in the previous two essays. Moreover, although the 'Dionysuses' that he examines are but a handful of Afro-American male figures, they enrich his previous 'typical' construction of Afro-American masculinity, by suggesting exceptions, and hinting what may well be the future for more Afro-American males - throwing off the painful legacy of slavery to cross or even dissolve racial boundaries.
In conclusion, Orlando Patterson's sociological approach to identifying social, economic, political, and cultural problems in the Afro-American community is comprehensive, and convincing. His use of a gendered analysis, which places Afro-American masculinity at the centre of these problems is an interesting and useful line of argument. It is undeniable that the experience of slavery still has a legacy for Afro-Americans in today's United States. It is also undeniable that the Afro-American community is currently beset with serious social, economic, political, and cultural problems. Patterson is right to link these realities to an extent, yet the line from the emasculated enslaved Afro-American male to the tragic present-day "cool" male is far too complicated to be attributed to a straightforward historical legacy. He generalises far too much on the 'typical' troubled Afro-American male, moreover. His analysis apportions too much blame on slavery for creating such apparently self- and socially-destructive Afro-American men, and too much blame on Afro-American males themselves for contemporary crises within their community. Although it was not the express purpose of his work, a stronger condemnation of Euro-American domination and racism on the Afro-American community since the very inception of slavery should have been included in the 'Introduction'. Patterson did not clearly portray that it was Euro-Americans who created a crisis for Afro-Americans in the first place, and he understates the effect of their continuing racism towards the minority group to the present day. Race and class are neglected in his analysis of problems for Afro-Americans since slavery. Yet, his dramatic argument, his innovative gendered analysis, and his impressive writing style outweigh the weaknesses of his actual thesis that slavery caused the crisis of Afro-American masculinity that now pulls down the entire Afro-American community. Such controversial theses as Patterson's do not fail promote wide debate about the status of Afro-Americans in the US. Attention and debate on causes and results of contemporary issues for Afro-Americans is vital to ignite internal community will, and external political will too to implement social, economic, and political improvement for the Afro-American community in future. So Patterson's Rituals of Blood is an extremely useful piece for its arguments, and for its style in addition. Unlike the well-intentioned Moynihan Report, which was deeply stereotypical, patronising and offensive to Afro-Americans, Patterson's work is exemplary for its diplomacy. He strives to write in a fair (considering internal and external, male and female aspects), non-confrontational, and proactive style, which is an inspiration to the present author at least.