The 'passionlessness' debate was initially a discourse in religious and medical circles about whether female sexual desire was natural or a moral issue. The debate was central to the gendered life of Americans - to men and women's spheres of work and family, and to the very nature of the male-female relationship. 'Passionlessness' was initially an ideology created by men as a form of controlling women and thus society. Without economic or political independence, women could only manipulate the ideology to their best advantage rather than overturning it completely. The ideology meant that, 'middle-class women lost their association with lust and instead were invested with the quality of innate purity." In addition, 'passionlessness' did not just apply to pre-marital chastity, but was expected within marriage for the first time. The condition of 'passionlessness' in a woman, therefore, became the centrepiece to the ideal social unit - the family. The 'passionlessness' ideology was intrinsically linked with one side of the Cult of True Womanhood (the other side being that womanhood included a satisfying sexual relationship for husband and wife).
It was, principally, a self-imposed middle-class ideology, to differentiate themselves from decadent upper classes, and debauched lower classes, in keeping with their self image as the progressive element of American society. Yet, notions of women's sexuality were never monolithic. Not all middle class men or women favoured the ideology, and it manifested itself differently across the classes, and with respect to African-Americans. A critical analysis of the idea of 'passionlessness' will be offered in the following inquiry. It is vitally important to recognise that discourse until the 1970s has been constructed around public evangelical and medical debates, rather than private accounts of sexuality in nineteenth-century America, due to the lack of evidence on the sensitive subject. 'Passionlessness', therefore, has been given more credence than it had in reality. There was also discourse, if to a lesser volume and emotive value, of the importance of male continence during the nineteenth century, but it is not possible to do justice to its contribution to the 'passionlessness' ideology here. Whether 'passionlessness' was a liberating or repressive ideology for men and women, how it affected other classes and races in American society, and whether or not it actually existed will be addressed with reference to leading figures in past discourse.
The 'passionlessness' debate coincided with the Second Great Awakening, which began in the 1830s. A feature of the evangelical revival was that ideal Christian virtues and values came to be expected of women, who would in turn uplift the morality of men and therefore society as a whole. Physicians supported the evangelical condemnation of sexual excess from the point of view that it was detrimental to health - depriving men of their energy and women of their strength and sanity. Medical opinion was accepted as public opinion. As physicians wrote on the threat of 'nymphomaniac' women, male society was 'scared spermless' and so attempted to convince themselves that women were naturally 'passionless'.
Nancy Cott is an advocate that 'passionlessness' was a liberating ideology for women. She convincingly argues that women used their image as 'passionless' to take advantage of new opportunities. 'Passionlessness served women's larger interests by downplaying altogether their sexual characterisation, which was the cause of their exclusion from significant "human" pursuits." She asserts that women drew great self-confidence from believing themselves to be more Godly, moral, and intellectual than men. However, Cott does acknowledge that 'passionlessness' protected women from vulnerability and dependence, but did not provide them with full autonomy. Women might have benefited in the marriage market by emphasising their purity and so improved their social and economic prospects, but they were still constrained to behave towards the will of men, and marry for physical survival. Yet, figures such as Mary Wollstonecraft emphasised women's moral and intellectual power. By invoking 'passionlessness', women would be taken more seriously in the future in the movement for suffrage, which would finally liberate women from dependence on men, and having to resort to 'passionlessness' for protection.
Furthermore, Daniel Scott Smith's theory of domestic feminism, used to avoid unwanted sexual advances, and most importantly limit family size, was a significant advantage of complying with the ideology. Sisterly love over matrimonial love may have brought some advantages, but surely none as great as a union of love and respect in marriage. In any case, sisterly love hardly crossed class or racial divides for middle class women.
However, 'passionlessness' essentially denied women the capacity to need or desire pleasurable sex, and so was an overwhelmingly repressive ideology for women. Moral double standards for the sexes were enshrined in laws which excused man's adultery, and were supported by willing doctors who performed horrendous operations in attempts to reduce women's sexual desires. Medical attempts to enforce 'passionlessness' were perhaps the most disturbing manifestation of social will to uphold the ideology, and were the ultimate proof that natural 'passionlessness' did not exist. For all their defence of happiness and family, crusading surgeons deprived thousands of women of the chance to have children, as well as sexual pleasure. The 'passionlessness' ideal subordinated a woman's free will to serving God before her marriage, and her husband afterwards, and also could wreak physical damage on her body.
'Passionlessness' ideology can be used to analyse the experience of lower class women too. In poverty these women were forced to live with little dignity, and one way that they could raise themselves above the rest was to conform to the 'passionlessness' ideology. Middle-class ideologues did not attribute lower class women with much effort in this direction, however. Yet, the fact they continued to perceive these women as licentious, actually undermined any argument that women were naturally 'passionless'.
Similarly, as white society believed African-American men and women to be highly sexual, both in slavery and after, they further undermined the universal 'passionlessness' condition of women. 'Southern gender conventions notoriously treated black women as special inferiors, but they also discriminated among white women of different classes." Black women lived with the threat their master believed himself to have a right to sexual relations with any slave of his choosing. As Harriet Jacobs did, a female slave could behave as 'passionless' to protect herself. But they faced a dilemma because the master could improve their circumstances if they complied. To a notable extent, however, both slave masters and slave communities had respected the institution of the slave family since the abolition of the slave trade in 1808. Without the slave family institution, the entire system of slavery would have expired. In any case, 'passionlessness' did not have the same relevance to slaves. African heritage was not critical of pre-marital sex, and valued stable, loving, and sexual unions. Slave women used (often feigned) pregnancy as resistance to work, and only had use for 'passionlessness' to avoid the wandering eye of their master.
Although medical debates initially provided 'evidence' that women were naturally, or should be, 'passionless', medical thought more strongly denied the existence of 'passionlessness' at all. In addition to the industry of neutering 'excessively' sexual women, 'abundant anti-masturbation literature, aimed at "women of all classes", contradicted the notion of innate purity." In fact, any medical discourse discussing 'excessive' female sexual desire, contraception, or abortion, innately undermined notions that women were 'naturally' 'passionlessness'. The gynaecologist reducing a woman to an extension of her reproductive organs completely defeated the validity of women as 'passionless'.
Rather than discussing whether or not women were, or should have been, 'passionless', revisionist discourse since the 1970s has been inspired by evidence along the lines of Clelia Mosher's (1863-1940) work for example. Writing has focused on criticising the 'passionlessness' industry, and defeating its logic as being in no way representative of real sexual behaviour. Mosher conducted perhaps the first survey of female sexual habits. Although the sample group consisted of only 45 women, who were from middle-class, educated backgrounds, she provided convincing evidence that most women had sexual appetites, and that husbands, in fact, complained if their wives were 'passionless'. Similarly, Karen Lystra, using letters as her evidence, proposed that nineteenth-century women believed that passion in a loving relationship was acceptable. Sex was even acceptable and usually practiced upon engagement. 'Middle-class American women gave no private indication that they believed in an ideal of female passionlessness." She undermines Cott's thesis that women used 'passionlessness' at all.
In conclusion, the strong ideology of 'passionlessness' is still present in the historical imagination of nineteenth-century America today. Yet, 'passionlessness' was only a prescriptive ideology, in evangelical, some medical, and polite middle-class society discourse, largely for middle-class women. It was not universal, and did not accurately reflect real behaviour. 'Passionlessness' may have been an ideal to some 'scared' men, and socially oppressed but ambitious women, but the evidence proves that men and women simply preferred to have sex throughout the nineteenth century, as they always had done, and were only mindful of creating an image of self-control. Women were more materially concerned with avoiding pregnancy. In fact, far from being 'passionless', 'evidence of behavioural change strongly suggests that the procreative function of sex declined over the century'. The 'reform' backlash to this phenomenon in the 1880s, which suppressed birth control information, condemned adultery, criminalised abortion, and curbed prostitution, literally proved the inaccuracy of a belief in 'passionless' behaviour to all.