Constantin von Neurath (1873-1956), a conservative south German aristocrat and diplomat, was an important figure in the Czech experience of occupation during his time in office as their Reichsprotektor (21 March 1939 - 24 August 1943). He disliked the lawlessness of the Nazi upstarts, although 'he was enough of a nationalist to welcome their regime." After being involved in Nazi foreign policy successes including her withdrawal from the League of Nations (1933) and the Anglo-German Naval Accord (1935), Neurath joined the NSDAP in 1937. On 4 February 1938 he resigned in protest against aggressive Nazi military ambitions, but remained in government.
However, less than six months following the unexpected acquisition of the Sudetenland granted to Hitler in the Munich Agreement of 30 September 1938, Hitler decided to occupy Bohemia-Moravia. Neurath was called upon to be the representative of the German Reich who had the authority to object to any government policy that could harm Reich interests. In principle, he had superior power over all Party organisations, and of course the Czech government. However, in the weeks between the occupation and his appointment, Sudeten Germans, Party functionaries, and Nazi security services had already established footholds of power in the localities. So from the outset, Neurath's time in office was largely spent fighting more radical forces in Berlin and inside the Protectorate itself. In reality, Neurath could only delay the influence of these forces over the Protectorate, and hope of maintaining peace and order, and Czech cultural integrity faded as the fog of war descended over Europe.
The following inquiry will use documents to determine Neurath's view of the Czechs, his policies towards them, and his future intentions. The circumstances of his appointment as Reichsprotektor, his efforts towards preserving Czech autonomy, his struggle against other Party members, his approach to political threats and minorities within the Czech population, his opinion of Germanisation of the Czechs, and an analysis of his undoing at Nuremberg, will be addressed. It will be argued that Neurath's view of the Czechs and his vision for the future of the Protectorate were at significant odds with those of Hitler and the Party. His main motivations were German nationalism but respect for Czech autonomy, encouraging co-operation between Czechs and Germans and maintaining peace and order in the Protectorate, supporting the Reich war effort with Czech industry, and sympathy for the Czechs in the face of radical Nazi designs.
Neurath's reluctance to accept his appointment as Reichsprotektor is evidence of his views and intentions towards the Czechs. In the months following Munich, Neurath 'did not regret the fate of this unhappy country; nature had brought it within the German sphere of influence, and [believed] in time the Czechs would accept this reality." Yet by December, Hitler decided to occupy. Neurath, distressed by reports of Hitler's plan, dined with Hitler on 9 March, and argued that Prague was not an important territorial claim and that occupation would seriously undermine foreign confidence. He was not the militant German nationalist here. Hitler ignored his advice, and from then onward did not consult him. The Fhrer was only satisfied with forming a Protectorate rather than outright annexation when Hcha unexpectedly co-operated.
On 17 March, two days after a bloodless march on Prague, Hitler discussed his needing for the post of Reichsprotektor 'a personality who possessed an importance and reputation abroad, and who would be able to master cleverly, in diplomatic fashion and with a certain quiet hand, the task of bringing about the future peaceful cooperation of Czechs and Germans within the Greater German Empire." The following day Neurath was reluctant to accept Hitler's directive. 'Neurath wanted no part in the administration of conquered lands, and in particular the suppression of the Czechs." Hitler threatened him with appointing Ribbentrop or a Sudeten German instead, holding Neurath as responsible for the fate of the Czechs. He was eventually persuaded after being advised to refuse independence from Berlin, and demand no authority for the Gestapo, SS, and SD. The Czechs welcomed Neurath as their saviour from Frank.
Neurath continued to defend Czech autonomy throughout his time in office. 'Neurath was uninterested in creating an empire over which to preside. He approached his job in Prague as an administrator, carrying out his duties, and not attempting to enlarge his power base." He employed old-fashioned, non-Nazi diplomats, who were unfortunately inexperienced in Czech affairs, which left his Office vulnerable to the Frank and SS influence. On his accession, in addition to forcing Hitler to confirm his principal authority, Neurath fought doggedly to keep the Czech judiciary, and even delayed a customs union and the takeover of the postal service. Neurath pursued the same commitment to autonomy, if out of expediency for peace in the Protectorate to encourage war production, throughout his administration. Even in his infamous 31 August 1941 memorandum, he declared that his best practice would be to allow the Czechs to administer themselves to ensure peace and order, as an administration as in the Reich proper would provoke resistance. Until war, Neurath's and Hcha's offices clashed little. In any case, the President was on cordial relations with the Reichsprotektor, and frequently appealed to Neurath to protect Czech interests and even his own ministers. A significant example was Hcha's conversation with Neurath on 15 April 1940 clarifying that the Czechs would not be liable to military conscription in light of their more valuable work in industry.
The Reichsprotektor worked tirelessless for two and a half years to prevent forces including Frank, Himmler and Heydrich reigning radicalism and terror over the Czechs from Berlin and their organisations within the Protectorate. From the outset, Himmler and similarly-minded Nazis understood that Neurath did not share his idea of Germanic racial destiny. They continuously worked to marginalise and deceive the Reichsprotektor, in order that they could further their diabolical agenda. Himmler immediately placed authority over the SS with Frank. On 9 May, Heydrich was sent to Prague and tricked Neurath into agreeing to grant the police more powers. Neurath enjoyed some temporary successes. Neurath resorted to personally appealing to Hitler, and generally procrastinating to delay adverse decisions. Perhaps he believed that after the war, Nazi policies would be more respectable, for he cannot have wished or expected the Nazis to be defeated. Neurath successfully fought extension of SS powers until outbreak of war 1 September.
Neurath has had attributed to him more actions against Czech political threats than he actually took, usually by his Secretary of State. In addition, there is barely any evidence to suggest that he initiated moves against racial undesirables and minorities. However, it is somewhat understandable that Neurath has been accused of initiating persecution. Neurath, despite knowing possibility of unrest, went on hunting trip around 28 October. In a furious reaction to planned student demonstrations on what had been Czech National Day and on 16 November 1939, Hitler advised Frank to close all Czech universities for three years and execute the nine student leaders - the posters again bore Neurath's signature. Moreover, Neurath's absences in January and April 1941 left Frank time to attack Eli
 and issue drastic warnings respectively. Mastny portrays Neurath as impotent and ineffective as a protector of the Czechs, unequal to the task of fighting the influence of Berlin, the SS, and Frank.
Clearly Neurath would have opposed Czech resistance, but documents show him more likely to deny unrest to Hitler in order to protect the Czechs from reprisals. Even so, under his administration, the main Czech resistance groups, the Political Centre (PU), Defence of the Nation (ON), and Central Committee of Domestic Resistance (UVOD), were all purged by the summer of 1940 by Nazi security forces. The We Remain Faithful (PPVZ) was attacked by the summer of 1941. Five days after Germany invaded Russia on 22 June 1941, Neurath forbade discussion of political future of Protectorate.
Neurath's interpretation of Germanisation and desire of it for the Czechs is central to his defence or condemnation. On 25 June Neurath published his 'Viewpoints on the Task of the Protector in Bohemia and Moravia'. To the Reichsprotektor, 'German policy began with the principle that in an area of mixed nationalities, the well-being of all peoples living there must be guaranteed if peace were to be preserved." His future plan was to win the Czechs over to the German way of thinking with tolerance, and the promotion of German cultural superiority. 'As he had shown in Denmark and Italy, Neurath was sympathetic to the suffering of minorities, but he believed that the issue of national cultural identifications must be overcome before Europe could enjoy real peace.'
However, a key piece of evidence of Neurath's views about the Czechs and intentions towards them is the joint memorandum sent by Neurath and Frank to Hitler on 31 August 1940. By the summer of 1940, it was rumoured that Hitler would dissolve the Protectorate and order total absorption of Czech people into Reich. On 6 August Neurath wired a protest to Lammers, and also took the unprecedented step of colluding with Frank. While Frank only wished to protect his personal power base, Neurath was motivated to prevent mass deportations and re-settlement of Germans. He had sympathy for the Czechs, but probably more importantly, realised that partition would drastically interfere with war production and would aggravate the Czechs to further resistance.
Thus, Neurath adopted a for the first time a strong line, guaranteeing permanent German control, and hoping that thereby all questions concerning Germanization would be postponed until after the war when more rational and humane considerations would prevail, and the gradual assimilation of Czechs would continue. It was very unusual for Neurath to write in racialised rhetoric, but the memorandum exposes him to charges of wishing race-based persecution, even annihilation of Czechs. However, he spent less than a paragraph positively appraising the Czech 'racial' type in Nazi rhetoric. This token begs the assumption that he only employed it in the memorandum as a token to ensure that Hitler would take him seriously. He was unenthusiastic to categorise Czechs, and believed German culture rather than biology as superior.
On the other hand, evidence that Neurath desired cultural genocide for the Czechs is more damning. Neurath proclaimed the ultimate goal for the Czech people was 'complete incorporation into the Greater German Reich." Neurath was attacked at Nuremberg for having advised the 'repulsing' those 'racially useless of antagonistic' (the intelligentsia, whose response to the new condition of German influence he described as less forthcoming than other social groups) to Germanise the population. Frank suggested expatriation or Sonderbehandlung for the group - rhetoric that Neurath misunderstood. His words were seized upon, and resulted in the protection of the majority of 'useful' Czechs, but exposed the rest to new persecution.
However, it should be recognised that Neurath's rhetoric about desiring 'Germanisation' was, in fact, mirrored in his own subsequent actions. On 13 September 1940 Neurath had confirmed the precedence of the German language on signs in public in all areas of any German settlement.
Neurath was at length dismissed as paranoia escalated in Berlin and the Protectorate about resistance and sabotage. Frank and Himmler conspired to persuade Hitler of Neurath's incompetance - his ignorance of the Czech 'vejkist' tradition - at preventing opposition to the occupation. Neurath attempted to resign in 1941, but he was not permitted to until August 1943. On 27 September Heydrich began his reign of terror and proclaimed martial law, accelerating his plans of screening the racial characteristics of the Czech population, and instituting full anti-Jewish laws.
At the Nuremberg Trial of the Major War Criminals Before the International Military Neurath was accused and convicted of conspiracy to commit crimes against peace; planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression; war crimes and crimes against humanity. His fifteen-year sentence, however, was lenient compared to those of other leading Nazis. The damning phrase at his trial was that which Neurath attached to Frank's independent memorandum. Neurath confirmed that it 'reaches the same conclusions and has my full support." Neurath claimed that Frank had written both memoranda, and that Neurath had complained personally to Hitler later about his disagreement with the content. When pressed by the prosecutor, Neurath altered his argument, replying that he 'no longer agreed with these statements' in any case. He then defended his interpretation of 'assimilate' as meaning Czechs should identify themselves more with the Reich in the future. He argued that his (and Frank's) memorandum rejected the more radical plans of the Party and SS.
In conclusion, if anything, Neurath's view towards the Czechs grew more sympathetic over time as he witnessed their exposure to the potential arbitrary terror of his colleagues. As a nationalist he certainly desired German dominance over the population, and for the Protectorate to become more 'German' in character over time. But he never advocated persecution or extermination of any political or minority group, and fought doggedly to prevent other Nazis enacting their annihilationist wishes. Under him, the Protectorate largely experienced peace and stability. 'Among the Czechs, there was appreciation and gratitude for Neurath's role." He was misrepresented at Nuremberg, and his intentions in the 31 August memorandum were misunderstood and condemned rather than analysed in the context of his previous work.