The rise and fall of the Third Reich had the most profound of consequences for the Czechoslovak lands and people. Sacrificed by their allies Britain and France in a futile attempt to avoid war by ceding substantial Sudetenland territory in the Munich Settlement of 29 September 1938, full occupation was really only a matter of time. Beginning on the night of 15 March 1939, official Nazi occupation of Bohemia and Moravia endured until 13 May 1945. Nazi dominance over the region was one of the darkest periods in Czechoslovak history, and Czechoslovak leaders had only limited scope to protect their nation and its population. Edvard Bene (1884 - 1948) and Emil Hcha (1872-1945) were two of the best-placed figures to fight for the survival of their republic and its people during the occupation. Bene was the Czech politician and diplomat who had been a leader of the Czechoslovak independence movement, and became the second President of the republic. He resigned on 5 October 1938, and became leader of the government-in-exile in London during the Naxi occupation. Meanwhile, the celebrated Czech legal mind Hcha reluctantly accepted the position of was Bene' successor, who became President of the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. Bene was recognised as the figurehead, with his role being to fight for the legal continuity and territorial integrity of the republic after the war, while Hcha was more concerned with protecting the population during occupation, all the while subordinating his actions to Bene direction as part of his foreign policy strategy. The complexity and difficulty of the situation for these two men cannot be overstated. Geopolitics far greater than the power of a Czechoslovak republic threatened to thwart every effort made by the outstanding political tactician that was Bene throughout. The blood of millions of Czechoslovaks was potentially the responsibility of Bene, and to a more immediate extent, Hacha, with every word written or spoken by him under the auspices of the Nazis inside the Protectorate. It is certainly not the place of the author to seriously judge either of these men in their unenviable struggles. Yet, their strategies and actions can be evaluated with respect to whether they interpreted the needs of their people well, and their success can be considered too. The following enquiry will be primarily concerned with the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, and 'Czech' people will be taken to mean ethnic Czechs, who were by far the majority of the Protectorate's population. Diaries and memoirs, minutes of official meetings, accounts of conversations, letters and memoranda, and communist reports and despatches, from Czech, German, British, American, and Soviet political figures will be used to determine the strategy and success of Edvard Bene and Emil Hcha in protecting the interests of the Czech people under Nazi occupation.
Both Bene and Hcha began their roles as protectors of the republic and its people on shaky ground. Bene at once faced a struggle to acquire recognition as a president-in-exile, because he was the living reminder of the British and French betrayal at Munich. However, he was energetic and made himself not only visible, but also useful, to the Allies. The legal anomaly that he was not actually the Czechoslovak president was not so much overcome as overlooked, depending on how far Benes was in favour with Britain, the United States and the Soviet Union at any one time. By late 1939 Bene had secured British and French recognition of a Czechoslovak national committee, and had also overseen the establishment of a Czechoslovak army in France. Once Bene had installed himself as principal diplomat for the Czechoslovak republic, his principle objectives were to acquire official diplomatic recognition of his government-in-exile, to be followed by confirmation by both the Western and Eastern powers of the legal continuity of the Czechoslovak republic after the defeat of the Third Reich, which included the repudiation of the Munich settlement. In addition, Bene needed to create a meaningful place for himself in the future world order to ensure the long-term survival of an independent republic, which had had previously proved so short-lived. He would do so through being a useful source of information for anxious powers, an impressive diplomat and mediator, head of potential Czech armed forces, and head of security apparatus willing to supply the Allies with intelligence.
Although Bene was tireless in his campaigning, major diplomatic successes were usually decided by decisive events in the war. It was only in the aftermath of the fall of France, in July 1940, that a provisional Czechoslovak government and parliament were recognised. The British, at this point, still refused to agree to future territorial arrangements. Similarly, when the Soviet Union entered the war in June 1941 a treaty of mutual assistance was signed with the provisional government, which finally afforded the London Czechs with full diplomatic recognition. The repudiation of Munich was Bene' next important objective. It was Molotov for the Soviet Union who was first to indicate that this would be realised. In a conversation in June 1942 the commissar assured Bene that the Soviet Union did not recognise Munich or anything that had happened to the Czechoslovak republic since.
On the other hand, the main example of these powers responding to the Czech' leader's initiative was the repudiation of Munich, which resulted from Operation Anthropoid. Bene was acutely aware that the Protectorate government would be a liability to his diplomatic efforts if it were perceived to be a tool of the Nazis, full of self-serving quislings. Once Bene had decided that Hacha's collaborationism was worrying the Allies, he settled on a dramatic gesture of resistance against the Nazi occupiers was needed to vindicate the Czechs. On 27 May 1942 two Czech assassins, who had been supported by an underground network in Britain and the Protectorate, attacked the Nazi leader in the Protectorate Reinhard Heydrich, who died a week later. In addition to ensuring that every participant and underground assistant to the assassins was killed, the Nazis completely destroyed the towns of Lidice and Le
ky. It was these heavy recriminations against the Czechs in its aftermath, rather than the actual gesture of assassination, which convinced Britain to officially repudiate Munich in August. The price that Bene required of his people in order to ensure the territorial continuity of the post-war republic was certainly higher than he had predicted, but he would have been willing to pay it nonetheless.
Thereafter, Bene had to continuously prove that the Czechoslovak republic deserved to emerge as a viable entity after the war. He devoted himself as mediator for Poland, especially after the breakdown in their relations with Moscow in June 1944. Representing Poland was certainly in the Czechoslovak national interest. Between November 1940 and mid-1942 Bene and Sikorski increasingly moved towards a confederation - a powerful Eastern European bloc. However, Bene coldly neglected this alliance once it was clear the Stalin disapproved. More ambitiously, Bene aspired to be the bridge between West and East. Convinced that the Soviet Union would emerge from the war as a moderate European great power, Bene shifted his allegiance more towards Stalin. Bene effectively was the dictator's champion to the United States, particularly during his visit to Washington between May and June 1943. His advising Roosevelt about the Poles and Soviet Union was rewarded by the president agreeing to the transfer of the German population out of the post-war republic. Bene was valued in Moscow too in December. After working hard to persuade Britain, Bene was able to enter into the Soviet-Czechoslovak Treaty. Bene saw himself as the broker of the Soviet Union's entry into a future stable balance of power in Europe, but the pact was more important to him and the Czech people because it contained the implication that there would be no possible communisation and Sovietisation after the war. For all of his foresight and efforts, Bene was too optimistic about there being room for him and an independent Czechoslovak republic in the new world order.
Bene' diplomatic manoeuvres were undoubtedly impressive, and it is difficult to imagine any man being more successful than he in achieving his objectives. However, his tireless efforts resulted in serious failures too. The most grave was, of course, his failure to prevent Czech communists from gaining a following and power during, and especially in the aftermath of, the war. Once the Soviet Union entered on the side of the Allies on 22 June 1941, the Czech communists in Moscow, the government-in-exile, and the Czech underground did achieve a substantial degree of unity in their resistance to the Nazis, but politically they were antagonistic. Fierlinger reported to the exile government on 4 January 1942 that 'Some pseudo-liberal regime will not have the support in Moscow that is expected." By May, Bene, was assuring Fierlinger that the first post-war government would be a "popular front", with a radical social and economic programme. 'By the time Bene visited Moscow at the end of 1943, the communists there were ready to welcome him as the head of the state and the official representative of the Czech movement." Yet, his positive feelings towards the Soviet Union were too great an influence on Bene. Mastny is particularly critical of his naivety. He did not test Soviet sincerity to the Czechoslovak state. His secretary Taborsky regarded the December 1943 treaty as Bene' greatest misinterpretation. 'Bene did misread Stalin's psyche, place too much trust in his assurances, and misinterpret his real intentions." Another painful example of Benes' powerlessness was the affair over Sub-Carpathian Ruthenia beginning in October 1944. By the end of 1944, despite being treaty-bound to non-interferece, the Soviets began to see the Czech communist leader Klement Gottwald as Bene replacement. In a letter to Fierlinger on 30 December 1944, Bene was essentially resigned to recognising the Lublin Committee as the future government. The loss of Sub-Carpathian Ruthenia indicated that policy had swung more to the East than Bene had envisaged. The participation of communists in the post-war government was also in excess of his expectations.
In addition to his work for the future Czechoslovak people, Bene' strategy and actions affected the Czechs during the occupation directly too. Bene was 'inclined, in his broadcasts from London, to discourage active resistance at a time when it would have involved useless sacrifices." Bene advised the Czech army not to irritate the Nazis in case there were reprisals against the Protectorate government or Czech people. Instead he favoured gathering intelligence as a bargaining tool as well as for protection of the Czech population, an undetectable strategy of sabotaging German communications, and passive resistance of Czechs working for the Nazi war effort. However, aware that the communists had supported active resistance from the outset, and sensitive to their criticism of him, by February 1944 Bene himself encouraged Czechs to directly oppose their occupiers. By August 1944 pressure from Moscow and London, Bene was seriously advocating resistance in the Protectorate. Only when it was evident that the Reich would imminently collapse did he envisage the underground taking to the streets, seizing official positions and re-occupying the country. The final uprising for Prague lasted four days with 2,000 lives lost, in order to demonstrate that the Czechs did not intend to passively await liberation, which was, nonetheless, liberated by the Red Army on 9 May 1945. More than 50,000 Czechs were tortured or murdered during the occupation - far more than the government-in-exile had expected. Bene was disturbingly willing to sacrifice Czech lives for his foreign policy aims.
On the other hand, Hcha's main influence was on the experience of the Czech people inside the Protectorate during the occupation, rather than over international diplomatic issues. Charged by Bene to keep the Czech people 'in as good condition, as possible', Hcha walked a political tightrope to protect the standard of living, property, and lives of the Czech people with some success. Hcha's efforts were often, in fact, with the support of Reichsprotektor Constantin von Neurath (in office 21 March 1939 - 24 August 1943). So arguably Neurath was the more successful protector of Czech lives than Hcha. Neurath and Hcha had a mutually respectful relationship, and Neurath where possible responded with compromise to some of the very numerous written and personal appeals to reduce the restriction of civil liberties, terrorism by Nazi organs, and to temper Germanisation policies. Of course, there were other influential Nazis who overruled the Protectorate politicians. Head of the security apparatus K. H. Frank was the principal threat towards the Czech people for Hcha during Neurath's time in office.
Part of Hcha's task involved keeping the favour of leading Nazis, and in this he excelled. By gaining their confidence, Hcha was able to pressure them into treating Czechs more considerately. Hitler believed Hcha to be a collaborator. While appearing the collaborationist host to Goebbels during the propaganda minster's visit to Prague in November 1940, Hcha at the same time appealed to him on behalf of the Czech people, complaining about the many arrests and the closure of the Prague university. Encouraged that Hcha had taken him to his heart, Goebbels resolved to do what he could for the old man.
Hcha was a brave, and clever man to have achieved the successes above, and it seems grossly unfair to brand him as ineffectual, or as a collaborator with the Nazis. However, his efforts came under increasingly severe limitation by various Nazis and from Bene himself. Hcha's displays of loyalty to the Nazi regime do appear damning, but were enacted for fear for the lives of Czechs. Each ostensibly pro-Nazi action acutely embarassed Bene, and he threatened to break with Prague. Bene was overly sensitive to the effect Hcha's actions had on the Allies, and was unrealistically critical of Hcha. Hcha did consider the drastic move of resignation on several occassions during his time as president of the Protectorate. The first followed the Nazi response to the 28 October and 15 November 1939 student demonstrations. However, Frank made it clear that he would interpret such a move as provocation, and Neurath convinced him that his resignation would damage the Czech cause.
However, the greatest obstacle to Hcha securing concessions for the treatment of Czechs was Heydrich, who replaced Neurath in September 1941. Hcha spent a great deal of energy convincing Heydrich that himself and his government colleagues were not part of the resistance, instead of devoting all his time to campaigning for the Czechs. Between late September and early October, many of his colleagues and friends were arrested (including the Prime Minister Alois Eli
) and shot or sent to the concentration camps. In the new climate of terror Hcha not only risked his own life, but the probablity that the Nazis would simply dismiss the Protectorate government and leave nothing in their way to reign terror over the Czechs. Instead he embarked on a policy of collaboration, designed to spare the Czech people further bloodshed. However, it should be noted that in Hcha's response to Heydrich, he only pledged his and his government's sincere commitment to collaboration, if Heydrich was supportive of important initiatives suggested by the government.
The situation worsened following the assassination of Heydrich. Hitler called Hcha to the Reich Chancellory for Heydrich's memorial service and threatened the deportation of every Czech if there were any more anti-German acts. At this point Hcha 'collapsed like a pricked balloon'. At the same meeting Hcha and his colleagues promised to stamp out pro- Bene activity. As a result of the meeting the president oversaw the arrangement of a huge rally where the organisers arranged an appeal for complete co-operation with the Third Reich. After Hitler surmised this attitude as being '100 per cent pro-German'. Of course, this was a massive misjudgment and exaggeration, but it is clear that Hcha's hands were now more tied than ever with regards to helping the Czech people. He could only strive to protect his colleagues such as Eli
 and Feierabend in the underground.
In conclusion, Edvard Bene and Emil Hcha had the most unenviable of tasks during the Nazi occupation. Fighting for the survival of the republic and its people fell heavily on their responsibility. Bene should be afforded greater admiration for his diplomatic skill and unrivalled contribution to the sheer existence of a post-war republic, but his eventual powerlessness towards the Soviet Union once the communists provided a viable alternative government to his exiled one, severely tempers the significance of his accomplishments. Meanwhile, Hcha deserves more thanks from the Czech people for protecting their very lives in the immediacy. Bene was, perhaps, too willing to sacrifice Czech people for a greater good, which did not come to pass. The Czechoslovak republic was relatively the most peaceful of the occupied territories throughout the war, and its population experienced a markedly higher living standard than the Reich itself. Yet, this had more to do with the population being so instrumental to war production for the Reich, rather that the ability of their president to temper Nazis. Perhaps Hcha could have been more use to the Czech people if he had been more confrontational with the Nazis, but this would have been suicide - itself a message to international leaders, but one which they probably would not have reacted strongly too. His death would have been a symbolic martyrdom, but most probably a futile action, as he would have been replaced by someone even less irritant to the occupying regime, and therefore less of a protector of the Czech people. The author is ill-qualified to weigh Bene and Hcha's achievements against each other, but would argue if pushed that legal existence, even of many, can never carry more weight than the physical existence even of a few. It is so important to examine cases such the actions of Bene and Hcha because they are an interesting case of a sophisticated interaction between exiled and occupied government stuctures. More generally, inquiry raises fundamental moral questions about the politics of war, nations, and of humanity.