In his general introduction to Radical Street Performance, Jan Cohen-Cruz compares radical street performance to acts which question or re-envision ingrained social arrangements of power,
In many ways, to experience the atmosphere of Blackpool Pleasure Beach is to experience a form of radical street performance. Firstly, in its atmospheres ability to transport everyday reality to something more ideal. Throughout the summer, the Pleasure Beach is visited by millions of people seeking escapism from their everyday lives. During the rest of the year they are followers of their own pre-set scripts, at work, at school and in the home. For a brief period each year they become holidaymakers, eagerly searching for a license to misbehave.
The arrival of the masses to Blackpool Pleasure Beach could clearly be seen as a performative way to challenge the status quo, easily connecting with Mikhail Bakhtin's philosophies surrounding the carnival, 'Was it an escape valve, serving to keep people in their place, or did the taste of a world more to the masses liking lead to change?" Carnival originated in Trinidad when slavery was abolished in 1834. The freed slaves took to the streets in celebration, singing and dancing in a chaotic street party. Over the years it has evolved into the greatest show on earth.
Bakhtin resurrected the idea of the carnival as a critique of the status quo. Describing such events as playful, non-hierarchical and sensorily excessive, he claims that,
To visit Blackpool Pleasure Beach is to witness an assault on the senses. It is a carnival chaos of traditional fairground rides combined with modern steel thrill machines and a back catalogue of historic wooden roller coasters. The sight of wooden structures intertwined with steel, overlapping with walkways and under lapping with water channels is one of visual confusion. The sounds of fear, excitement and fun never fully drown out the rattle of roller coasters passing above and below. The intoxicating smell of fast food combines with that of perfectly oiled machines. The taste of the salt sea air is as exhilarating as the feeling of speed and abandonment. Blackpool Pleasure Beach is out of control.
Jan Cohen-Cruz argues that no one can generalise about street performers. 'Some are working actors who explore street theatre as a means of bringing their politics into agreement with their profession. Others are not actors by vocation but rather are driven by a tremendous incentive to change their own reality." The same can be translated to the people of the Pleasure Beach. Many who work there are students to whom a job there is simply a way to earn extra money in the summer. The Pleasure Beach sunshine logo, stamped upon the backs of their bright blue uniforms means little to them as they sweep greasy chips from the floor and harness endless toddlers safely onto the carousel. The other type of worker however, acts like an ambassador for Blackpool Pleasure Beach. It is they who create the magic for the public. Believers in the magic of the park themselves, they are people to whom the Pleasure Beach is a way of life, bringing their passion of fun and ability to surrender to the atmosphere into agreement with their profession. To a certain extent, the Pleasure Beach employees are actors. They arrive for work everyday, put on a costume and paint broad smiles on their faces. The millions visiting the park are not actors but witnesses of the Pleasure Beach's performance. It is an interactive experience. Driven by the incentive to change their own reality, they stand impatiently in line before climbing aboard rides which allow them, if only for a few minutes, to abandon reality and yield themselves to a higher power.
In terms of an audience/actor relationship, the operation of the park and its machinery is a mystery to the public, a boundary it cannot cross. In the same way behind the scenes activity is kept secret from the audience. Jan Cohen-Cruz suggests that, 'Space is always controlled by someone and exists somewhere, so is inevitably marked by a particular class or race and not equally accessible to everyone." However controlled the Pleasure Beach is by its employees, however, it is the public which creates the carnivalesque atmosphere which abolishes the boundaries mentioned by Cohen-Cruz. During the period of the original carnival it seems that every excess was permitted and the fact that everyone wore masks seemed to abolish all social division. Streets were thronged with people intent on partying and carousing, singing, dancing and playing games. Costumes allowed revellers to appear in the city incognito.
Without the public, the Pleasure Beach is an official space. The public creates its transformation from official space to playground, reinforcing Richard Schechner's idea in his essay 'The Street is the Stage', 'A big part of the celebration is experiencing the transformation of work space, or traffic space or some kind of official space into a playfield.'
In riding a roller coaster, roaring down a 200ft drop at 85mph, colliding into everyone and anyone in a dodgem car, deciding the order of which to eat a hot dog, portion of chips, tray of shrimps, bag of doughnuts and an ice cream, or simply leaping off one ride and hurtling through the crowds to be first in line for the next illustrates Schechner's view of the purpose of the carnival. 'When people go into the streets en masse, they are celebrating life's fertile possibilities... They protest, often by means of force and parody against what is oppressive... Such playing challenges official culture's claims to authority and stability... People mask and costume or act in ways that are 'not me'. The Pleasure Beach is truly devoted to the living of fantasy in order to create a different kind of reality.'
I think of the Pleasure Beach as the capital city of Blackpool. Anyone taking a bird's eye of the town will see a hundred streets crammed with hotels and boarding houses, stretching all the way towards the promenade, gleaming from the tower in the North to the Pleasure Beach in the South. In the summer months the Pleasure Beach becomes the very pulse of a town devoted to amusement.
In the introduction to City Cultures Reader, the city is described as taking on many roles; it is a set of objects, a set of beliefs, a place of the spectacular, temporal, historical and even invisible. The question of where the city ends is debated, '...when does the suburb terminate and the countryside begin? There are many arguments for seeing the countryside and the city as simply parts of an overall urban space, for are not the fields and agricultural plains just as manufactured as the city proper?" The merge between the natural and the manufactured is defined beautifully at Blackpool. Standing on the beach as the sun sets, watching the sea roll in from the West, the landscape is mingled - the waves and sand suddenly combined with the black silhouettes of the pier and a mish mash of wooden struts and supports at the Pleasure Beach. Although the flatness of the sand compares astonishingly with the enormous hills of the collective roller coasters and long legs of the South pier, they have joined to form a single landscape. Rides and attractions are supported beneath a sandy base and endless waves smack the pier's structure.
The ideas surrounding the city in the City Cultures Reader are applicable to the Pleasure Beach. The text discusses a relationship between the city and those who live/visit there based entirely on trust, '...to live here, one must have faith in a huge range of impossible illusions. One has to truly believe that paper is valuable (money), that cars will not invade pavements (traffic behaviour)..." The relationship between the Pleasure Beach and its visitors depends completely on trust. The act of boarding a roller coaster which climbs 235ft high and throw passengers down the first drop at 85 mph depends on the trust of the thrill seeker. They must truly believe they are safe and will return to the loading station eager for more.
The City Cultures Reader describes the city as a place of the spectacular, where many historic events take place, grand architecture is constructed, big decisions are taken and great art is produced. Such events have happened simultaneously at Blackpool Pleasure Beach since it opened in 1896. Decisions taken to improve the park and its popularity according to the changing times have led to the opening of attractions which are major historic events in of themselves, and certainly examples of grand architecture.
The huge first and second hills of the Pepsi Max Big one can be seen from ten miles away, a superb lure for the thrills that await. Across the park is the massive network of rides, each crisscrossed and entwined with its neighbour, every conceivable inch devoted to thrill seeking. So unlike theme parks popular today, particularly at Disney Resorts where everything is pre planned, antiseptic and perfectly laid out, the Pleasure Beach has evolved slowly from a simple fairground. It lacks much theming but its attractive, tangled clutter has become a theme in itself. No one could argue it is a place of the spectacular.
And what happens when it stops?
At the closing of the last day of the season, after eight magical months, the Pleasure Beach was about to close for the season. The people had gone, the music had stopped, the spectacular had disappeared. During the winter, the park and to a certain extent, the town shuts down completely. Without the thousands of holidaymakers neither one can function. The rides and attractions stand frozen, the kiosks are shuttered and the Christmas decorations hanging in hotel windows on the promenade look strangely out of place in a town associated with summer holidays. During this period, the Pleasure Beach becomes a non-place.
Marc Auge states that, 'A non-place comes into existence, when human beings don't recognise themselves in it, or cease to recognise themselves in it, or have not yet recognised themselves in it." Certainly out of season, when the Pleasure Beach is deserted and motionless, it is hard to imagine it crammed full in the summer, the noises, smells and the soaring coasters completing circuit after circuit of well-worn track.
I walk towards the park. It waits, surrounded by a sense of foreboding. On either side of the South Park entrance tall, faceless jesters stand sentry, their arms thrust proudly towards the bright blue gates. Positioned strategically beside them are an arcade, a doughnut stand and Val's Fish and Chip kiosk. All are closed although curiously, the lights surrounding the entrance to the arcade have been switched on. Any glimpse of cheeriness is lost however, as only a few of the coloured bulbs are flashing - the others have given up. As I look around I can hardly blame them. The fish and chip kiosk has its silver shutters clamped shut and the doughnut stand is depressing. A menu board swings metallically. Doughnuts are five for a pound, candy - floss is served 'In a Bag or on a Stick', popcorn is 1:25 and Hot Jam Waffles are topped with a choice of fresh cream or maple syrup. It's December and I'm looking forward to roast turkey and Christmas pudding. These summer delicacies sound sickly and unappetising.
Within the rusting gates the Pleasure Beach lies dormant. To my left is a crumbling white casino and theatre. Letters stuck to panes of grubby glass spell 'PARADISE'. Fuchsia pink palm trees are attached to the walls. A trail of rust spills down the concrete from the spiky pink leaves. Clearly, this is a paradise lost.
The main gates have been left open and I walk through them, feeling like a trespasser. The whole place is asleep, the only sounds coming from the road running parallel to the park.
I think back to July, fighting my way through waves of people towards the entrance kiosks. Above the clamour of the crowd and the screams as riders of The Big One are whipped around a hairpin bend high above, is the vicious chortle of a clown. He lounges on a revolving throne. Surrounded by glass, his head thrown back triumphantly, roaring with laughter, horribly frightening.
Now he's switched off and covered in a blue tarpaulin for the winter. It's disturbing knowing he's under there, his mouth twisted, eyes malevolent, waiting.
The kiosk building is designed to look like the mouth of a cave. On its roof a number of plastic prehistoric animals stare down at me. Purple spotted dinosaurs jostle for space with green and orange dragons. A white sabre-tooth tiger leers across at a bloated rhinoceros. At any minute I imagine these fantastic characters will begin a grotesque life of their own, lumbering about the decaying mock rock formation like poor deformed players in a nightmare.
The kiosks are tightly locked but I can glimpse parts of the park through the railings surrounding it. Dodgem cars stacked on their sides, signs advertising cold clams, beer and ice cream. Stands and stalls, each with faded painted lettering - 'French Fries' in a western style, 'Derek's Tattoos', bold and red, 'Sweet Treasures' in delicate loops and swirls. Grass is peeping through the paving stones and everywhere I look, the jumbled structures of different roller coasters meet my eyes.
I realise with a shock how seedy it is. In the summer, the grittiness is easily accepted. The park oozes a gypsy-like charm and nothing is taken seriously. Now everything appears threatening - any comfort has disappeared with the crowds, the park at once switching from dazzling fantasy to disturbing reality.
I walk past a shop temptingly called 'You've Been Mugged!' The windows are thick with dust and florescent yellow stars claim that all mugs are 1:50 each. They stand on uneven shelves, each bearing an enchanting message; Bald Git, Fat Git, Groaning Git, Fat Bastard, Big Chief, Big Daddy, I Love Aston Villa, I Love My Attitude Problem, Superman, Slapper, The Boss. I'd be proud to drink my Cuppa Soup from any of these quality products.
The light is changing as I reach the other side of the park. The coasters cast fat black shadows onto the pavement and aircraft warning beacons flash brightly at the highest point of The Big One, the ride dominating the park. Its massive metal structural supports drilled proudly next to wooden rides a hundred years old. Its huge iron network is reflected in the puddles at my feet. But as the sun sets, it becomes invisible, forgotten in the winter's dark.
People are swarming thickly around the entrance kiosks like wasps on a toffee apple. They hover around Val's Fish and Chip kiosk, digging their nails into polystyrene trays bubbling over with hot, salty golden chips. They're chomping away at hot jam waffles and tearing pieces of fluffy candy- floss from sticks. Electronic noise jumps from the arcade.
The clown roars loudly as children press their noses against the glass surrounding him, a union jack flies proudly at the top of the casino.
As the crowd pours through the ticket kiosks their hubbub is drowned slightly by a spectacular carousel, its frozen horses whirling around, their reflections caught in a hundred winking mirrors.
Amongst the vast, rolling sand hills in 1896 stood a small merry-go-round. Gloriously alive amidst the silent sand it began to attract people like an oasis in a sticky desert. Dotted around the main attraction were hobby- horses, an ice cream stand and a skittle alley. A troupe of minstrels sang on fine days. In 1904, an ambitious young man, William George Bean, inspired by a vision of the new style American amusement parks, encouraged small companies to operate American 'devises' in his new fairground.
I look upwards now, a hundred years later, and watch one of these 'devises', Sir Hiram S. Maxim's flying machine and its riders, soaring around in an endless circle. Small boys in football strips imagine flying through space, firing missiles through the galaxies, pulverising aliens to a stringy green pulp.
In 1904 as donkeys walked slowly up the beach and the carousel spun round and round, boys felt for the first time, the sensation of flying. Sitting, bewildered in tiny tweed jackets, they dreamed new fangled dreams of real aeroplanes and one day, perhaps even riding in one themselves.
George Bean's ambition to create an amusement park which would "make adults feel like children again" is echoed everywhere in the park. The Pleasure Beach is fuelled by fun and a sense of desire mixed with danger.
I stand by a dustbin shaped like a large white rabbit and see a girl smothered in fake tan squeal as her boyfriend chases her with an ice cream. A toddler gazes suspiciously at a swaying pink balloon tied to his pushchair. He has no idea what it is but it's pink and shiny and he decides he rather likes it.
Two Chinese women are having their photograph taken in front of The Big One. They point to the top, their faces twisted in mock terror, the man with the camera laughing hysterically, imagining their mother's reaction when they take the picture home.
A small girl looks up at her father who is eating clams from a cone. He gives her one. She cradles the strange sea creature in her hands but temptation overwhelms her and after testing its flavour on her tongue, she gobbles it down.
To sit in the food court is to experience several time periods in countries all over the world. The plastic tables and chairs are surrounded by a seafood counter designed in the shape of a medieval barn, a creperie pasted all over with Eiffel Towers, Tudor like houses selling sweets and ice creams, a red telephone box from which hot jacket potatoes are served, a bar in the shape of an erupting volcano and a curry house flanked by palm trees. It's unreal but it's happening.
Back outside in the summer heat an elderly couple sit on a bench beside large figurines of Alice and the Mad Hatter. They smile as the train of the Big Dipper flashes past them, remembering another time when people, dressed in their best, paid a shilling to ride it for the first time.
As another train- load of people reaches the summit of The Big One, a thousand pairs of eyes squint through the sunshine to watch its descent. Riders in their jeans and t-shirts throw up their arms in exalted triumph.
From time to time, a lone voice amongst the crowds is heard to say, "What's all the fuss about? It's only a roller coaster ride with a big drop - it's not really magical". But everyone else ignores him. They want to believe in the magic, determined to ride happily ever after.