The celebrated and influential German historian and teacher Leopold von Ranke (1795-1886) acquired many titles both during and after his life. Perhaps none is so contentious as 'the father of scientific history'.
This enquiry can go no further without defining the meaning of 'scientific history'. Consensus was neither reached in the time of Ranke nor is held at present, as notions of 'science' independently and together with 'history' have been in continuous development. E. H. Carr proposes a useful discussion on whether history is a science. He acknowledges that the scientist and historian are similar at the foundational level to the extent that they both desire to explain, and are involved in a fundamental process of question and answer. 'Scientists, social scientists and historians are all engaged in different branches of the same study: the study of man and his environment, of the effects of man on his environment and of his environment on man." But Carr distinguishes the disciplines. Science deals with the general, and history with the particular. Science gives general inexorable laws, while only general tendencies can be identified in human history. History, then, is not a science. Therefore, an utterly 'scientific historian' does not exist. As Carr convincingly argues, a 'scientific' method of history is not enough to render history a science in itself. As an historian, Ranke can strive towards, but never achieve, a scientific ethos and methodology. So 'scientific history' concerns only the degree of 'scientificity' (meaning acting along the lines of scientific rationality) used to produce 'history'.
Another problem arises in distinguishing true Rankean thought and method from posthumous interpretation. Although Ranke produced well over fifty volumes of historical writing, not one was primarily concerned with his philosophy of history. The scarcity of convincing writing on his own scientificity, and Ranke's deviation in practice from his own precepts (his high literary style suffused with metaphor, for example), immediately encouraged other historians to interpret his thought and method variously. The German and American schools, for example, have created paradoxical legacies for Ranke. Georg Iggers suggests, 'what Ranke himself had thought, was, in a sense, less important to the development of historiography than was the image of Ranke in the historian's mind." However, the purpose of this enquiry is to attempt to place Ranke's true thought and method in context with the development of the field of 'scientific history'.
So, a complex analysis of the scientificity of Ranke's philosophy, approach, and methodology of history will be offered. The themes of Ranke's personal, academic and political background; his approach of objectivity, historicism and intuition, his methodology of primary source authentication in addition to his teaching methods and literary style will be examined.
It will be argued that Ranke's foundational belief in an all-knowing and active God determined that his philosophy of history was in the Lutheran tradition, and was, therefore, not 'scientific'. Moreover, Ranke's approach was not wholly 'scientific' and, indeed, he was not the first historian to offer the practice of 'objectivity' or historicism in any case. In addition, Ranke was neither the pioneer nor the epitome of 'scientific' methodology.
However, Ranke's favoured position in the Prussian state, eminence in the academic world, and the scholarly and literary appeal of his work brought him exceptional fame during his career, and made him a legendary figure thereafter. Ranke had an unprecedented platform then, which saw him become associated with previously introduced 'scientific' elements of history. He was also an innovator, as so does to a certain extent deserve the reputation as 'a father of scientific history'.
Ranke's religious, academic, and political background profoundly influenced his 'scientific' philosophy, approach, and methodology. It produced his particular unconscious and conscious subjectivity, which he persisted to deny existed in his work.
Ranke experienced a religious upbringing in the Lutheran mystic tradition. God, for him, was the guiding hand of history, so his calling was (after a spell as a schoolmaster between 1818 and 1825) to learn God's plan for humanity - to be an historian. As a Lutheran, Ranke knew he could only decipher God's will by understanding history, through the study of historical documents rather than doctrine.
He received his academic training in theology, and also in philology (the study of ancient languages and texts) and linguistics at Leipzig. Ranke was a theological historian at heart, who, paradoxically, claimed to use 'science' for his purpose. He was, indeed, not the first figure with such a philosophy. Jean Bodin (1530-96) is one such example. Bodin defended history as the search for 'truth', meaning the determination of God's divine plan, and suggested some undeniably 'scientific' methods.
Next to religion as an inherent influence on Ranke's life and works was politics. Born at a defining moment in Prussian history, a time of awesome statecraft, politics infiltrated Ranke's life from his innermost thoughts to the materiality of his career and wallet. Ranke loved his country as a romantic and conservative patriot. He shared the Prussian partiality to monarchical rule and authoritarian government. Ranke rejected the Enlightenment philosophy of progress, including liberty and democracy. He was primarily concerned with the political, over economic, social, or cultural. He was an inflexible Eurocentric. A 'scientific' historian would not allow preference for political and European history to eclipse the need to consider other factors ('variables') and unique history of the other continents.
Ranke not only had a personal preference for studying the political, he was obliged to produce works on politics due to the nature of his patrons. In Prussia, men achieved power through their relationship with the Prussian monarchy and state institutions, and Ranke energetically cultivated this relationship. Once he reached the University of Berlin in 1825, his research was largely bankrolled by the state. His training in the civil service and personal standing provided him with access to the state archives. Although his personal philosophical purpose was concerned with God, his working philosophy was necessarily political. His body of work was amassed for the benefit of the state.
With such deep influences of religious conviction and involvement with the Prussian state, Ranke's philosophical motivation to produce history can hardly be construed as 'scientific'. However, his approach was of considerable 'scientific' character. 'Objectivity' and historicism were the main elements of his approach to history as a discipline.
Firstly, 'objectivity'. In order to discover God's plan for humanity through understanding history, Ranke believed he needed perfect 'objectivity'. He put himself through the conscious process of shedding his preconceptions of the past, present, and future, each time he began work in the archives. Thus Ranke believed he approached historical documents with a completely open mind. Yet, an historian with perfect 'objectivity' cannot exist, because humankind studies himself.
Secondly, historicism. Though historicism had been practiced by lawyers since the earliest schools of jurisprudence, Ranke was another after Franois Baudouin (1590-1650), who applied the notion to historical research. He fervently believed that it was not the place of the historian to judge the past, only to understand. Ranke believed that his commitment to objectivity and historicism would best place him to understand wie es eigentlich gewesen. Translation of this euphemism has proven problematic for scholars of Ranke. While some interpret the phrase to mean Ranke aimed to discover how history "really" was, it is more accurate to translate to how it "essentially" was. Ranke's superficially 'scientific' intention to precisely recreate the past as it "really" was, is actually a deeply philosophical one. He looked for "essential" truths, with intuition rather than reason.
While objectivity and historicism provide an apparently 'scientific' approach, intuition, or historical imagination, was then required to actually recreate the past. Ranke was confident that if he detached himself utterly from his own values and preconceptions, and immersed himself deep enough into all possible sources, he would attain perfect empathy with his historical agents and so understand the past in its own terms. The necessity of historical imagination seriously compromises Ranke's claim to a 'scientific' approach. One cannot reconstruct history to the extent that the historian penetrates inside the head of an historical agent, and it is arrogant to argue otherwise. However, so long as the historian recognises that perfect empathy is impossible, through study or imagination, striving for perfect empathy is both a useful and 'scientific' approach, nonetheless.
Ranke is most convincing as a 'scientific historian' with respect to his methodology. He aimed to examine every source ('experiment'), forensically. Ranke used an unusually wide variety of sources for a historian of his age, including diaries, memoirs, letters, first hand accounts of eyewitnesses, and diplomatic dispatches. He immersed himself in state archives with a fetish-like energy, to gain a complete insight into the past. His priority on primary sources was 'scientific', and was a very significant contribution to the historical discipline. Such was Ranke's commitment to the 'truth' that discovering so much as one more historical document that altered his argument would prompt him to revise his entire thesis. For example, in 1827 Ranke asked for return of manuscript of second book, as he had found a document that required him to revise a chapter.
Ranke's method of analysis was 'scientific' too. He used sophisticated linguistic analysis and corroboration, for example, to authenticate sources. Yet, Ranke was, of course, not the first to employ such a method. Linguistic analysis was famed by Lorenzo Valla's (1406-57) work on the Donation of Constantine, which he proved to be a forgery in 1439.
To ensure that he spread the gospel of his 'scientific' treatment of sources, Ranke inculcated other scholars with his 'professional' methodology. Ranke presented his works in such a way, adorned with footnotes and appendixes, which later historians could elaborate upon to enhance the accuracy of his studies. As Anthony Grafton makes abundantly clear, Ranke was not the inventor of the footnote or scholarly appendix. But he was their most talented and influential patron, and popularised their use. He introduced the seminar as a laboratory to teach engagement with sources, proposed gobbetts as experiments, and further popularised the academic journal and conference.
However, there are serious flaws in Ranke's self-proclaimed 'scientific' methodology - primarily, what can be described as his general narrow-mindedness, and also his compromising of interpretation for artistic style.
Ranke's ideal was that one day history would only be written using only the most authentic of immediate sources. Only then did he believe it possible that 'truth' could be determined. Ranke's total reliance on primary sources, let alone on official documents, was excessive and certainly not 'scientific'. Ranke had the passion and commitment of a sixteenth-century antiquarian, but these individuals were more 'scientific' in their expansive definition of an historical source. Perhaps the Annales school is an unfair comparison, as they worked well over a century after Ranke. Nevertheless, like him, Annalistes such as Fernand Braudel (1902-85) aimed to examine all possible sources, but they strove with unprecedented innovation to identify new types of historical evidence.
Ranke might have stringently authenticated every primary official source he encountered, but he did not have a similarly systematic method for interpreting them. An author of such sources himself during his career, Ranke was too blind to examine the potentially less sincere purpose of other authors.
Finally, certainly not a criticism of Ranke as an historian, but one of him as a 'scientific' historian, involves his brilliant literary style. Peter Gay passionately describes and applauds Ranke's style of writing, but argues that this style reduced the scientificity of Ranke's work. Gay waxes lyrical with praises such as Ranke 'establishes his characters with the precision of a novelist." In addition, he argues, not neglecting explanation, Ranke the dramatist plants information early in his works so that he 'is free to devote all his space to narration, undistracted by explanation." Yet, where, in Gay's reading, was there room for interpretation?
In conclusion, Leopold von Ranke was a Great Man of historiography, in the Rankean sense, but a contradictory figure. Ranke did not believe history was a science. The scenario of 'all things being equal' does not exist in history as it does with science, so one cannot write inexorable laws for history to predict the future. Ranke believed that history was unique, having only general tendencies at best, and so refused to identify general laws. Further, he did not quantify his findings, or test hypotheses. Yet, he certainly saw himself as an innovator (and even the saviour of the historical craft) and along with most of his contemporaries, asserted that he had a 'scientific' philosophy, approach, and especially a 'scientific' methodology of history. Notwithstanding the significant alteration in the definition of 'scientific history' over time, Ranke's image as 'the father of scientific history' was misleading from the outset, and can now be judged as inaccurate. His philosophy of history was that it was ultimately determined by God. Ranke's approach of striving for perfect objectivity and empathy was undermined by personal faith in his ability to intuitively understand the past. His methodology for working with sources was significantly 'scientific', but was also artistic in its style. In his time he was the closest to the concept of a 'scientific historian', but as new disciplines of social science developed to augment historical analysis, he was superseded by more 'scientific' figures. Ranke was, then, essentially not a 'scientific' historian, although he undoubtedly dramatised the role of 'scientificity' in historical work.
In any case, Ranke's contribution to historiography was far more impressive for its synergy of religious connection, 'scientific' approaches and methods, and artistic flair in addition. The influence of 'scientific' philosophies, approaches, and methodologies on 'history' are important and desirable for the discipline for as long as 'scientific' innovation increases knowledge and understanding of the past. But if 'history' becomes so 'scientific' that it becomes passionless, it becomes unreadable, and loses all usefulness.