The labor theory of value occupies a fundamental place in Marx's works. Just as alienated labour is a key theme in his early works, the labour theory of value marks Marx's transition from the philosophical criticism of inhuman capitalist production to the scientific exploration of the capitalist economy system. At first glance, the labour theory of value seems to be a mere elaboration of Ricardo's theory of value, which complements the latter with a dimension of history, and because of this, Marx is often regarded by some scholars as a conclusive figure among political economists. Such a reading, however, does not exhaust the rich implication of Marx's theory.
There are two concepts yet to define: labor and value. As these two words could comprise various meanings, from the most concrete to the most abstract. What is their meaning here? What is their relationship and why? Does this relationship apply to all epochs in the history or specifically to capitalist production?
In this argument, the author will try to solve the questions above. In the first three sections, the definition of value and labor and their interrelation will be discussed in detail. Based on that, in the following section, the attention will be shifted to the production and exchange process in which the interrelation of labor and value could be studied on a larger scale. The phenomenon of commodity fetishism will also be discussed. Finally, we will talk about how labor theory of value provides a better image of social relation than that of classical political economists.
Through the discussion, the author tries to point out that here the concept of value and labour is specific to the commodity production. The labour theory of value reveals the distinctive organization of capitalistic economy system and sheds light on the whole societal structure of bourgeois society.
In the first chapter of Capital, Marx pointed out three opposing pairs: use-value/value, concrete labour/abstract labour and private labour/social labour. Different interpretations of their relationship lead to different evaluations of Marx's labour theory of value and his whole analysis of capitalist society.
One of these interpretations argues that there are two kinds of production: production of use-value and production of value. Use-value is 'an external object,' (Marx, 1976: 125) an intrinsic quality, 'conditioned by the physical properties of a thing.' 'They constitute the material content of wealth, whatever its social form maybe.' (Marx, 1976: 126) Accordingly, the concrete labour which produces use-value is also trans-historical; it is a 'natural condition of human existence, a condition of material interchange of man and nature, quite independent of the form of society.'(Marx, 1971: 36) As the use-value production appears to be irreverent of the social form, it naturally follows that the use-value production could take place privately. Isolated people can carry on concrete labour respectively in their own place without much social contact with others.
Likewise, abstract labour is value-producing labour, which appears to be the abstraction of various concrete labours. For example, weaving and tailing are two distinctive concrete labours, differing in 'aim, mode of operation, object, means and result,'(Marx, 1976: 132) but they share some common characters: they are both 'an expenditure of human labour-power', 'both a productive expenditure of human brains, muscles, nerves, hands etc., and in this sense both human labour.'(Marx, 1976: 134) Because of this, they are equal in the physiological sense. The only difference is not qualitative, but quantitative, determined by different duration of labour-time, so they could be compared in the market, in the society. Abstract labour is also social labour as they confer social quality on commodities. The value and abstract labour thus appear to emerge from the abstraction of diverse use-values and use labours. They are, in this way, trans-historical concepts also.
This interpretation of their relationship into two parallel lines: use-value - concrete labour - private labour and value - abstract labour - social labour, however oversimplifies Marx's labour theory of value, reducing it to Ricardo's theory of value. The value remains embodied human labour, determined out of the social relation. The market serves only as an arena where quantitatively varying commodities compare their inner value. The exchange remains a mere technical process while the value is already predetermined before the exchange process.
Without the consideration of the social form of value, the labour theory of value is reduced to the explanation of the quantitative relation between commodities, which is in fact, what Marx aimed to criticize. Actually, the quantitative exchange relation between commodities or the price-form is the most visible appearance of commodity economy. It serves to be the staring point for Marx's whole enquiry to uncover the underlying secret of capitalist economy system behind the price-form, money-form and later developed capital form.
Diane Elson would disagree with such a separation and the regrouping of these six concepts into two categories, the private and the social. Though she admits that there is a tendency to suggest that 'abstract' means the same as 'social', and 'concrete' the same as 'private', she insists that these categories are nevertheless distinct and must not be collapsed into one. (Elson, 1979: 145)
In her essay 'The Value Theory of Labour', she brings out another interpretation of the meanings and interrelation of four categories of labour: concrete, abstract, private and social labour. She argues that:'
The four concepts are actually four aspects of the same labour. Concrete labour is no more concrete than abstract labour, just as abstract labour is no more abstract than concrete labour, because they are both one-sided abstraction of the same labour. It is the same case with private and social labour. They are in this way pertaining to all epochs of history, though the way they relate to each other varies in different epochs of history.
In the specific condition of capitalism, the distinction between the two pairs tend, as practical reality, to be obliterated; the concrete aspect of labour is privatized' and the social aspect of labour is 'abstracted'. (Elson, 1979: 149) This is the appearance, but essence is that 'in capitalistic society the abstract aspect is dominant. The social character of labour is established precisely through the representation of the abstract aspect of labour.' (Elson, 1979: 149)
Abstract labour is not the common character shared by various distinctive concrete labours. It is not derived from the abstraction of concrete labours, not a derivative aspect, but sui generis. 'It is not an assumption that all work is physiologically identical. Rather, it draws attention to the fact that all work takes the time and effort, irrespective of what kind of work it is'. (Elson, 1979: 148) In capitalist society, abstract labour dominates concrete labour, provides the social form into which the latter enters. Therefore, the concrete labour ceases to be 'the concept of a 'given', determinated reality upon which social relations are superimposed'. (Elson, 1979: 147)
The concept abstract labour overlaps somehow with the concept the social labour, as both are viewed as collective activity, without concerning who is the particular labourer. 'What the concept of labour adds to the concept of social labour is the idea of quantity, labour is viewed not simply as part of a collective effort, but as a definite fraction of a quantitatively specified total.' (Elson, 1979: 148)
We could clearly see the difference between these two interpretations: the first interpretation puts the same weight on use-value and value, concrete and abstract labour, private and social labour, without noticing the inner relationship within each pair, and therefore disregards the particularity of labour production in the capitalist economy system. In other words, it tacitly agrees that value production is just as natural as the use-value production without questioning its validity. Value appears to be imposed by abstract labour and becomes inherent in the commodity. They could be compared in the market as they are both crystallized abstract labour, differing only in the duration of labour time. In this way such an interpretation naturally leads to a doctrine of determination of the quantitative relation of commodities.
The second interpretation maintains that these categories of labour pertain to all epochs of history, but in capitalist society, their relation is represented in a unique way that the abstract labour dominates concrete labour. The social form of labour should be taken into consideration even before the concrete labour takes place. Thus from the qualitative standpoint, the social form of value and labour should be addressed first before analyzing the quantitative relation of commodities.
However, there still remain some questions unsolved. Firstly, the author did not talk much about use-value and value. Though it is implied in the analysis of four categories of labour, it is still worth thinking about. Secondly, Elson did not give a very clear answer to: How does abstract labour dominate concrete labour? How does concrete labour takes the social form? In the next section, these questions will be further discussed. In the following two sections, we try to undertake these two tasks respectively.
Among all these categories, use-value seems to be the most simple and obvious. 'As far as it is a use-value, there is nothing mysterious about it.'(Marx, 1976: 163) It is true, but it does not license us to regard use-value as the eternal quality and be determinated out of human interference. 'Every useful thing...may be looked at from the two points of view of quality and quantity'. (Marx, 1976: 125)
Both the 'quality' and 'quantity' of use-value is to some extent determined in human society, under the mediation of human beings in a definite historical epoch. Therefore, from this perspective, use-value ceases to be an eternal or trans-historical concept. Though this concept could apply to all epochs of history, say, pre-capitalist, capitalist and post-capitalist, it can only be fully grasped in the background of certain stage of human society.
Nevertheless, the mystery of community production stems more from value than from use-value. Then what is value? Value is expressly exhibited by exchange-value. Then what is exchange value? Exchange-value appears to be 'the quantitative relation, the proportion, in which the use-values of one kind exchange for use value is another kind' (Marx, 1976: 126) Exchange-value stems from the relation of commodities of different use-value.
'This form of manifestation is exchange-value, and the commodity never has this form when looked in isolation, but only when it is in a value-relation or an exchange relation with a second commodity of a different kind.'(Marx, 1976: 152) 'The expression x commodity A= x commodity A would not be a value equation,' in that the value of commodity A can't expressed its value in itself. 'An individual commodity taken in isolation is incapable of manifesting its own value.' (Sayer, 1979: 25)
However, this definition of value, 'value expresses itself in exchange-value, which can only be understood in relation with other commodities of different use-value', is not a satisfactory one. It is more of description than definition and it has not touched the essence of value. Then, the question remained: what is value? This time we turn to the substance of value: abstract labour.
Value is produced by abstract labour. Abstract labour, at first glance, emerges in the negative way: 'If we leave aside the determinate quality of productive activity, and therefore the useful character of the labour, what remains is its quality of being an expenditure of human labour-power.'(Marx, 1976: 134) As we have discussed in the first section, viewing abstract labour as the residue after subtraction of concrete labour leads to the abstraction of abstract labour. It is neither a mere physiological concept, 'the expenditure of human brains, muscles, nerves, hands etc.' (Marx, 1976: 134)
Here Marx's comment on Ricardo might offer some clues:
The quotation shows that the reading of abstract labour above is only a logical deduction without taking its historical quality into consideration. Abstract labour, therefore, could only be understood in a definite social background also. The emergence of it coincides with the introduction of machine, with large-scale commodity production, with the formation of social and production relation within the bourgeois society. Let's discuss in detail.
Abstract labour is 'the expenditure of simple labour-power, i.e. of the labour-power possessed in his bodily organism by every ordinary man, on the average, without being developed in any special way.'(Marx, 1976: 135) It is simple because 'any average individual can be trained to do and which in one way or another he has to perform'. (Marx, 1971: 31) What's more, 'the labour contained in these values does not count by virtue of its productive relation to cloth and linen, but only as being an expenditure of human labour-power.'(Marx, 1976: 136) It does not matter who is the labourer of one product, since the individuality and particularity of labour is no longer so important. From this perspective, abstract labour is somehow similar to what Marx described as alienated labour in his early works: 'The labour is external to the worker... His worker is therefore not voluntary, but coerced; it is forced labour. It is therefore not the satisfaction of a need; it is merely a means to satisfy needs external to it...it (the product) is not his own, but someone else's.' (Marx, 1971: 137)
Though with a strong philosophical and humanistic flavour, the paragraph expressed roughly the same meaning: in the capitalist society, the direct relation between labourer and his product loosened. The product of labour is no longer the direct use-value to its producer. Thus the labour or production process is reduced to a means of life, not life itself. The importance of the particularity of labour decreases coincides with the loosening relation between labourer and product. The quality of labour is overtaken by the quantity, the duration of labour time. Hence, abstract labour could be measured by labour-time because of it is simple and average labour-power. Its being simple and average is due to its specific productive relation in capitalist society.
The second important aspect of abstract labour is its social character, 'social however not in the general sense but in the particular sense, denoting a specific type of society'. (Marx, 1971: 31-32) Social labour has distinctive forms and meanings in different epochs of history. For example, in the rural patriarchal system of production, labour can also be categorized as social. 'But their social character did not appear in the form of yarn becoming a universal equivalent exchanged for line as a universal equivalent, i.e., of the two products exchanging for each other as equal and equally valid expressions of the same universal labour-time.' (Marx, 1971: 33) It is the same case with the social labour in the Middle Ages, in the communal society: their social labour does not possess the quality of being universal equal.
Rubin has discussed the different characters of social labour in 'abstract labour and value'. He indicated that in ancient family or slavery-based economy, division of labour is based on extreme inequality of the sexes or on inequality of the various social strata. In a large socialist community, he admits the existence of equality of labour, but only in a secondary place and it is 'complementary to the process of socialisation and division of labour. ' (Rubin, 1927)
The uniqueness of the social labour in the commodity society is that it takes the form of universal equivalence. Therefore, we have narrowed the concept of social labour, putting it in the particular social background. The concept of social labour could not be discussed separately. We should consider it in the context of bourgeois society and with relation to with the concept of simple labour:
Like the concept of simple average labour, indicating a special type of labour and at the same time a specific historical stage, social labour also implies a definite social condition in which the universal equivalence of labour is made possible. Let's take the Greek society for a comparison. Here is Marx's comment on Aristotle's failure to see 'all labour is expressed as equal labour' due to the specific social structure of Greek society, which 'was founded on the labour of slaves, hence had as its natural basis the inequality of men and of their labour-powers.' (Marx, 1976: 152) It does not exist in the feudal society either, as in that kind of society, social class and social stratum plays a more dominant role. The equivalence of labour does not emerge until 'the concept of human equality had already acquired the permanence of a fixed popular opinion' (Marx, 1976: 152), which pertains to bourgeois society.
It is for the clearness of the analysis that we discuss the two aspects of abstract labour separately: simple average labour and equivalence of labour. They are in fact closely related, in that the analysis of one leads naturally to the other. Both of these aspects should be considered simultaneously, in the context of bourgeois society. So is the concept of abstract labour and value. We could see that they do not emerge out of imagination or of philosophical reasoning. They are real phenomena and historical facts, which coincide with the emergence and prosperity of capitalist economy system.
So far, the concept of use-value and value has been carefully studied. We could move on to the second task, to analyze how in the commodity society, concrete labour is dominated by abstract labour, use-value by value. How is the labour presented in the social form?
The quotation shows that it is the money form that facilitates the transformation of use-value to exchange value, concrete labour to abstract labour and private labour to social labour. Therefore before we examine the process of transformation, let's look at the money-form.
The money-form emerges in the final stage of Marx's analysis of value-form, which starts from the simple, isolated or accidental form, through expanded form and general form, and finally develops into money-form. This is not simply a project of archeology. It should be regarded as Marx's effort to provide a historico-logical explanation of the money-form. Money is not a human invention, coming from nowhere. It is the finished value form through several metamorphoses. Here it should be bear in mind that the distinction of the four stages is only an analytical one. Even in the first stage, the simple, isolated or accidental form, the contradiction of use-value and value, concrete labour and abstract labour is already there, and such contradiction is yet to overcome, which implies the development of later forms.
In the first stage, the division of use-value and value has emerged. For example, x commodity A = y commodity B. The value of commodity A, the relative form of value, is expressed in the use-value of commodity B, the equivalent form. In this value-relation, A plays an active role, B a passive one. However, through the development of the value-form, the equivalent form gradually developed into a seemly independent form of value. Its acquired power seems to be a natural one, inherent in itself. The equivalent form achieves its summit in the money-form. The use-value of a commodity has to be disregarded before being converted into money-form or price-form. The exchange-value or value thus gains the dominance over use-value.
As the value is crystallization of abstract labour and use-value that of concrete labour, the dominance of value over use-value, from the perspective of the essence of value, is also the dominance of abstract labour over concrete labour:
In the previous section, the genesis of money and its relation with the dominance of value over use-value is explored. However money itself is also an appearance of dominance and it can give no thorough explanation of the origin of dominance. Then the question remains: how can the equivalent form in the value relation appear to gain the power which originally belongs to the relative form of value. The underlying reason lies in the specific social relation of production and exchange process of the bourgeois society.
Generally speaking, human economic activity comprises of four stages: production, distribution, exchange and consumption. Here, our attention will focus on the process of production and exchange, as labour exists in the former and value in the latter. Therefore the analysis of the relation of the production and exchange process provides a concrete background for the study of the relation of labour and value on a large scale.
In commodity society, the exchange process appears to be dominant over the other three, which is presented by the 'immense collection of commodities' (Marx, 1976: 125). The quantitative relation of the commodities, represented by the price-form, seems to be an independent physical quality of the commodities, regulated only by the invisible hand, the asymmetry of supply and demand in the market, without the influence from the production process. The relation between individual producers becomes indirect, mediated by the relation of commodities they produce. This is what Marx called commodity fetishism, 'it is nothing but the definite social relation between men themselves which assumes here, for them, the fantastic form of a relation between things... I call this the fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour as soon as they are produced as commodities, and is therefore inseparable from the production of commodities.'(Marx, 1976: 165) Commodity fetishism is neither an imaginative myth, nor a psychological fantasy, but a perceivable fact particular in the commodity society. It also derives from the unique way in that economy activities are organized in the bourgeois society.
From alienated labour to the labour theory of value, Marx's attention focused firmly on the production rather than the process of exchange. Alienated labour remains an external critique of the condition of labourers in predicament, while the labour theory of value points out clearly the decisive role of production rather than the market equilibrium in determining the value of commodities by arguing that 'substance of value is abstract labour'. However, this is not equal to say that from Marx's point of view, value production is a mere technical process. As has been discussed above, the existence of abstract labour presupposes a unique way of exchange-process in the bourgeois society. This is where Marx's labour theory of value differs from that of the classical political economists: his insistence on the historical particularity of bourgeois society. 'Thus when we speak of production, we always have in mind production at a definite stage of social development, production by individuals in a society.'(Marx, 1971: 189-190)
'No exchange is possible without division of labour, whether this is naturally evolved or is already the result of an historical process... The intensity of exchange, its extent and nature, are determined by the development and structure of production... All aspects of exchange to this extent appear either to be directly comprised in production, or else determined by it.'(Marx, 1971: 204) It is the production at a definite historical epoch, in other words, productive forces at a certain level of development which determines the specific way the other processes are organized, though it is no denying that there is an interaction between various stages.
Therefore, we have examined the relation between labour and value and arrive at the conclusion value is produced by labour. Labour here takes the form of abstract labour, which is only found in the bourgeois society. Thus value production is also a historical and transitory one.
Hitherto, our analysis is still confined within the simple commodity production, without mentioning capitalist production, but it is necessary to make the distinction between two systems. As Pichit Likitkijssomboon pointed out in 'Marxian Theories of the Value-Form', simple commodity system 'can be viewed as a logical stage at which the categories of commodity, value and money have not yet developed into capital, and labour into wage-labour. It is the system in which capitalist mode of production, including all its elements such as surplus value, profit interest, rent and so on, remain explicit, being a mere probability.' (Likitkijsomboon, 1995: 77)
It should be bear in mind that such a distinction is just an analytical one. There is no clear-cut line between simple commodity system and capital commodity system, as the latter is only fully developed in the capitalist mode of production.
Once in the context of capitalist commodity system, there are two types of production and exchange. The first type has been carefully examined with the production in the general sense and the process of exchange between producers. It is actually, for the sake of clearness, a simplified version of capitalist production and exchange, in which hides the second type. In Marx's terms, M-C-M is hidden in C-M-C and serves to be a prerequisite for the latter. It is the production of labour-power and the exchange between wage-labourers and capitalists. Capitalists buy labour-power from wage-labourers in order to carry on the production of value, while wage-labourers sell it for their subsistence and procreation.
The discovery of labour-power solves the contradiction of Ricardo's theory and legitimized the existence of surplus value. Surplus value is nothing mysterious but value produced by labour after deducting the value of labour-power itself. Surplus value also arises in the process of production.
'The sphere of circulation or commodity exchange, within whose boundaries the sale and purchase of labour-power goes on, is in fact a very Eden of the innate rights of man. It is the exclusive realm of Freedom, Equality, Property and Bentham.'(Marx, 1976: 280) This is Marx's conclusion of basic concepts of classical political economy: it starts from free individuals making contract with each other for the pursuit of their own goodness but in the same time promote the common interest, which is the target of Marx's critique.
Marx differs from political economists from the starting point, he criticized that 'They saw this individual not as an historical result, but as the starting point of history' (Marx, 1971: 188), because in his idea, 'Man is a social animal in the most liberal sense: he is not only a social animal, but an animal that can be individualized only within society.'((Marx, 1971: 189) What's more, if the analysis starts from individuals, who are equal with each other and free to make contracts, we can never explain for the existence of social class.
However, Marx's theory can not be interpreted as an accusation of class exploitation; otherwise it will be reduced to Ricardo's theory of class antagonism. Individual labourer is not cheated by individual capitalist. But from the perspective of class, such an exchange is unequal and unavoidable. As capitalist is just the embodiment of capital, the pursuit of profit is his justifiable object. Marx's central theme, nevertheless, is to reveal the 'contradictory nature of capitalism, which necessarily set limits to its development'. (Weeks, 1981: 4)
In analyzing three opposing pairs, use-value/value, concrete labour/abstract labour and private labour/social labour, this article points out that both the concepts, value and abstract labour, are specific to commodity-capitalist society. The process of production and exchange is also explored in which the relation of labour and value is examined on a larger scale. In commodity-capitalist society, exchange-process seems to be dominant, while in fact, production plays a more decisive role in determining the magnitude of value. Finally, the attention is shifted from commodity production to capitalist production, though the distinction is merely an analytical one, in that the latter is hidden in the former. Nevertheless, Marx's theory is not a theory of class antagonism, but provides a better image of society, made up of social classes.