There has been much discussion on whether Hobbes is the first man of modern political philosophy or not, but it is sure that Hobbes stands across the dividing line between the old and the burgeoning new world. The influence of both is intertwined in Hobbes's works and especially, shown in Hobbes's self-contradictory way of writing, which leads to different interpretations of Hobbes: he is liberal or authoritative, anti-social or humanistic, a scientist or a moralist, an individualist or a collectivist. Hobbes is just Hobbes, who defies any attempt to categorize him into one small label. The tension in Hobbes's system of theory also gains him much attention both from his contemporaries and from our own time.
We might say that 'the state of nature' and its antithesis to the civil society is the most original invention of Hobbes. His description of state of nature, humanity's condition in predicament, which unavoidably calls for an omnipotent authority of government, invites the criticism both out of the emotional and of the intellectual. (Oakeshott, 1975: 55)
This essay sets out with the criticism of Locke and Rousseau on Hobbes's explanation of transition from state of nature to civil society. The distinction and consistency between the three is discussed in the first section. In the second section, the following questions are examined: Is Hobbes's state of nature a historical account, some anthropological study or what else? What's the implied meaning of it? What's the role played by it in Hobbes's theory? By answering these questions, Hobbes's break with the tradition and opening-up of a new epoch is clearly seen. We will talk about it in the third section.
Through the essay, the author wants to point out Hobbes's state of nature is neither a historical account of the origin of political society, nor a pure thinking game of a philosopher. His state of nature is the very portrait of human situation of the Civil War and the design of Leviathan is for the restoration of laws and returning to an ordered civil society.
On the books of the history of political philosophy, the name of Locke and Rousseau usually appears right after Hobbes. This arrangement surely follows a chronological order, while it also implies a close intellectual relation between the three. Locke and Rousseau, they both criticized strictly Hobbes's assumption on the state of nature. Both of them, in fact, tacitly agreed with Hobbes's methodology and main themes, but presented a new story in a modified but similar way. They both developed their own theory based on the criticism of Hobbes and in fact inherited a lot from him. Let's compare them separately and take a close look.
In the previous section, three versions of 'state of nature' have been compared and contrasted. Locke and Rousseau, despite their openly-declared opposition, observed the tradition, opened up by Hobbes, of tracing back the human condition in the state of nature. As is discussed above, this is not a historical exploration of the origin of human society. Then if the state of nature does not concern the history, which role it plays in Hobbes's system of theory? Then in this section, the following questions will be discussed: Does the state of war of one against one literally mean that everyone kills everyone? What's the relation between state of nature and civil state? What's the implied meaning of state of war?
Rousseau discussed in the Second Discourse man's disinclination to harm each other from his anthropological analysis of human nature. Here, in the Social Contract, he reiterated that the state of war could not be generated from the relation between man and man, but between state and state.
Rousseau's analysis reminds us that Hobbes's state of war could not be literally understood as a real and physical war. It might only be a metaphor. We should remember that Hobbes studied Greek and Latin in his early years and 'his facility at languages remained with him all his life.' (Tuck, 1991: 7)
Then, Bobbio's interpretation of Hobbes's state of nature might provide some hints. According to Bobbio, Hobbes's state of nature comprises three specific situations. The first is 'primitive societies', like some American natives and the barbarian populations of antiquity, 'which precedes the passage from the state of nature to civil society, and is therefore prepolitical'; the second is 'in case of civil war. This occurs when the state already exist, but dissolves for various reasons. Here there occurs the passage from civil society to anarchy. We might call this situation antipolitical'; the third is 'in international society. Relations among states are not regulated by a shared power. This is a situation which occurs among-political entities.' (Bobbio, 1993: 41-42)
Among the three situations, civil war is the most fitted theme, as Leviathan is published in 1651, nine years after the breakout of England's Civil War. Hobbes was pride of being the first one to flee from England at that time. Civil War's influence upon Hobbes's writing could not be ignored when we analyze the state of nature. Civil War is not a pre-political state, but an interlude in a civil society. It disrupts the order of the previous state and turns it into anarchy, where there is no common power, no authority, no order, no law. It is like 'the state of nature', in Hobbes's term. And Hobbes's design of Leviathan is to bring back order and reestablish laws in order to return to the civil stage.
In order to see clearly the relation between the state of nature and civil society, we might compare them in one form as is shown below:
To conclude, the state of nature can be characterized as (1) everyone decides everything; (2) driven by passion; (3) continual war without civilization; (4) natural rights but no morality; (5) no contracts at all. By comparison, the civil society, or the Leviathan, is (1) sovereign power by a person or an assembly of people; (2) guided by reason; (3) everything in order; (4) morality according to the observance of law of nature; (5) contract under a mutual power.
It is shown Hobbes's 'state of war' is quite the portrait of Civil War, where there is no common power, no effective law. Everything is allowed. Society dissolves into a multitude of individuals. Therefore, the establishment of Leviathan is to put an end to the anarchy of society, to restore laws and morality, for the preservation and continuance of civilization. Therefore, the antithesis of state of nature and civil society is not necessarily a chronological one: one being physically earlier than the other, but actually, the former is the interlude or an abnormal situation of the latter.
There has been much argument about Hobbes's state of nature, it is 'purely hypothetical, a kind of thought-experiment, or whether he supposed that it could be or had been a practical possibility.' (Tuck, 1991: 29) Oakeshott argued in his Hobbes on Civil Association that the 'state of nature' is an 'inherited myth, rather than the private dream of an eccentric or the malicious invention of an outcast.' (Oakeshott, 1975: 153) By 'myth', he means that 'We apt to think of a civilization as something solid and external, but at bottom it is a collective dream... And the substance of this dream is a myth, an imaginative interpretation of human existence, the perception (not the solution) of the mystery of human life'. (Oakeshott, 1975: 150) But after the discussion above, we could see that the description of state of nature is not merely a dream of a philosopher, a game of brain, a thought-experiment. It could be physically found in the history, though it is never an archeological project of the origin of political society. It derives its existence from Hobbes's life experience during the Civil War.
It might be oversimplifying to say that the job of political philosophers is to arrange the position of individual, state and maybe some intermediate organizations. In this light, the subject matter of Hobbes's whole story, including the antithesis of state of nature to civil society, and transition from state of nature into the civil society, is also about: how is a state made up of individuals? How do individuals gather to become a state? What's the relation between individual and state?
Hobbes is an original and revolutionary thinker in the history of political philosophy. His antithesis of state of nature to civil society could be interpreted as that of individual to state, as the former is made up of individuals without a common power, and the latter with a political authority. He rearranges this above-mentioned relation to that state of nature becomes logically prior to the civil state. The legitimacy of the latter is derived from the transferring rights of the former. Individuals are both the starting point and the final aim of the state. This, however, is not the same case with classical philosophers, for example, when discussing the nature of justice and injustice, Socrates would propose studying first in the State, and secondly in the individual, 'proceeding from the greater to the lesser and comparing them, ' as 'in the larger the quantity of justice is likely to be larger and more easily discernible.' (Plato, 1977: 339-340) In their perspective, state is naturally and logically prior to individuals. By comparison, it is clearly seen that Hobbes's dramatic division of state of nature and civil society is a work of emancipation individuals from state. His state of nature provides a secure place for the existence of pre-political individuals. As Dr. Strauss commented on Hobbes's break with the tradition,
Here again, we need take into account the historical background of the wring of Leviathan and other political works of him, otherwise Hobbes's break with history would seem to come from nowhere but an inspiration of mind. The Civil War destroyed the previous state, which assumed to possess a natural root, and left behind a multitude of individuals. Thus, Hobbes had to begin with another direction, not from state, but from individuals. And he was obliged to offer a different explanation of the origin of state: the derivation of the state is from the transferring right of individuals in the state of nature, before the establishment of the state. The state ceased to be natural, but an artificial institution designed by human beings. However, as is discussed above that Hobbes is a complicated and sometimes self-contradictory thinker. His theory of origin of the state by contract is not complete. The right once transferred is for ever and irrevocable. The sovereign returns to be an omnipotent power, but at least Hobbes paved the way for later philosophers, such as Locke and Rousseau, who further developed Hobbes's view of contract-made state out of the state of nature.
This essay offers an alternative interpretation of Hobbes's 'state of nature', pointing out that it is a vivid portrait of Civil War, not merely a hypothetical myth or an intellectual game, and never an intention of exploring the historical origin of political state. The design of the Leviathan is a remedy to this disordered situation. Hobbes's invention of the division of state of nature/civil state and individual/state does not come from nowhere, but is a product of his time. Locke and Rousseau's criticism of Hobbes is also studied in this essay and it is shown both of them are strongly influenced by Hobbes's methodology and main themes despite their apparent oppositions.