Identifying one definition of community is extremely problematical as it is subject to such a wide range of interpretations. Can it be identified by geographical location, inclusion in certain social or cultural groups, or shared interest? (Clarke 1996). Also with education, what constitutes education differs enormously based on the situation or requirement eg academic achievement or learning how to bake a cake. So finding a standard definition or system that suits every circumstance and perspective is far from easy - it will vary depending on a multitude of criteria.
This essay tracks community education from its roots in the early 1920s where it had a cosy yet paternalistic feel, through radical changes which challenged traditional methods and thinking. It also considers the explosion of the education ethos of today's learning society, and discovers how collective learning can still take place in an environment that encourages a more individualistic approach. By studying the different and varying initiatives that have been used across time it examines their impact and successes of them as well as questions whether progress is really being made towards using community education to transform lives at a macro level.
Henry Morris is considered to be the founder of community education when, during his 30 years as Chief Education Officer, he introduced what were quite radical changes to the education system. One of his main concerns was to provide an educational service to rural areas which equalled that in the towns - "to change the whole face of the problem with rural education" (Re 1973:31). He believed everyone should have equal access to learning and was keen to preserve community life, which he felt was disintegrating as villages left rural areas to seek work in the towns. The first 'village college', was opened in Sawston in 1930 and provided reading rooms, recreational and sport facilities, meeting rooms for local groups such as the Women's' Institute and scouts and offered evening classes - it was to be the focal point of the community. Morris' reforms were driven by his early experiences in education and based on his interests in religion, science and the arts. The retention of religious education in the new education system was a major debating block as control for education was wrestled from Church provision. The influences of Morris' ideals in mixed sex and class education and national curriculum can be seen in today's educational arrangements. Whilst there must be plenty of praise for the work undertaken by Morris and his transformation of the educational system, the situation can be viewed as paternalistic or controlling society by being controlled by the establishment.
Radical education grew out of the Enlightenment. Expanding human nature via analytical and scientific thought challenged moral and religious values (and liberalism - 'education for its own sake' (Johnston 2003)) which underpinned traditional models of education (Johnson 1988 in Lovett). Since most early education was provided by the Church the idea of 'people's knowledge' - where the focus is on making up ones' own mind - was considered radical and threatening to the social order (Johnson 1988 in Lovett). Early radical educators included the Chartist Movement and the Mechanics Institute, these were later replaced by tutorial and residential colleges such as Ruskin and the Labour Movement. The age of "really useful knowledge" was born. The aim was "to help working class people understand their world and the institutions that affect their lives" (Horton in Lovett 1988:xiv). However, one of the key points raised by Johnson is who produces the knowledge and for what purpose? Benjamin King confirms the hegemonic nature of education by stating "the Mechanics Institute is not intending to teach the most useful knowledge but to teach only that which might be profitable to the unproductive" (Lovett 1988:xxi). Despite this argument, the focus of radical education was to find collective and co-operative solutions rather than individualistic ones. Another important institution in the education arena was the Workers Education Association, which held a liberal approach to education by encouraging equality of access to learning through communal readings, discussion groups and newspapers. Education was seen as part of the political movement, the focus being on non-academic learning.
The 1970s saw a growth in educational initiatives to increase community participation in learning eg community centres, community schools, Trade Unions, neighbourhood centres and community development projects (Lovett 1988). In the midst of crisis of mass unemployment and changing skill requirements education is seen as the solution to return economic health to the nation. The difference from the traditional model is to encourage the working class to take control of their own education and to link that education to a process of social and community action (Lovett 1988). However, this is no easy task, but a new link had been made.
Two case studies for consideration are those of the Educational Priority Area (EPA) project in Liverpool - 1968 (Lovett 1982) and the Adult Learning Project (ALP) in Scotland - 1979 to 1984 (Crowther et al 1999). The Liverpool EPA project used action research to investigate educational inequalities in an area which had approx 90,000 inhabitants, with high unemployment, bad housing, low wages and semi or unskilled workers. The overall aim of EPAs post 1967 was to redress imbalances of inequality in disadvantaged areas, positive discrimination becoming the new buzz word. Early in the research it was identified how difficult it was to establish a 'one size fits all' proposal for change due for instance to the conflicting views of the area by the residents. Those occupying neat houses had a good sense of community and did not relate to the depravation label. The project identified the need for the working class to be included in the political arena in order for them to be represented and bring about change, this could only be brought about by radical education which would replace the traditional middle class system that existed. The project met many obstacles along the way and used reflection and further action to work towards the aims of the project.
Based on the work of Freire, the ALP in Scotland used reflection and action (praxis) as the basis for the project. Freire's work in Brazil and Latin America questioned the use of education by the state to control the people, was critical of the 'banking system' of education and acknowledged the value of life experiences not just academic knowledge. The ALP introduced a student centred approach using two way relationships (dialogical) to encourage collective and cultural learning; so that knowledge gained could be used in everyday lives. The findings of the project added a word of caution in that this method of working needs to be introduced slowly as learners felt the method was unstructured when compared with traditional methods - time for them to adjust needs to be allowed.
Although the work of Freire is considered ground breaking, there are criticisms that it is not substantial enough, is vague and could therefore be misused, is not clear enough when dealing with certain issues eg cultural requirements and in the dialogical process could the most vocal become the new oppressors? (Allman in Lovett 1988).
However, changes in community can also affect changing roles eg the position of women. The POWER project established in Ireland is a good example of how groups of women changed their lives by establishing, and eventually running, education programmes. The results, which provided great strides forward for the participants in terms of personal development and community involvement, still left them excluded from the decision and policy making arena that determined their environment (NIACE 2000).
When attracting the working class into education consideration needs to be given to the language and cultural barriers that exist (Bernstein in Lovett 1988). A small example of this is shown in McGivney's research where participants in education activities sponsored by the WEA, did not relate such informal learning as writing workshops and discussion groups to learning or education (McGivney 1990).
Globalisation, competing market forces, new technology and an emphasis on maintaining economic stability in a world which appears increasingly more 'risky', has promoted the ethos of 'lifelong learning' and a drive towards 'learning societies'. As a result, new ways of including 'communities' that are excluded due to inequalities eg education, gender, race, age or geography (Johnston in Field and Leicester 2000) have become a focal point. As well as individuals being encouraged to take responsibility for their own 'employability', and reduce their dependency on the state, active citizenship' is being promoted. By valuing skills and experience other than academic achievement and an introduction of a multitude of initiatives attempts are made to include excluded groups in decision-making processes eg community projects, neighbourhood regeneration schemes and community education provision, thereby increasing their involvement. Martin (2003) believes in a staged process towards citizenship that can be brought about via education. Growing social and economic inequalities and a decline in social cohesion, resulting in increased crime rates, evidences social exclusion and has prompted an explosion of education as the solution (UNESCO in Johnston in Field and Leicester 2000). This means that community educators are being presented with new challenges to identify educational needs that are learner rather than subject driven.
Central to the discussion on community education is the issue of participation and how to widen participation (Johnston in Field and Leicester 2000). Bite Size is an initiative funded by the LSC to encourage adults (16+) back into learning - mainly with the view to improving their employment prospects. During 2003 50,000 learners attended Bite Size courses, which last 1 to 3 hours, and can be accessed via colleges, community centres, libraries, supermarkets or even pubs. However, only 4 in 10 have gone on to further learning (LSC website 29/2/04). This seems to have missed the aim of widening participation and does little to promote collective learning or encourage using learning to transform lives. It could, however, be a small starting point for some on the road that leads to improved confidence and self discovery, or eventually challenge traditional (academic) thinking. By supporting each other through dialogue, soliciting partnership interaction and starting with their own experiences the Women's Education Centre in Southampton challenged the oppressive role of women in society. Their work is a shining example of how voice can be used to make collective changes at both a personal and political level (Thompson 1997).
Amongst all the rhetoric of the 'learning society' and the numerous government initiatives to promote learning and active citizenship via education, it is difficult to sometimes see how community educators can find the flexibility to meet the needs of the target groups. Johnston (1993) believes success can be achieved within the confining policy parameters by linking theory to practice, linking institutional and community based actions, creating new alliances, building on small victories and continuing to use praxis. Lovett (lecture notes 7.1.04) sees building relationships and providing learner centred programmes as key to success.
The identification of one definition of community education is problematic in that the concepts of both community and education have such diverse components - "elastic and flexible" as described by Johnston (in Field and Leicester 2000). Both elements are affected by time and space as well as economic climate and political opinion and can be representative of a dominant group. It can be seen, therefore, that community education has had many guises and varying successes. From the early days of Morris, a cosy feel to community education was developed, which provided a somewhat paternalistic and controlling environment - albeit in the best interests of the people involved? With the advent of radical educators, traditional concepts were challenged and replaced with education for liberation from oppression by using praxis as a key tool (Freire 1970, Allman in Lovett 1988). Peoples lives could be changed by themselves for themselves, but still within the confines of policy dictates. (Lovett 1988). Notwithstanding the wealth of models of community education (Martin 1987) already in existence and with the recent learning explosion prompted by golobalization, economic instability and increased market competitiveness the provision of community education has become diverse and fragmented (Johnston in Field and Leicester 2000). Added to this Freire's concept of providing education to meet learners' needs, the potential for educational initiatives is vast. Whilst this offers a wealth of opportunity in some respects, can it ever collectively be sufficient to challenge the systems it sets out to change?