The unique style of story-telling established by Gabriel Garcia Marquez in his masterpiece 'One Hundred Years of Solitude,' allows him to deliver to the reader a fantastic, unnatural and truly magical experience, as his abandonment of linear form and incorporation of non-rational elements combine to create the supernatural wonderland that is Macondo. The deadpan narration throughout the novel is a key construct when forming and using the literary technique known as "magical realism," and Marquez uses this style to great effect throughout the novel, to such an extent that the unbelievable become commonplace, at times without argument or bewilderment. It is necessary therefore, to establish which 'magical' events in the novel are created to stupefy and intrigue the reader, purely for literary enjoyment, and which are actual metaphors or messages that are formed to symbolise events, encounters or emotions. By placing examples of the many magical and supernatural events into three groups, namely psychological, character, and nature based, it will be possible to review Marquez' "magical realism" and consider its function in context with events throughout the novel.
The most apparent psychological occurrence in the novel surrounds the idea of an 'insomnia plague,' a so-called 'illness' that 'invaded the town.'(47) The very notion that humans could all survive for such a long period of time without sleep is extremely improbable and this mental condition is in no way 'transmitted by mouth'(47) as described by the narrator, but Marquez is so successful in manipulating a convincing matter-of-fact tone, that delivering the plague as a genuine, contagious disease is simple and effective. The important issue concerning the plague is not the likelihood of its manifestation in the town, but its deeper meaning concerning the towns people, and to a greater extent, the Buendia's. Solitude, as a psychological condition, refers, in part, to a loss of the state of mind and in this insomnia ordeal, the most important thing for the Buendia family is to retain memory, a vital component with which a state of mind can be kept or destroyed. The magical formation of an insomnia plague could represent the plague of solitude that haunts the Buendia family throughout the story and in their attempt to avoid change, Jose Arcadio Buendia develops the 'memory machine'(49) to eliminate forgetting.
Upon Melquiades' returns to Macondo, he 'gave Jose Arcadio Buendia a drink of a gentle colour and the light went on in his memory.'(50) The magical plague has now been irradiated with the drink of a potion, and the fact that Melquiades brought that memory saving potion is important in itself, as will be discussed along with the functions and magic surrounding his character. However, the determination of Macondo's founding family to retain memory, and the deliverance of Melquiades potion, serve to highlight an ideological change in Macondo, as if Marquez indicated that this point would signify an end to the prehistoric communities of the past and Macondo's thrust into the modern course of history.
Covering one hundred years of history (when reading a purely linear timeline), Marquez creates an incredibly large number of characters and in order to distinguish them, traits are formed for each, allowing the reader to enjoy many different personalities, emotions and interactions formulated by the author in exemplary fashion. An inevitable emotional interaction occurring within such a large group surrounds the mystery, passion and magic of love. The ability to love is key to the novel, and in that respect, two important characters emerge late on in the story, Meme and Mauricio Babilonia. The 'yellow butterflies' that swarm around Mauricio Babilonia were not apparent when Meme first met him and it was only after she started to feel 'an irresistible urge to see him'(291) that she realised 'the butterflies preceded'(292) his appearance. The way in which Marquez uses butterflies during the affair between Babilonia and Meme is so much more romantic and innocent than in his description of other love affairs in the story, that it is almost impossible to deny their meaning. Deciding that the magic of yellow butterflies is used for simple literary enjoyment is, therefore, far to disappointing an explanation and perhaps the preferred meaning surrounds the true romance of Macondo's first real love, as Meme 'lost her mind over him'(294) and he eventually was shot in his desperation to see her, after 'they made love twice a week for more than three months.'(296) This conclusion allows understanding of Fernanda's fight with the butterflies as she kills them 'with an insecticide bomb.'(296) Fernanda has been unable to love and so can only destroy its magic, detesting Meme's relationship with a desperately unromantic fervour.
There are many small examples of magic and supernatural behaviour throughout the novel that have simple and explicit functions, which simply comment on events. One such example involves Fernanda's other daughter, Amaranta Ursula and Meme's son Aureliano, perhaps the only other couple who are actually in love in the novel. Their 'mad passion....made Fernanda's bones tremble with horror in her grave,' a concept so supernatural and yet mentioned with such dry narrative that it is almost difficult to pick up on and which serves the simple purpose of outlining Fernanda's sheer anger at such an occurance. The author plays with literature so well that he is able to maintain Fernanda's harsh, disbelieving personality after death.
Remidios the Beauty's character differs from all the other characters in the novel and it is due to her strange, rather removed and at times unfocused personality that she acquires a rather magical, enlightened persona. Her ascent into heaven whilst holding onto sheets that she is folding may serve no other purpose as a supernatural event, except to reinforce her character. Marquez may simply believe that this death is the only one possible for a character who had shown more interest in the safety of the man who watched her in the bath than for his actions. The function could relate biblically to the Virgin Mary's assumption to heaven, an idea linking to the biblical tragedies that would bring about Macondo's destruction. It is almost certain that Marquez was influenced by stories told to him in his native Aracataca where he lived with his grandparents in a house rumoured to have been inhabited by ghosts. The ascending Remedios may simply be a copy of a story told to Marquez himself and many other magical instances throughout the novel could represent images Marquez has developed and acquired during his lifetime.
Finding a function for all the magic in the novel may be, to a certain extent, unnecessary. "Magic realism" maybe Garcia Marquez' tool for describing the approach to Macondo of modernity. The narrator exaggerates the excitement of such things as ice and yet fails to develop a shocked tone at the emergence of a magic carpet. Things that we find impossible and fantastical, the people of Macondo find normal and not at all irregular and this tone succeeds simply to help the reader understand the towns people's shock and ore at their discovery of ice. In this respect, magic has the function of reversing reader expectations and the astonishment at the fantastic (to the reader, commonplace) inventions brought by the gypsies is understood.
Father Nicanor had been brought to the region by Don Apolinar Moscote and like him, was not accustomed to the ways of the people of Macondo. Whilst everyone was watching, he drank some chocolate and 'rose six inches above the level of the ground.'(85) Marquez may have many different reasons for this showing of magic, the first simply to integrate the priest into the town. However, it is possible that this magic trick is positioned by the author for the benefit of Jose Arcadio Buendia, so the reader can understand how unimpressed Buendia is with the event. Buendia is far more interested by a 'scientific basis,'(86) and Marquez is able to outline the ominous approach of modernity in Macondo through Jose Arcadio Buendia.
There can be no discussion of magic in 'One Hundred Years of Solitude' without mentioning one of, if not the most important character in the novel, Melquiades. The old gypsy appears in the very first chapter and his legacy is key to the story until the very end. To describe Melquiades as simply a supernatural being would be to simplistic and probably wouldn't represent the aim of Marquez. Magic and Melquiades however are very closely related and their relationship is fundamental to the story. It has already been noted that Melquiades brought the magic potion to cure Macondo of the insomnia plague and this act highlights the importance of his character as the holder of ultimate power over the future and history of Macondo. Melquiades is able to visit after his foretold death, has the ability to converse with characters throughout the story after death, and his room is free from the dust and ruin of time. These magical abilities given to Melquiades by Marquez give him a certain hold or control over time, a control he needs to write the parchments that in essence tell the story. His ability to live in a time after he has died emphasises this power. His room never ages, as his time is not linear, a concept necessary in order for him to write the story of many generations even before they have be born.
Nature plays a very important role throughout the novel, at times mirroring the isolation and grief of the inhabitants of Macondo. The first of two major forces of nature to arrive in Macondo is rain, not a rain shower but a highly improbable downpour for 'four years, eleven months and two days.'(320) Rain, normally seen as a regular and natural occurrence, takes on a more supernatural and extreme purpose as Marquez uses this incredibly long lasting event to highlight the deterioration of Macondo. The onslaught of modernity reached its high-point with the arrival of the banana company, the prelude to devastation and the rain which followed the massacre simply washed it all away. The inhabitants had no where to go, no where to turn to but solitude. The rain lasted so long that it assisted in the break-up of the Buendia house, a representative for the rest of Macondo in terms of the desolation that would remain when the shower finished.
Marquez could have included these supernatural occurrences to function as biblical references. The idea of a great flood created by the rains could relate to a famous flood from the bible that destroyed land and life. Similarly, Macondo is wiped off the face of the earth, 'by the wind and exiled from the memory of men.'(422) Marquez may believe that the destruction of his town should take on biblical significance and that a hurricane of biblical (and supernatural) proportions should function well as the extinction level event that destroys Macondo forever.
To decide upon the overall function of the magic used by Gabriel Garcia Marquez is simply an impossible task. The factors involved are too many in number and probably to complex in reason. In writing a literary masterpiece, Marquez may have appealed to a particular audience, concerning social events and myths which are beyond our knowledge. Although much of the magic in this novel may be written to develop understandings of the story itself, it is important to realise that Marquez may just be describing the fantastical to allow the reader their own desires for exotic and unbelievable events. Magic used within One Hundred Years of Solitude needs no profound meaning to function, it can serve simply as a vehicle of cultural escapism, but whether acting as fantasy, for metaphorical purposes or a mixture of both, its inclusion is valuable and well presented.