'Many ancient peoples around the world practiced human sacrifice... But few cultures made sacrifice such a central part of their religion as the Aztecs, and few cultures carried out human sacrifice on the same scale as the Aztecs." Acquired documental evidence has led to a widespread consensus regarding such a statement, yet the treatment of such facts has lead to great debate and considerable misunderstanding. Mesoamerican historians have considered many possible explanations, have attempted to enter the Aztec world and provide an accurate picture of the Aztec ritual mindset. From anthropologist Michael Harner's cannibalism theory, to more mainstream religious hypotheses, historians have had to research all aspects of Aztec culture and society in order to produce an Aztec interpretation worthy of the name. The aim here is to combine historian opinion and attempt to gain a rounded understanding of Aztec sacrifice, paying particular attention to religion and terror and the political link forged by the two.
Aztec religious theory is a complex subject matter due to a number of factors of which two are of great importance. Firstly, it is important to remember that the Aztec religion was in constant evolution - so much so in fact, that many elements had yet to be integrated properly even by the time of the Spanish arrival. Secondly, and more importantly, the Aztec system does not follow the religious model of other ancient civilisations. Living as a twentieth century historian, it is almost impossible to relate with Aztec religious concepts, and so making presumptions regarding the validity of sacrifice as a religious matter is difficult. Through reading various accounts, many historians share the belief that, as Michael E. Smith writes, 'religious explanation for human sacrifice is fine as far as it goes...but [does not explain] why they practiced it so frequently." Given the factors mentioned above, such a conclusion may not be so accurate, especially due to the radical nature of The Teotl Concept and Aztec sacrificial behaviour, which now requires some attention.
The Aztecs believed that they owed their existence to the gods. This supposition itself proves far from radical, and in fact just as Christians believe in Jesus' supreme sacrifice, so the Aztecs believed that these gods sacrificed themselves for the sun. However, that is where the comparison ends, for the Mexica believed that in order to keep the sun going, they had to provide their blood and on often an occasion, their hearts. The Teotl Concept is complex, but in broad terms, relates to a number of deities - gods with special roles in society. The Deities of War, Sacrifice, Blood and Death required human blood to maintain the sun, earth and life. Priests were important members of Aztec society, performing rituals, presiding over temple economies and educating, where knowledge concerning the gods was essential. Priests stressed that the gods had offered their own blood to create people and so humankind owed a great debt. Such a system, involving a complex religious administration and sacrificial management suggests the high level of importance afforded to the worship of deities, and sacrifice based on religion can not be underplayed.
As a form of worship, personal bloodletting known as 'autosacrifice,' was common. This idea of autosacrifice repeated the actions of god Quetzalcoatl, and the more common acts included a variety of self-piercing techniques. Another important sacrificial concept is ixiptla, and through examination of ixiptla, a vital component of this discussion is drawn up - is religion used as a pretext for mass sacrifice, or do the Aztecs really believe in religious sacrifice on such a grandeur scale? Ixiptla involves god impersonation - that is death which replicates the mythical death of a said god. Victims usually included captured warriors who were respected like gods, to such an extent in fact that they would feel a great sense of pride at walking up the steps to the top of the sacrificial pyramid. This dignified death would hardly suit sacrifice which aimed at humiliating the defeated warrior and striking fear into the watching Mexica people and their enemies. Such a concept indicates a vigorous enthusiasm for religious sacrifice.
Emerging as a political force in Mexico, the Mexica had built on the experiences of other ethnic groups and it would be inaccurate to talk of an Aztec religion as something which just existed. Alan Knight writes that such sacrificial practices 'were neither new nor confined to the Azecs." This implies that Aztec religion was rather fluidic, and that their sacrificial behaviour simply mimicked other local ethnic groups as well as Mexica ancestry. The religious nature of Aztec society may account for much of the human sacrifice, but Aztec origins and influences played as great if not an even greater role in forming such a system.
Knight also argues that Aztec religion and sacrifice was based entirely on maintaining the cycle of existence. Historians that argue sacrificial behaviour was based on terror may find it hard to fathom the psychology of a victim who chooses to die for his god. As previously mentioned however, relating to a fifteenth century Mexican is an impossible task. For the mindset of a Mexican 'convinced of the fragility of terrestrial existence' is far removed from almost any twentieth century rationale.
When attempting to justify Aztec sacrifice, Knight follows the same line of thought as Smith, arguing again that despite the familiarity of Mesoamerican sacrificial behaviour, the extreme frequency of such behaviour shown by the Aztecs requires further investigation. The most common theory stresses political factors, factors related to the growth of the Aztec empire and its subsequent expansion into the largest and most powerful empire in the valley of Mexico by the middle of the fifteenth century. The origins of political sacrifice in Aztec society mirror those of religion - in that the Mexica learned from experience during their period of emergence - the value of political sacrifice. One major example of this occurred in the 1420's when the Mexica formed an alliance with the Tetzcoco and Tlacopan tribes. This period also saw the legitimization of the role of the tlatoani and the new ruling class.
Before the Mexica emerged as the dominant force in the valley of Mexico, they had played subordinate roles in other empires. In the early fifteenth century, the Tepenecs were the dominant empire in the region and they received Mexica tribute. In return, the Mexica made land gains and gained warfare experience fighting for the Tepenec leader Tezozomoc of Atzcapotzalco. By 1426 the Mexica were now vital allies more so than straight subordinates of the Tepenec Empire. Following the death of Tezozomoc, Maxtla assumed authority which led to struggles between the Tepenec and Mexica. New Mexica tlatoani, Itzcoatl refused to pay tribute and submit to the Tepenec leader on the scale that Maxtla expected. Finding allies in Netzahualcoyotl of Tetzcoco, who headed the allied force, and the people of Tlacopan, the Mexica helped take Atzcapotzalco in 114 days. The subsequent sacrifice of Maxtla 'shows how inseparable rulership, war, and human sacrifice were in ancient Mexican culture." The sacrifice of Maxtla was a stupendous event, where victorious warriors wearing their finest ensembles gathered to watch Netzahualcoyotl tear out the heart of the former Tepenec leader. This sacrificial event took place for more than one reason. On one level, Netzahualcoyotl could express his revenge. The mandatory religious justification offered the sleighed King's 'sacrificial human blood [regarded] as the primary ritual fertilizing agent, ensuring the earths regeneration." This sacrifice was also held on highly political grounds. The victorious states became sovereign and the ritual signalled the capture of land for the Mexica and its allies as well as signalling the indispensability of the ruling class.
Following the events of the 1420's, historians begin to focus on Aztec sacrifice as a form of political propaganda as much as a religious necessity, and this idea takes two forms. Firstly, within Aztec society, sacrificial rituals were carried out within a redistributive system, a system which made up the basics of the Aztec economy. Sacrificial victims were a basic commodity within the mass redistribution of goods. Paying tribute in human blood to the gods was obligatory, and such rituals may also have been designed to warn the watching commoners of the dangers of seditious behaviour against the ruling class.
Secondly, political sacrifices were necessary to show off the extreme power of the state and its gods. Foreign enemies would be forced to witness ritual killings of warriors captured from their state in order to receive the message of superiority. Fray Diego Duran translated a nahuatl account of the cruel sacrifice of the Huaxtecs at the hands of the Aztecs. Some of the prisoners had to try and defend themselves with wooden balls or feathered swords. Many tried to fight the priest who would approach with four others to strap them down and extract their heart. Each prisoner faced this ritual in turn, others were so afraid they killed themselves on a nearby stone. 'The lords from the provinces who had come to observe the sacrifice were shocked and bewildered by what they had seen and they returned to their homes filled with astonishment and fright." This type of human sacrifice could hardly fail to achieve its goal, as ethnic groups were forced to submit to the rule of the Aztec empire.
The most controversial theory used to explain Aztec sacrificial behaviour concerns cannibalism. Alan Knight believes that we should not reject Harners proposal to quickly, stating, like Harner, that the Aztec population lacked protein and suffered recurrent famines, which may have led to increased sacrifice in order to provide meat. Harner also claimed that corn and beans were sufficient as dietary fulfilment but only when eaten together, and that there was evidence of widespread cannibalism shown in the Spanish chronicles. Despite these points, many historians have directly attacked this conjecture. Sahlins stresses that dear, fish and birds were all available via hunting, while Harris launches a scathing attack, again stressing that while the Aztec world lacked grazing animals, the hunting and consumption of fish and duck provided an accessible source of animal protein.
Professor of Science at Wayne State University, Detroit, Bernard R. Ortiz de Montellano directly refutes Harners thesis, stating, 'the greatest amount of cannibalism.....coincided with times of harvest, not with periods of scarcity, and is better explained as a thanksgiving." He writes that Tenochtitlan received food as tribute from neighbouring peoples and coupled with intensive Aztec agriculture, the entire population was provided for. Most historians agree that some cannibalism took place, but do not concede that the need to eat their own was a reason for sacrifice.
Harner also argued that population pressures during a famine led to increased sacrifice, not particularly to provide food through cannibalism, but merely to decrease the population. Montellano again argues that in Mexico the Aztecs responded to famine by intensifying agriculture and conquering new lands.
Historian Inga Clendinnen reviews all of the aforementioned realities of human sacrifice in her Aztec Interpretation, placing special focus on the 'god impersonator' rituals and the commitment of the victim to achieve the desired theatrical effect. Clendinnen stresses the importance of Mexica festivals dedicated to the gods and how strictly the priests observed such religious occasions and public displays, as the victim, who may have been preparing for the ritual an entire year, walked proudly up the Death Path, 'detached from the imperfections of actuality, [providing] a free zone for fantasy.'
Clendinnen also attempts to justify sacrificial behaviour by attaching a label to all those killed in ritual, the designation of 'otherness.' The victims of sacrifice, be they warriors from hostile tribes, children, or social delinquents, are seen as humans. More so however, they are seen as strangers or outcasts whose ritual death was destined by the Aztec gods.
In final analysis, one definite fact remains; the casual everyday sacrificial behaviour of this civilisation, in whatever context it may have occurred, is a hard concept to grasp. With its 'terrible matter-of-factness we are given neither a secure footing for judgement nor a threshold for fantasy, so that curiosity sickens." Understanding how men could callously and with great regularity, design the deaths of other men on such a scale is a chilling thought. This task is made easier by looking at factors in tandem. Instead of using religion as a pretext for political domination, the two should be thought of in conjunction. Whilst it is likely that the ruling classes used sacrifice to exemplify their power, the dedication of Aztec priests toward their gods is too powerful a notion to ignore. Clendinnen agrees stating that, 'Enchantment and violence are typically presented as alternative strategies for the maintenance of social stability, but that distinction is not easily drawn in Tenochtitlan." The seemingly inhumane acts of human sacrifice, so distant and implausible a concept in our world represented the learned experiences and impact of cumulative influences placed upon the world of the Aztec and their empire.