During my time studying here, at L'cole Polytechnique in Paris, I have come into contact with undoubtedly one of the most gifted mathematicians of our time, Augustin-Louis Cauchy. Through his lectures and published work I have been given a valuable insight into many new and exciting developments in the theory of functions of a real variable.
Cauchy believes that mathematical work should be rigorous, and has been instrumental in raising the general expectation of how mathematics should be presented. The mathematical community here no longer just want to see solutions to problems; they also want strong evidence that the proposed solutions will actually hold. Cauchy, especially, is not happy with the way key concepts were defined in the past, so has tried to refine them, giving them a much higher level of precision. Take, for example, his definition of the indefinite integral, found in his Resum of 1823. Previously we have assumed the existence of the indefinite integral in order to derive the definite integral using the fundamental law of the calculus. Instead Cauchy reverts back to the way Leibniz originally regarded the indefinite integral as the sum of infinitesimal elements. He makes this formulation more precise, ending up with y = f  f(x)dx + constant. He is not afraid to break with what is regarded as common practice in order to build on past ideas. I respect him greatly for this since the only way mathematicians will make breakthroughs is by being prepared to think differently.
This does not mean that Cauchy's work is infallible or indeed totally rigorous. There are some inconsistencies in the quality of his work. In lectures he has shown many of his ideas on the concept of continuity, a major topic, including a proof of the Mean Value Theorem (Notes page 38). In this proof he introduces two very small numbers,  and , without stating assumptions about them in the original theorem. This maybe reflects his eagerness to present such important results; the benefit of spreading his knowledge outweighs the problem of minor lapses in rigour.
The most remarkable thing Cauchy has done is to completely reformulate the ideas of the calculus. As Newton did originally, he considers integration and differentiation as two independent processes, but gives his own, more exact, definitions - thus refuting the version that Lagrange came up with. He destroys the foundations of Lagrange's previous work by finding a function f(x) = e -x^2 + e -(1/x)^2 which does not agree with the expansion of its Taylor series. This contradicts Lagrange's claim that every function can be expanded in a Taylor series, on which he based his whole concept of the calculus. Although others, including Ampre (another lecturer here at L'cole Polytechnique), have questioned if Lagrange's argument was entirely correct, they have still sought to prove that functions are infinitely differentiable and admit a Taylor series. Hence Cauchy's work is a revelation. It has disproved something which has been assumed to be correct for so long, and has left people perhaps questioning the validity of previously concrete principles, wondering if they too could admit exceptions.
Cauchy has given us much stronger foundations on which to base our ideas of the calculus in future years. Having experienced many of his revolutionary ideas first hand, it has had a profound effect on the way I will structure my own work in the future; his meticulous approach is something every mathematician should try to emulate.