Anglo-American moral and political philosophy has traditionally been premised on "the widely accepted old faith that some form of utilitarianism, if only we could discover the right form, must capture the essence of political morality". Until quite recently, new theories of distributive justice emphasizing individual freedom, founded on some appeal to impartiality or fairness have supplanted theories based on utilitarian grounds. In particular, John Rawls's A Theory of Justice defends a conception of justice that centres on the notions of liberty and reciprocity. More strikingly, Rawls's developed this conception of "justice as fairness" as "an alternative systematic account of justice that is superior... to the dominant utilitarianism of the tradition".
Essentially, the essay will rest on the central argument that Rawls's conception of "justice as fairness" was well intended to be a superior alternative to the utilitarian conception of justice; however it was merely a useful alternative out of desirability rather than feasibility.
To begin with, Utilitarianism is a conception of justice that seeks to distribute benefits and burdens in a society based on the goal of maximising utility, defined as the satisfaction of desire. Linking this to the notion of justice; the principle of utility serves as the best principle for deciding between justice and injustice. In particular, J.S. Mill, an advocate of classical utilitarianism applied the "greatest happiness principle" to the notion of justice. J.S. Mill asserts that utility is indeed the most appropriate measure for justice since justice cannot be felt or sensed like sui generis perceptions such as taste or smell. Hence, debates about justice can only be resolved and measured by utility.
On the flipside, Rawls's conception of "justice as fairness" has two fundamental principles. The first is the Greatest Equal Liberty Principle which states that each person has an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with a like liberty for others. This includes the basic liberties such as political liberty, liberty of conscience and thought.
The second principle concerns the distribution of other "primary goods" such as income, wealth, power and authority. It is further segmented into two parts; each of which is also a principle. These two principles state that social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are
(a) Reasonably expected to be to everyone's advantage (Difference Principle)
(b) Attached to positions in society that are open to all (Fair Equality of Opportunity Principle)
According to Rawls, the violation of any of these principles is an injustice. Though it is important to note that the first principle is prior to the second, implying that justice in its highest form must safeguard liberty over social and economic advantages.
The Rawlsian conception of justice is definitely a useful alternative to the utilitarian conception of justice. The first difference between the two conceptions of justice is that the utilitarian approach does not consider how benefits and burdens are distributed in a society. Since Utilitarianism seeks to maximise the sum of utility over an entire society, even an unjust distribution that will achieve maximum utility is considered ideal. For example, it may be plausible that utility is maximised in a society which practices slavery.
In this respect, the Rawlsian conception of justice is a more desirable alternative. Rawls argues that the principle of utility can be extended only to individuals but not to society as a whole. Specifically, a society cannot be the sole decision maker who has the autonomy to shift benefits and burdens as it wishes in order to reach some greater good. Hence, the utilitarian inability to adequately explain our individual commitments to justice seems to enhance the appeal of Rawls's conception of justice.
Closely linked to the point above, the Utilitarian conception of justice also negates individualism and violates individual choice. The decision-making heuristic for Utilitarianism is derived from the perspective of a sole impartial ``perfect legislator'', which conflates the many diverse desire systems present in a society and imposes a single desire system by which to measure utility. Hence, Rawls's conception of justice is certainly more attractive as "justice as fairness" gives more room for individual choice and hence greater support to men's self respect. Another fellow critic of utilitarianism, Nozick also affirmed Rawls's view that the sacrifice of one individual for the greater social good does not bring due respect to a person as "a separate person, that his is the only life he has" .
Finally, this line of argument proposed by Rawls follows the social contractarian tradition. Instead of achieving justice by maximising general utility through a single interest, Rawls states that the principles of justice will have to be principles that "free and rational persons concerned to further their own interests would accept in an initial position of equality as defining the fundamental terms of their association". By this, it highlights the public nature and plurality of the principles of justice which have to be acceptable to all. And this conception of justice will generate its own support if it is derived out of public good will and consent.
Up till this point, it has been firmly established that Rawls's conception of justice is certainly a striking desirable alternative to the utilitarian conception of justice. However the degree of superiority of the former over the latter in terms of feasibility is questionable due to a combination of reasons.
Firstly, Rawls's position on justice has important features in common with utilitarianism's; which ironically exposes his arguments to very same objections that he levels against the utilitarian. Both views regard the concept of justice as a "derivative" status and must be viewed as "subordinate" to a "higher criterion" . Utilitarians believe in the principle of utility as the higher standard while Rawls's two principles are the "correct higher criterion" . Significantly, Nozick, classifies both the utilitarian and the Rawlsian principles of justice as end-result principles.
Most importantly, the two conceptions of justice converge when "justice as fairness" could be the most utilitarian result in a society, hence upholding Rawls's notion of justice together with the Utilitarian conception of an ideally just society. Clearly, there are many similarities as much as there are differences between the two, and the recognition of the former weakens the argument that Rawls has put forth an alternative theory, much less a superior one.
Secondly, how plausible is it that individuals would choose Rawlsian principles over Utilitarian principles? Rawls's formal aim is to show that the parties in the original position would prefer his own conception of justice. His justification was that due to the veil of ignorance in the Original Position, rational individuals are forced to choose the rules of society through "Maxim Strategy"; a rational individual who is ignorant of the structured society to come will maximise what one could get if they were in the minimum or worst off position. Hence it is the hypothetical and contextual position that exists to derive the principles of justice which are agreed to in an initial situation of fairness.
While the above situation is desirable for a state of justice to prevail, it is questionable how applicable this imaginary state of affairs is to the real world. After all, how does Rawls know how rational beings behave in the "original position"? He makes a serious assumption that everyone is rational and capable of a sense of justice. In all, he fails to put forth a theory of how society works, much less a feasible theory of how society ought to work.
Lastly, there are also some theoretical flaws in Rawls's argument. If we follow his argument that the veil of ignorance appears to "exclude any attempt to maximise expectations which would lead toward utilitarianism" , it would blind us to the fact that probability calculations are possible in the original position. There is no reason why one cannot use personal information (talents and capabilities) for calculating the likelihood of one's condition. Despite the veil of ignorance, the parties in the original position can still calculate to maximise general expectation and naturally incline toward utilitarianism. Furthermore, the notion of individual choice is merely an illusion if we are forced by circumstances to make the choice of Rawlsian principles over utilitarian principles. Important conditions laid down by Rawls are designed not only to simply the choice problem but also "to ensure the moral quality of the outcome". Hence, it seems that the conceptions of justice derived from his methodology stems out of prudence rather than from a genuine understanding of justice.
To end it off, it is valid to reiterate Rawls's complex attitude towards utilitarianism; it is an attitude that is marked by respect and areas of affinity as well as by sharp disagreements.
Indeed, the Rawlsian conception of "justice as fairness" is a more desirable alternative to the utilitarian conceptions of justice because it is ultimately a normative inquiry about a justice that ought to be or determines what ought to be. It is important that we value Rawlsian conception of "justice as fairness" as an achievement in itself and assess its success by his intentions of the writing together with its success as an alternative to another school of thought. However as much as we give credit to its idealistic worth, the Rawlsian conception has failed to be a feasible alternative to the Utilitarian conceptions of justice. In all, Rawls's conception of "justice as fairness" stands as a useful and desirable alternative to the utilitarian conception of justice, albeit an impractical one.