The aim of the experiment was to establish the order of a number of genes important in amino acid metabolism and sugar catabolism. Using conjugation, pieces of Escherichia coli (E. coli) chromosome were transferred from the donor strain to the recipient strain. As this occurs in a linear fashion in one direction, the mating pairs were broken apart at time intervals and plated. The plates were incubated for a week and from the appearance of the different number of colonies, the order of the gene transfer for the high frequency donor (Hfr) strain can be estimated.
Mutations are naturally occurring events in any genome and they can be point mutation, where a single base pair might be changed or more serious large-scale mutations, such as deletions, which involve removal of very long kilo bases of DNA. These mutations are one of many mechanisms that bring change into genome of a species. When the characteristic brought about by the mutation, allow the organism to better fit the changing environment, the organism survives and passes down the trait through reproduction, bringing about evolution. The estimated mutation rate of E. coli is 2.5x10 -3 mutations per genome replication due to a slightly inefficient repair mechanism. However, it takes a few generations for a rare beneficial mutation to dominate. The bacteria with the normal gene is known as the 'wild type' and the transfer of a 'wild type' gene to an organism with a mutation in that gene will ensure restoration of that gene activity due to recombination.
Genetic exchange permits new combinations of alleles. The three most common mechanisms of genetic exchange in bacteria are transformation, transduction and conjugation. Transformation is the process of genetic exchange between bacteria involving uptake of free DNA from environment. Transduction involves genetic exchange between bacteriophage, or virus and bacteria. Conjugation requires the intimate contact between the donor and recipient for genetic exchange. This horizontal gene transfer leads to evolution and the spread of multiple drug resistance. This gene transfer can be between members of the same species, between members of the same genus or even between very distantly related organisms. Conjugative plasmids are self-transmissible and only transfer between very closely related species of bacteria.
In conjugation, an F pilus from the donor is used to anchor a recipient to form a mating pair. The Fertility or F factor, which is present in the donor but not in the recipient (F-), was transferred through this pilus. Bacterial strains with the F factor integrated in their chromosomes are referred to as High Frequency Donor (Hfr) strains as they are capable of high efficiency chromosome transfer. The F factor in integrated in different positions and in different orientations in different Hfr strains. As the Hfr donate the chromosome in one direction, the orientation determines the direction of chromosome donations from the Hfr strain, starting at the F factor integration site. The distance between genes is related to the time between their transfer, thus the map of an E. coli chromosome is referred to as a temporal map as it is time-dependent.
In this experiment, conjugation was used to establish the order of genes and their distance apart through the degree of linkage between genes, or the recombination frequency. As large pieces of genetic material are transferred during conjugation, a rough mapping of the E. coli chromosome can be deduced from the order of gene transfer.
All the steps in the laboratory manual were followed. KL14 was chosen as the donor strain and UWE109 as the recipient strain. However, the cultures were left for a week instead as a-few-days growth was not enough for observation. Only a simple qualitative method was carried out was there were insufficient plates to do a full quantitative assay for recombination.
Graph 1 was drawn on a semi-log scale and it was observed that the absorbance increases with time for both the donor and the recipient strains. Lines of best fit were drawn for the exponential phase (from 20min onwards) for both cultures. The absorbance values for 60min (for both the donor and recipient strains) were not included as they were the only points out of norm. From 0 to 20min, the cultures were at the lag phase and thus the increase in absorbance was not huge. The absorbance values then increase sharply, exponential phase. The donor culture was transferred to the recipient culture and the absorbance was measured and was plated and taken as time 0. The culture was plated at time intervals (0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 min) and the growth for each quadrant was shown in table 3 below.
At 60min, plate 4 has more growth than plate 5. At 0min, plate 3 has more growth than either plate 3 or 7, but plate 7 has more growth than plate 3. Plate 6 has more growth than plate 1 at 0min. From table 3, the order of genes established was: threonine (plate 6), arginine (plate 1), xylose (plate 7), isoleucine and valine (plate 3), leucine (plate 4), proline (plate 5) and histidine (plate 2).
An uninoculated flask containing 5ml of LB was used to blank the spectrophotometer at 550nm.
As the recipient strain gained the genes containing the ability to grow in the absence of a specific nutrient in the selective media, growth would be observed on the plate, depending the time of the gene transfer. This ability is due to the presence of genes capable of synthesising the absent nutrient. From the results section, the order of genes established was: threonine (plate 6), arginine (plate 1), xylose (plate 7), isoleucine and valine (plate 3), leucine (plate 4), proline (plate 5) and histidine (plate 2). A more precise method is required to obtain a fine structure mapping of the chromosome, such as restriction enzyme treatment of the total DNA. The gene order can be confirmed by using different donor strains, or Hfr (high frequency donor) and comparing the gene order obtained from each strain.
The conjugation mix was incubated in a static water bath so that the mating pair will not be disrupted. The mating pairs are very fragile and easily broken apart. Nalidixic acid was included in all the selective plates to select against the donor strain and it also prevents further gene transfer from the donor to the recipient. Only the recombinant strain is resistant to nalidixic acid. If nalidixic acid was not included, the donor strain will also grow on the plates, thus the time for gene transfer cannot be deduced, as all the plates will show the donor phenotypes. Both the donor and the recipient strains were plated on the selective media to control for the presence of revertents, as point mutations can revert unlike deletions. Even though this interrupted mating technique is important for rough mapping, fine structure mapping of genes which are close together (such as leucine and proline) cannot be determined as the time difference for the transfer of those genes is very small.
In plate 6, the recipient quadrant of the plate showed growth even though both the donor and the recipient (the parental strains) were counter selected. This is due to reversions, which is a form of point mutation that is capable of being reversed so that the original sequence is restored and thus, is resistant to nalidixic acid and can grow without threonine. However, reversions can only take place for certain classes of mutations thus, several different types of mutant alleles are required to test for a reversion.
Through conjugation, the chromosome map of E. coli was deduced from time of gene transfer. The accuracy of the experiment cannot be confirmed, as a quantitative experiment was not carried out. Further tests need to be carried out to confirm the order of gene on the whole chromosome.