There is a claim that all facts inherent in the universe can be expressed in physical terms; that every thing in existence is explainable through physical facts. This view, known as phyisicalism, is found to be repulsive by many who feel that it somehow leaves out something very important.Things like hope, happiness, sorrow and even love can all be seen to be expressed in terms of chemicals in the bloodstream or physical patterns of neuron fire in the brain. We seem to be left with nothing at all, no matter how sacred, that cannot be explained in terms of physical facts.
However, Frank Jackson will not so readily hand over all facts to the realm of physical existence and comes up with a thought experiment to show that some things are beyond the ken of the physicalist. He tells a story about a super neurophysiologist named Mary, who has been confined, raised and taught in a black and white room; Mary knows every physical fact there is to know about human colour vision and colour in general; she knows in minute detail how the eye and brain work together once they have received a certain wave length to produce an experience, redness for example but she has never seen the colour red or had any other firsthand experiences of colour before.
One day Mary is let out of the room and is exposed to the world of colours, red for example. Suddenly Mary knows not only the wavelength and brain interactions associated with the colour red, she also knows what it is like to experience 'redness'. She has learned something new that no amount of teaching could ever show her. The argument therefore goes that if Mary had known all physical facts available but was still able to learn a new fact, the fact of what the experience of redness is like, then it follows that not all facts are physical because she has just learned a non-physical fact!
To further illustrate the point, Jackson comes up with another thought experiment, this time involving Fred. Now Fred has this amazing ability to distinguish between two different types of reds, let us call them red1 and red2, and he sees the distinction as clearly as we can see the distinction between yellow and blue. Jackson imagines that if neuroscientists were to scan his brain and find the extra little organelle that provided Fred with this amazing ability then a complete catalogue of its structure and workings is performed. The result is complete knowledge of all the physical facts that can be known about Fred's amazing new ability, yet no matter how much information of that type we gather, we will never know what it is like to experience red2. Not until we transplant or duplicate the organ in our own brains will we be able to know what it is like to see red2. Not until our point of view includes the ability to see red2 will we ever know what red2 looks like. The phyisicalist claim of being able to explain everything in terms of physical facts seems to be in grave danger, for it seems to be unable to ever explain to us what it is like to see red2.
By the use of these two thought experiments, Jackson is making a very powerful ontological claim; that there exist such things as non physical facts. This must be contrasted and separated from the very different epistemological claim that all knowledge can be expressed in physical terms. It must be noted that Jackson's claim and attempt to prove the claim are far bolder then just a simple epistemological one; he is attempting to go from a claim about knowledge to a claim about existence.
Jackson acknowledges this powerful stance he has taken by contrasting his stance to that of Thomas Nagel, expressed in his paper 'What it is like to be a bat'. In this paper, Nagel points out that bats can hear distance and shape rather then see it and that no amount of study on a bat's brain would answer the question 'what is it like to hear shapes?' There is something worth knowing there, but it is confined to the bats' point of view and can never be seen from our perspective, no matter how many physical facts we possess. But this is only a comment about the nature of knowledge, of how perspectival knowledge is only accessible through experience and not through physical facts. Jackson affirms this but also points to something else; the existence of non physical things which you can possess facts about. He names these things qualia.
Jackson's qualia are things like the hurtfulness of pain, the itchiness of itches and the redness of red; they are the way all these physically explainable things feel to us from our point of view. They are also inert and have no causal effect on anything that we can perceive. This view of qualia Jackson terms epiphenomenalism.
At first glance it seems counter intuitive; when you put your hand above a flame, surely it is the hurtfulness of pain that causes you to move your hand away? Surely qualia does affect the world? Surely without the hurtfulness of pain and the joyfulness of joy there would be no reason to get out of bed in the morning and so no action would take place. Jackson denies this, pointing out that action can be legitimately explained in terms of physical facts with no recourse to qualia needed. The qualia themselves are certainly caused, but they cause nothing. This can be plainly seen with a short thought experiment: Imagine a world, just like our own down to the minute particle, but devoid of consciousness and qualia. This world from the outside would function in exactly the same way, with absolutely no discernable difference. If we can take away qualia and nothing changes, then surely the presence qualia changes nothing!
There have been many responses to the epiphenomenalism of qualia, all of which Jackson seems capable of countering effectively, however his overall attack on physicalism has received far stiffer resistance. One particularly damning response to the knowledge argument Jackson proposes has been called the ability response. This response takes a closer look at what Mary gains when she leaves the black and white room. When she leaves the rooms Mary defiantly learns something; she learns what it is like to see red. The crux of the argument lies in the idea that 'knowing what it is like to see red' is in fact acquiring a new set of abilities, in particular, the ability to apply an indexical concept to the idea of red. Indexical concepts are words like 'I', 'you', 'this' and 'that', they pick out things in relation to the experiencer and refer things in relation to one's self. It makes no sense to apply an indexical concept to something that you have never experienced before; how can you put an experience you have never had in relation to yourself? I have never been to Paris and so to say 'this Eiffel tower' makes no sense, all I can sensibly say is 'the Eiffel tower', because that does not index it to me.
Mary now has the new ability to go 'this is red', pointing inside of her to her newly acquired experience, but the idea of a new ability is problematic for those who would suggest that abilities exist even if the opportunity to use them never occurs. For example, there is no problem with the idea that Bob has the ability to swim even if he has never seen a large body of water in his life, and by the same token Mary surely has all the abilities associated with colour vision (her eyes and brain work perfectly) even is she has never had the chance to experience colour before. Surely this response has gone wrong somewhere?
Though intuitively pleasing, I believe this criticism of the response to be mistaken; the ability to apply indexical concepts to things cannot logically exist before you actually experience the thing in question. To apply an indexical concept to anything you must be able to reference it to yourself; indexical concepts are inextricably bound to points of view. The apple close by is 'this apple', where as the cloud far away is 'that cloud'. The use of these expressions paints the object in question at a certain relation to the viewer, and just like no measurement can be taken without at least two points of reference, so too cannot an indexical concept be made without the subject being made reference to and the referee themselves.
Mary may well have gained the ability to sensibly say 'this is a red experience' and presumably she had also learned that 'this is a red experience'. But what exactly are we saying when we say 'this'? Jackson seems to understand the 'this' in an objectual way, saying that we are pointing inwards at an object called qualia when we say 'this'. If that is accepted then the ability response doesn't seem to make any headway in proving wrong Jackson's theory; non physically explainable things still exist; we seem to point to them when we apply indexical concepts to then by saying 'this is red'.
Conversely, if the 'this' is interpreted from a perspective point of view then all reference to qualia as objects dissipates and there is no danger of learning facts about them. By taking a perspectival view on the nature of the new thing that Mary gains we are thereby suggesting that no new facts have been learned but rather that a new perspective on old fact has been achieved. The physicalist must now show that the objectual point of view is unsustainable if they should want to save their theory, and Daniel Dennett does just that.
Mary is said to know all the physical facts about colour vision, and so presumably she will know the physical facts about what her brain will be doing when it is subjected to the colour red. If Mary, in her room, is given a banana dyed red and is told that it is yellow, she will immediately know that it is not yellow because the physical state of her brain conforms to the state of redness rather then yellowness. Having never seen red or yellow before she would, with only physical facts, be able to tell that an object is red and not yellow. So the new experience cannot be a new knowledge because, for example, she already has the knowledge to distinguish between red and yellow. If she can already know a difference between experiencing red and experiencing yellow, then what new fact has she gained? Yes, now she can know this from a phenomenal point of view, but a new point of view and new ways of knowing something is not the same as knowing a new fact. The 'this' in the sentence 'this is red' cannot be referring to new object of knowledge because such knowledge was already possessed by Mary.
The ability response seems to have succeeded in defining away the knowledge argument with clever arguments showing that 'what it is like to see red' can be seen to mean 'the ability to apply an indexical concept to red'. But if we take a closer look, have they really proved this? Or have they simply shown that a red experience also creates in the experincer new abilities? Just because Mary gains new abilities from her new experience does not mean that is all she has gained, nor can it really answer the question of whether having knowledge of an experience is or is not knowledge of a fact. It is perfectly reasonable to imagine that new facts can bring about new abilities, gaining propositional knowable of what the addition sign means enables you to solve the question 'what is 2 + 2?'
There seems to be one idea that both sides will agree on; that Mary gains a new experience when leaving the room. The conclusions we draw seem to wholly be grounded on how we interpret the word 'experience'. If we are to say that a new experience is in itself a new fact, then we can then proceed to say that non physical facts can exist. The claim that experiences are facts in themselves does not seem so counter intuitive; 'it is a fact that this is what a red experience feels like from a personal point of view'. That said, experience could just as readily be defined as a non-factual thing by suggesting that facts must be held in the public domain for them to be considered facts at all. Perhaps then we must conclude that this whole philosophical dilemma has just arisen out of problems with our fuzzy use of language. Not a stratifying conclusion, but one that I think Wittgenstein would be very happy with.