I have recently returned from my year on the continent and my, what a year it has been! I was lucky enough to come across a copy of Jacobi's Fundamenta nova theoriae functionum ellipticarum, and although I was not completely familiar with all of the Latin it certainly sparked up some excitement for these new developments in elliptic functions. I am aware that Legendre has worked on the subject a good forty years now so one feels inclined to ask, why did he not make these discoveries himself? Why is it only now that others are beginning to take an interest in his work?
It is natural that once Legendre recognised new interest in his own field of work that he would give his support; the attention that elliptic integrals have received has undoubtedly led to this widespread recognition of the subject. I realise that only in the last decade has Cauchy taken this brave stance in completely defining complex variables and their properties - though I am not entirely convinced that Jacobi has read his work - so perhaps Legendre's mere acquaintance with this concept is why he did not complete the study himself.
Legendre's ideas have been totally reformulated in the last few years, the main ideas stemming from that of inversion: the idea that when regarding the integral  one can define  while allowing v to be complex. Jacobi has shown the existence of transformations of elliptic functions of every degree, however on working through his calculations it becomes evident that without first inverting the integral this claim could not have been proved. One ponders who originally had the idea of inversion: the mathematician Abel had also developed the concept publishing his first thoughts in 1827; one wonders if in fact Jacobi took his inspiration from him.
There is a new fight for understanding complex functions, which I am conscious has not been resolved yet, but I recognise the effect that taking elliptic integrals in the complex field may have with inspiring knowledge on the subject. Presently few functions of a complex variable are known other than trigonometric functions - Abel presented a theory of them in close relation with elliptic functions in his Recherches - so it is unsurprising that mathematicians are yet to have a full understanding of complex functions. However Jacobi's Fundamenta Nova certainly provides a starting point in the search by allowing elliptic integrals to have complex endpoints, thus providing stimulus for further research into the theory of functions of a complex variable.
Whether or not the two mathematicians were indeed taking ideas from one another, inversion has led to knowledge on double periodicity, ultimately leading Abel to a family of polynomial equations with the property of being solvable by radicals. It is clear that with the foundations of Legendre, Abel and Jacobi have been able to pave the way for future mathematics; it is just a shame that Abel did not live to enjoy the honour of receiving the Grand Prize.
I hope you have found my interests equally as inspiring.
Yours sincerely,
Your ever diligent student