The purpose of this report is to give an assessment of CAD (Computer Assisted Design) Tools in comparison to manual design techniques. This will be, in part, achieved by considering a case study of a chain wheel from a bicycle. The manual design techniques that would be suitable for an analysis of the stresses/displacements within the component will be discussed, and then compared to a CAD examination of the problem. Followed by a critical assessment of CAD versus manual methods.
All bicycles have a chain wheel, the purpose of which is to transmit the power from the pedals of the cyclist to the chain. The chain then transmits power to the rear wheel, and hence moves the bike. A photo of this is shown as follows,
For a chain wheel to fulfil its design requirements it must be able to do the following things:
* Connect to the cranks, which transmit the force of the user from the pedals.
* Transmit the rotational movement produced by the cranks to a linear movement of the chain.
In the design of bicycles, as with the optimisation of many products, it is desirable to produce a component that does what it is designed to do, whilst minimising the mass of material used to make it. This will not only reduce material costs for the manufacturer, but in the case of a bike, will reduce the weight of it, and hence improve the performance.
In this design situation it is desired to find the highest areas of stress and deflection within the component, in order that the component can be improved.
Manual design techniques for working out the areas of stress in a component, involve the making of prototypes and then the testing of them. This can be done in two ways. These are testing until failure, or the use of polarising lenses to visualise the areas of stress without failure.
In order to test a prototype until failure it should be made out of the material that the final component will be made out of. This prototype can then be tested under a specific loading situation until it fails. The result of this is that the place in which it fails can be seen, and therefore improved in a further design. This process can then be continued until it is felt that an optimal design has been reached.
In order to test a prototype with the use of polarising lenses, it is necessary to produce the prototype out of a transparent material, such as Perspex. This is achieved in some circumstances using Rapid Prototyping techniques, which build the component out of resin using a laser. The transparent prototype produced can then be put in a specific loading situation, and then viewed through a polarising lense. The areas of stress can then be seen. An example of the results that can be achieved are shown in the following photo,
Both of these processes could easily be applied to the design situation specified, and it would most likely reveal significant improvements that could be made to the design.
It will now be illustrated how modern CAD technology can be used as an alternative to the manual techniques discussed previously. This will be done by producing a 3D model of a chain wheel in the computer program SolidWorks, and then using a tool called CosmosWorks in order to illustrate the stresses and deflection in the wheel.
Firstly, a 3D model is made of the chain wheel, which is shown in Appendix 1. This model is based loosely upon the chain wheel shown in Photo 1.
Secondly, a model of the forces that the chain wheel would be subject to is applied, as shown in Appendix 2. This assumes that the wheel is fixed by the 5 holes to the cranks, and that a force is exerted on the teeth for 180 degrees of the circumference of the wheel. It also assumes that the force is exerted at a tangent to the wheel circumference. This force has been estimated to be of the order of 103 N, however this can be assumed to be fairly insignificant in terms of the model as a whole, as the areas of highest stress and deflection are desired, rather than the actual magnitude of these.
Thirdly, the model has then been set as being made of Aluminium, and then a finite element mesh has been created, followed by the processing of the finite element model.
This produced the illustrations of predicted stress and deflection as shown in Appendices 3 and 4.
The predicted stress diagram shows that the highest amounts of stress occur between the chain ring teeth, and also the curved edges. In a design process it would have to be decided if these were acceptable areas to have stress occurring, and then the design could be improved accordingly. The diagram also shows that there is a minimal amount of stress on the 5 sections of the ring closest to the centre. In order to illustrate how mass reduction could be applied in CAD, these areas have been taken out, and the FEA repeated, giving the new stress diagram in Appendix 5. This illustrates that mass reduction can take place without drastically reducing the strength of the product.
The predicted deflection diagram gives another indication of the areas within the chain ring that could be considered as weak, and therefore gives another opportunity to improve the product.
It can therefore be seen from this brief investigation into CAD that it is a powerful tool in the design process.
Both CAD and manual methods of component design have their relative merits and flaws.
CAD is in comparison to manual methods a very fast design process, where instead of producing real prototypes, prototypes can be made on screen in a fraction of a second. This not only cuts down on time, but also material and labour costs in producing the prototypes. This stage of prototyping can also be automated to a certain extent in a CAD program, with such features as optimisation tools. For example, in the design situation discussed, the maximum stresses or deflections in the chain ring can be set, and then after a series of iterations, a design with the least amount of mass that still upholds to these conditions can be derived. This process done using manual methods, such as by making prototypes and by testing, would be significantly longer and more expensive. However, it is fairly likely that the same conclusions would be found at the end of each process.
Finite element models within the CAD programs are subject to a great deal of personal judgement when they are applied. This is because the user has to decide what kind of forces to use, where to apply them, along with how to restrain the object, as well as many other factors. Also, the final values for stresses that are calculated are extremely unlikely to be the same as in real life. It is possible that they could be orders of magnitude out of the real values, due to the unreliability of FEA. With the manual methods of stress analysis described above, it would be possible to put the chain ring, for example, in the exact situation that it would operate in, thereby reducing the element of personal judgement to a fairly high extent. This would in many ways make the tests done more relevant, as it would be known for sure whether the object was suitable for the purpose for which it was intended.
Also, if a series of prototypes are made within a CAD program, then it may mean that the designer will not get 'feel' for the object. By this it is meant that the designer will know what an object will look like in 3D, and also how it will react in certain circumstances, but this may be no substitute for actually holding the object, which is what you do when using manual methods. This may, as a consequence, hold back the design in some way, where it may progress further if CAD was not being used.
It should also be considered when using a high amount of CAD design, how to organise and use the data collected in an efficient way. This is because it is easy in manual design to throw away and forget about designs, yet even easier on a computer, due to the constant editing that takes place on a single design. Therefore, it would be advisable for the management of a project to keep track of all major design refinements that take place, so as to make it easier for the project to backtrack to an original thought, if the situation so occurs.
In conclusion, there are many plus and minus points of both CAD and manual design techniques, and there are features of each that are desirable in any design process. It is can therefore be advised that a combination of these two techniques should be sought, perhaps with a fast preliminary CAD process, followed by a manual refinement and validation phase, with continued interchanging and collaboration between techniques until the optimum design is found.