In this essay I shall be analysing the above statement, discussing it with particular regard to the engineering industry. Factors such as free will and the creativity of engineers will also be explored. The engineering codes are what govern and promote morality amongst the engineering industry. These codes are aimed to deal with the issues that engineers must confront on a daily basis. Due to the sensitivity and risk contained in their work, great concern must be taken to follow these codes, but to what extent?
The statement focuses on engineers having a lack of autonomy within their work. This is controversial, as it promotes a lack of distinction between the creativity that engineers possess. In some opinions, it is vital for engineers to exhibit this creative freedom. "Loss of autonomy is a clear indicator that a fundamental fracture has occurred in the professional-client relationship."1 This supporting view displays the further idea that engineers need to be able to behave autonomously if they are to prevail within their careers, and hence their organisations. It is the autonomous view which gives engineers differentiation, and allows personal ethics to be exhibited. However, the author of the statement may disagree with this argument due to the conflicting ideas which it may create within a working environment, and could allow leniency to be granted and possibly abused in sensitive situations. Autonomy in this kind of environment can also lead to breaches in public safety when engineers do not act responsibly as the codes of ethics advise them to. In which cases, it should be considered beneficiary to precisely follow the codes of conduct, due to the overwhelming negative outcomes which could otherwise be faced.
The view should also be established that autonomous thinking within organisations can lead to positive conflicts. Engineering is recognised as a topic which explores research and creates breakthroughs in society. These breakthroughs can often be a consequence of taboos being broken and investigated. A major example of this was the first genetic cloning of Dolly the sheep in 1996. This technological advancement caused masses of controversy within the engineering and scientific industry as well as controversy from the general public. This resulted from pressure placed on the relevant scientific boards for this experiment to go ahead. Although some may feel that the genetic engineering carried out was unethical and possibly immoral, there is no doubt that it has advanced the learning and research on these issues, and has opened new channels to explore, such as genetic manipulation in medicine. Acting precisely as the statement in question describes would not have permitted these sort of actions to take place, because dated codes and ethical criteria do not allow for new views to be inputted, and hence for new controversial advances of this kind to be made.
The stem of conflicts on the topic of ethics arises from the basic interpretation of the definition of ethics itself:
Some definitions class the study of ethics as merely a collection of theories and opinions being collated, where others detail it as a set of rules which are to be obeyed. This causes complications with the basic understanding of the statement in question. Normative engineering ethics is the discussion of alternative theories. These theories are not law abiding, but serve as a facility to gain insight into problems and moral responsibilities in the engineering industry. In this case, it is not possible to refer to a course in ethics as simply a teaching of specific codes which are to be learnt. Ethics being taught in this way are set to act as a way for personal views to be developed. This assists engineers to be able to confront future situations which they may become involved in. Conversely, when ethics are considered as "right conduct", it may well be satisfactory for them to be mastered, if they are intended to benefit the engineer in their studies. However, not all situations can be accounted for by the codes which have been set. This can cause problems and debate over the correct ethical route to take; a difficult task if a firm personal moral basis has not been developed.
The National Society of Professional Engineers has a specific board dedicated to deal with arising ethical issues. This clearly shows that there is a considerable need to assess ethical situations. I feel that this also proves that the codes of conduct that are currently set are not able to accommodate for every ethical decision which may arise. Therefore it may be necessary to confront the situation. This problem that the engineering codes can not be used in every situation is apparent in cases of conflicting ethics. The case below shows how two engineers held conflicting ethics, and this placed public welfare at risk as well as the engineering careers of both men.
This case clearly demonstrates the lack of collaboration between the two engineers. This resulted in the serious consequence of public safety being risked. The dilemma that aroused here was the conflict of views by each party. The points below are taken from the NSPE codes of ethics.
There is a contradiction of ethics in this case, as acting for the employer would lead to Sam Wilson acting against public welfare. In this case, Mr. Wilson opposed this rule, and decided to follow the moral obligation which he felt was more important; to put public health and safety first. This demonstrates that personal ethical development was needed to ensure that the correct decision was obtained. A lack of autonomy from Mr Wilson here could have resulted in serious malpractice. However, this also displays the need for a universal following of the ethical codes, as in this case only one party was following them correctly.
Engineering is one of many subjects which is constantly growing in terms of research and new information that is made available. This has the effect of introducing new ethical problems. Therefore, some feel that it is not possible to devise a set of codes or rules to dictate an evolving topic. Students would not necessarily experience the long term benefits on a course in ethics, if it did not influence them to construct their own views and principles for future exigencies. Nevertheless, the idea that engineering codes are practised on a global scale gives the great advantage that everybody is following the same fundamental principles. This helps to create a universal moral attitude towards situations, which in turn benefits the public, and directs engineers on how they should conduct research. Although these codes help, they do not necessarily denote the exact way in which a situation should be handled. Arthur E Schwartz from the NSPE General Counsel remarks that, "Except in the most basic circumstances, codes of ethics do not provide 'answers' or 'solutions' as such to ethical dilemmas faced by engineers, but they do provide guideposts." This quote is useful to summarise the relevance of the codes with reference to the statement, as it describes how the codes are important, but to do not always dictate the exact way in which a circumstance should be approached.