Jaguar is a highly reputable manufacturer of sophisticated luxury saloon and estate motor vehicles. The sale of these vehicles relies heavily on the respect and status that they maintain in the consumer market, which has been accomplished by a build up of trust and quality since 1922 2. The Jaguar name is owned by the parent company; Ford, who, although no longer producing vehicles in the UK, owns a share in the US market of 18.8%- the second biggest market leader in the industry 1.
The car market that Jaguar has based itself in is highly competitive, with new innovation and technology creating new levels of competitiveness; for instance, future fuels such as bio diesel, and the latest in-car technology. It is difficult for new entrants to gain access into the market, mainly due to the UK market share being dominated by the top 5 producers, with an overwhelming gross share of 68% in 2004. Other barriers to entry will be discussed later. These 5 manufacturers; Nissan, Toyota, Honda, BMW and Peugeot, are well established competitors, with Nissan having a net profit in 2004 of 512 billion yen 1. Other manufacturers, who are to be noted, include General Motors, Daimler/Chrysler, Fiat, Fuji Heavy Industries, Hyundai, Renault, Porsche, and Volkswagen. Between them, the manufacturers stated own the rights to over 70 1 automotive brands.
The car industry is still expanding, and with new ideas entering, we are set to see a rise in the market adoption of the major firms. Different aspects of the market are generating alternative rises and falls relating to the Market Adoption Curve with reference to the Next Bench Syndrome. As discussed earlier, new technology such as bio diesel is being heavily invested in at present, and would be represented by the "Question Mark" as it is at the beginning of the market life cycle, and is not yet returning profits greater than the invested amount. However, as a whole, the car industry, including Jaguar, could be considered as a "Cash Cow" or "Rising Star" due to the money being invested, and a forecast of a growth of 3%1 in the market between 2004 and 2009. This is also determined from the BCG matrix system, which determines the majority of automotive firms as having a low market growth rate, yet a large market share.
As stated earlier, it is difficult for new entrants to enter into the automotive market due to the massive presence of the main firms. Michael Porters' Five Strategic Market Forces include Barriers to entry and Barriers to exit. These barriers involve cost, regulations and man power. To establish a competitive company, huge sums of money are needed to produce all the necessary measures to begin production. These include the actual manufacturing equipment and factories, as well as the huge marketing campaign which must be mounted in order to gain interest and respect from consumers. There is also the matter of having to follow government rules concerning safety and emissions which must be confronted at the design stage. Finally, a network of partners and dealerships must be recognised in order to create a retail strategy. There are also exit barriers which must be fulfilled if the company wishes to leave the market. These include the implications of warranty's and after sales service, which must continue for the contracted period.
There are core competencies which provide companies with strengths that no other company can compete with. In Jaguars' case, these core competencies are in the form of their highly regarded brand name and heritage. This is an extremely difficult factor to compete against, as it leads consumers to devote themselves to a particular firm. This feature allows Jaguar to compete in non price competition against some of its rivals, as it distinguishes them from other manufacturers, and hence helps them to avoid price competition 1, where they must lower their prices in order to compete against others. If a new company was founded to compete with Jaguar, they would have to compete in price competition before a leading brand name was established, and would not have the major advantage that Jaguar do in becoming a main order winner.
The core competencies discussed, also lead to demand advantage in terms of being elastic or inelastic. Due to the advantage of being a well established brand, Jaguar can decide the price which they wish to set for their products, and do not necessarily need to always change their price in consideration for the consumer. Therefore, they can select to have their products situated in the more expensive end of the market through this inelastic demand. See Fig 1 for an estimated graph of Jaguar's inelastic demand.
If a new company were to be set up, it would be advised that it must compete with Jaguar through different core competencies, such as new technology. This method of differentiation avoids having to contend with brand name of Jaguar. Another method which could be considered is to compete via low cost, as this would attract a different type of consumer, and would avoid a lot of competition from Jaguar.
In respect to the comments and analysis made, I would conclude that the best option would be to acquire the company instead of contending against them, as it would be difficult to create a similar image as Jaguar in a short time, and also for the reasons concerning the huge cost that would be involved in research and development of the firm that would be required.