Undoubtedly, there are many companies that provide interesting case-studies for a discussion of their strategic marketing planning and the way that they have affected or been affected by the international marketing environment, its changes and its trends. Toyota with the implementation of Lean Manufacturing and Motorola with the adoption of Six Sigma principles are only two of the most well-known examples.
However, this assignment is based on easyJet, a European Airline Industry which, by using a pioneering strategy, had a significant impact on the way that European airlines do business.
The current assignment initially examines the company and its strategy. Following on, under the perspective of macro-environment, the main events and trends that have affected the European aviation market are presented and analysed. Moreover, micro-environment of easyJet is defined, and, in order to provide a clearer picture of the company, a SWOT analysis is presented. Furthermore, possible future events and trends and the way that marketeers should respond to them are examined and lastly, the conclusions drawn up from this analysis are set out.
Among the main events and trends that have affected the European Airline Industry, Sweeney N. (2003) focuses on the following ones:
Moreover, the Expansion of the EU to include ten more countries (Economist, 2004), is one more significant event. Lastly, one should not fail to take into account the increasing environmental consciousness among consumers.
Following on, the abovementioned events and trends are going to be analysed under the perspective of Macro-environment.
According to Adcockal. (1998, p. 32) the Macro-Environment consists of uncontrollable variables such as Social, Technological, Economical and Political ones (also known as STEP), which companies have little influence over.
According to Adcockal. (1998, pp. 34-36) a company's micro-environment consists of some very important elements such as: The Company, the Competitors, the Suppliers, the Publics, the Marketing Intermediaries and the Customers.
Although in the present assignment some of these elements have already been analysed (e.g. the Company, see 1.1, 1.2), many of them require a further analysis in order to fully describe the marketing environment.
According to Adcockal. (1998, p. 132), '4Ps' is the abbreviation for 'Product', 'Price', 'Place' and 'Promotion'. In order for this assignment to be complete, there must be an analysis of the effect of each of these four elements of marketing mix to the policy of easyJet.
According to Adcockal. (1998, p.333), the main purpose of SWOT analysis is firstly to find important data concerning a company's strategy and secondly, to classify this data into its main categories; Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats.
Dibbal. (1996, p. 30) suggest that SWOT analysis can provide "a clear picture of the business's situation and where action is required to maximise opportunities and minimise threats and weaknesses".
A SWOT Analysis for easyJet is presented on the following table:
The past main events and trends of the marketing environment have been already discussed, but what are the possible future events and trends in the market?
Undoubtedly, environmental issues are critical since an increasing number of people are becoming environmentally sensitive. Thus, it is important for easyJet to implement any future environmental legislation, as an environmental-friendly image can work effectively in promoting easyJet's sales.
Furthermore, since new airlines will probably try to enter the low-cost airline market (i.e. subsidiaries of traditional companies) and the majority of easyJet's customers could not be characterised as brand loyal, easyJet must not only continue offering high-quality services at the same price, but also it must find ways to deter this entrance.
In addition, Dibbal. (1996, p. 53) suggest that it is crucial for market leaders to keep a balance between protecting their existing position and searching for a new market share. If one examines easyJet as part of easyGroup, one could realise that Mr. Haji-Ioannou has tried to implement the strategy of keeping its market position and trying to find new market shares using easyGroup's companies (new products/ services).
However, entering a new market with a new product or service is not always the safest 'path' for a company's future development, although this strategy possibly has the greatest potentials.
Finally, from the SWOT analysis, it is obvious that easyJet should take full advantage of its Strengths and try to make the most of its Opportunities. Its established policy and the fact that its flights cover a big part of Europe could play an important role for its future growth. At the same time however, the fact that most of the airlines use yield management to increase their sales it is probably a drawback. Moreover, taking into account that the European aviation market is very competitive, one could argue that the future potential of the company is not so promising.
According however to Sweeney N. (2003, pp. 12-13), there are still great potentials for the airlines due to the fact that many European markets (esp. Central and Eastern Europe) are still quite unexploited. Moreover, he states that
All these contradictory data make marketeers' task even more difficult. However, what it is considered very important for easyJet's potential growth is:
The conclusions drawn from this research can be set out by answering two questions that have probably come up.
One may wonder why easyJet performed so well, especially when so many other airlines went bankrupt. The British Chartered Institute of Marketing have defined marketing as, "...the management process responsible for identifying, anticipating and satisfying customer's requirements profitably." (Adcockal. 1998, p.3)
It is clear that easyJet succeeded because it effectively implemented the aforementioned definition. easyJet identified people's need to travel inexpensively, anticipated the demand for affordable tickets and eventually satisfied customers' needs. It foresaw a 'market gap' and although it promoted a rather common 'product' (flight ticket), the 'philosophy' and the operations that lay behind it were particularly innovative.
Furthermore, according to Proctor (2000, p. 16) "An important dimension to strategic market management is to be proactive rather than simply reactive to environmental change".
easyJet achieved its goals by an efficient proactive strategy and managed to remain a market leader by putting into effect various innovative strategies. It also managed to keep up with the different social trends (i.e. green issues) and in some way, easyJet promoted in Europe the trend of booking flight tickets on-line.
Secondly, one may wonder how easyJet managed to become one of the market leaders in such a competitive environment. According to Proctor (2000, p. 2), "Competition involves finding a different way to satisfy customers from other companies in the market place". easyJet accomplished this, by reforming the traditional way of doing business and by finding alternative low-cost means of satisfying customers.
Finally, the future development of easyJet will be probably based on the same 'tried and tested' principles. However, the increasingly competitive aviation market necessitates constant vigilance and careful marketing strategy, always taking into account consumers' needs and always seeking the most profitable way to satisfy them.