The concept of creativity over the last years has attracted much attention both from academia and industry. Andriopoulos (2003) -based on his study of three successful creative organisations- mentions that modern companies have realised the importance of enhancing creativity, and making it an integral part of their culture in order to gain a competitive advantage over their rivals. Moreover, Dougherty (1996, p.174) supports the aforementioned opinion by adding that creativity is thought to be the main attribute for developing viable new products/services, improving output quality and revitalizing "mature businesses".
This paper focuses on the key-factors required for a creative organisation, followed by the identification of key-barriers to implementing these factors, and an analysis of the ways to overcome these barriers. Finally, mind-maps for both the key-factors and the key-barriers can be found in the appendices.
The impact of efficient product development processes on successful product introductions is highlighted by Zirger and Maidique (1990), who state that efficient processes are key-factors for the prosperity and growth of manufacturing firms. Furthermore, Cooper (1990, p.44) pinpoints that leading "new products from idea to market faster and with fewer mistakes" is the key for successful companies.
The aforementioned statements justify the significant role of product development processes for a successful company. Under this perspective and in order to answer the assigned question, three product development processes are selected and described. Furthermore, the similarities and their differences are identified, and finally, the reasons that forced industries to develop these processes are discussed.
The goal of the particular case study was the development of a new product/ service. The team's first meeting was basically focused on finding existing market gaps, selecting a proposed one and trying to find ways to satisfy this gap. Although different proposals were heard during the meeting, the team's final choice was based on the lack of transportation inside universities and the ways that these gaps could be satisfied. In the second meeting an evaluation of the various proposals was conducted, and the development of a service of renting bicycles was selected. The next meetings were focused on developing the idea, calculating the developing costs, establishing final details (i.e. target price) and considering future potentials of the team's proposal.
The efficient communication and cooperation among team-members was the most significant strength of the team. All the meetings were completed on time, and team-members were participating equally to the various processes. The members came up with different ideas -from rather common to very wild ones- and tried to avoid expressing their disapproval of some opinions heard. Conducting fertile conversations substituted processes such as the one proposed from Pugh S., and in general, the team's final choices and proposals were agreed upon unanimously. Finally, members' willingness to participate and suggest solutions helped the team's effort in completing the task in a satisfactory way.
On the other hand, the team's main weakness was the difficulty faced coming up with a truly innovative product. The team did not succeed in finding a genuinely creative idea; however, since the time to come up with and develop a new idea was limited, and according to Amabile (1998, p.82) "creativity may be slow-going", the team can be partly excused.
Finally, the identification of the learning outcomes of this case study is important. Firstly, the participation on the case study made clear how difficult it is to identify a market gap and come up with a truly innovative product/ service, especially under time pressure. Participating in a multi-ethnic team and trying to make this team work efficiently, was the second major challenge and significant lesson learned. Communication and cooperation between people who do not speak the same language, come from different educational and cultural backgrounds and hence different perspectives, complicates the whole effort. However, the shared excitement and the willingness to participate overcame all these barriers. Participating in the process of brainstorming was also a major learning outcome. The interaction between the team's members and the way that one idea could instigate another, was truly impressive. Finally, an important learning outcome was to avoid the 'temptation' of criticizing other peoples' ideas, and to step back and see problems from a different point of view without being affected by one's prior knowledge and experiences.
In conclusion, the participation in this case study proved to be an invaluable experience, providing the opportunity to experience the difficulties that the product development process entails, but at the same time giving the chance to feel the excitement of being part of an ambitious project.