The main objective of this report is for me to understand how the two seven segment displays on the M16C microprocessor are driven on a time multiplexed basis, which output pins of the microprocessor are required to activate both the individual segments of the seven segment displays and how to activate a particular display device along with the required voltage levels. As well as this I must understand how manipulate code to rotate one segment of the LED1display clockwise, then displaying all of the segments simultaneously and then displaying only the decimal point.
I achieved this by investigating how to use HEX code in a lookup table to display the desired segments at the correct time.
I managed to display the output specified in the briefing sheet.
The aim of this laboratory was to write a program for the M16C microcontroller to rotate one segment of the LED1 clockwise then output all of the segments simultaneously then displays only the decimal point and repeats.
Code was written using the IAR Embedded Workbench software. A look-up table for the LEDs in terms of bytes was required as well as defining the input/output ports and code to switch the correct LED on.
The objective of the report was to enhance knowledge of extended C programming code, specifically in this case the code required to control the M16C microcontroller.
When the program is run, LED1 displays segments A on LED1, but not on LED2. The segment rotates clockwise around the seven segment display. All LED segments are then displayed for twice as long. The decimal point is then lit. Segment A is then lit again and the process repeats.
During this laboratory I have learnt how the two seven segment displays are driven on a time multiplexed basis. I have also learnt which output pins of the microprocessor are required to activate both the individual segments of the seven segment displays and activate the particular display device along with the required voltage levels.
I now know how to manipulate the output ports of the M16C microprocessor to display anything I want to on the seven segment LED displays and the theory behind it.