In recent years, most multinational organisations are facing inefficient corporate governance due to a failed information management. The crowded information is incapable to drives the entire business operation into a harmonize circumstance. The purpose of this report is to address the recognition of the benefits from an effective information management system on strengthen the corporate governance. The report begins by outline briefly the conceptual and strategic aspects of information management within the organisational setting, and then the relationship between information management and corporate governance will be presented. Subsequently, the benefits of implementing the effective information management system will be explored by analysing. Finally, a range of recommendations takes account of an information governance framework as the benchmark, as well as an electronic information management system.
Information is meaningful data received from internal or external sources in any format. Information management is an administration of information, aim to design and improve an information handling system across the organisation, through utilizing information science's theories, strategies and techniques (Pearce, 2005. para 6).
Nowadays, the management of the information is broader than maintaining a centralized control on files registry and records management. In addition to paper documents management, the multimedia and electronic objects that combine image and audio are also evolved. Information is embodied by document to represent business activities; record is a subset of documents and provides evidence; and those records appraised as having continuing uniqueness value will be classified as archives (e.g. annual reports, certificates of incorporation, patents) (McLeod, 1990, p184) It includes records management conducted by records managers, archives management by archivists, publications management by librarians and database management by information systems managers. (Records Management Principles and Practice, 2006, para 2)
Corporate governance conducts business activities by harmonizing the interacted performance and balancing the interests among senior management, shareholders, boards of directors, as well as other corporate internal and external stakeholders (such as employees, customers, suppliers, investors and creditors). Corporate governance stresses on optimising the enterprise's resources in an efficient, effective and ethical manner, to maximize the long-term sustained value of the enterprise.
Specifically, corporate governance presents a mechanism to hold the management accountable for the pursuit of the corporate obligations and strategic objective. The corporate governance of information provides overarching framework that indicates strategic-level leadership and direction on information. Conversely, compatible information management is used to support corporate governance to fulfill its mission.
Currently, businesses operate in a dynamic and uncertain condition stuffed with swarming information, especially in a large multinational organisation. Apart from available guidelines and certain criteria of information management under sound corporate governance policy, organisations with excessively redundant or defaulted information will be carrying with potential business risks and negative effects on enterprise value. The authorized directors and officers must be reasonably governed according to the requirement from Corporations Act (Records Management Principles and Practice, 2006, para 3). Additionally, information management, providing full and accurate records and audit trails of actions, can assist risk management and sustain cooperate governance to minimize the level of information risk and corporate risk, through improved compliance to laws and governmental regulations concerning the operations of business.
In the competitive environment and faithful accountability requirement, an effective information management is required to control the capacity of information and to capture the competent evidence in the first place for the organisational success. Good information management system, with an efficient management of both the quality and quantity of the information which links the organisation's routine processes, will ensure interoperability in corporation (Deserno & Kynaston, 2005).
The first benefit of an effective information management system is that a coordinating information management will generates significant capitals as a key competitive value in a knowledge-based economy. Transferred from broadly intangible resources (such as financial date, employee competencies, organisations structure and relationships) into explicit knowledge (records), the commercial wisdom and learning are ready for a maximized share by people (Adequate Records management 2006, para 8-11). An efficient information management system can facilitate organizational collaboration to improve outcomes, plus pass on integrated information to support strategic success. To uphold a learning organisation, this competent information management system can be regarded as competitive advantages because it is hard to be copied.
Secondly, the improved operational information system will be beneficial in facilitating actions in all areas to help the staff extract better value from the infrastructure. Information is one of the most vital, strategic assets in any organisation possesses. For instance, it assists the business continuity and progress disaster-recovery. The availability of effective records ensures new staff can be acquainted with the ground running quickly; it improves the retention of knowledge for subsequent action when staffs retire or move posts; senior managers can access file materials out-of-hours and respond more effectively to urgency when support staff are unavailable (McLeod, 1990, pp.108-117). Properly organized and maintained information - in paper and electronic formats - will ensure the accountability to protect the organisation and its assets (as human assets, financial assets, physical assets, IT assets, relationship assets) from the risks of misrepresenting or losing data and reduce the extremely high cost of 'dirty data' ( date is inaccurate, inconsistent and out of date). (Adequate Records management 2006, para 8-13)
These managing processes, to identify, organize, maintain, access and properly dispose the information to control the quantity of the records, will pays off in cost savings: the more efficient use of the available storage capacity, faster retrieval and sustained accessibility to corporate information (McLeod, 1990, pp.4-6). Moreover, it will improve the consistency across the organisation in dealings with customers, facilitate collaborative working and effectual corporate governance, and aid business process re-engineering by easing researches on workflow applications.
The third benefit is seeing as that successful organisations can meet identifiable communities' expectations by providing adequate evidences of their acceptable behaviors. Namely, to meet legal, ethical and professional responsibilities to employees, clients as well as the general public, an effective management is needed to develop unstructured material into an effective corporate memory of the past decisions, actions and outcomes and then support for a common corporate view.
Information management is an integral to accountability because it provides the documentary trail of evidence of how the organisation conducts business, as well as defends the organisation in prosecuting claims with a better response to laws, legislation and regulations. It reduces risks of litigation or political embarrassment from failing to find relevant evident. (Adequate Records Management, 2006, para 12)
Fourthly, information management can be treated as communication promoter and decision-making supporter. To be organized and stored in a good information management system, information can be communicated and used among defined users accurately (e.g. organisation or societal group). Information management facilitates the organisational knowledge-sharing, learning and understanding, which enables a better co-ordination and a better access to support casework, and then encourages more comprehensive evidence-based decision making. Under a free application, background information can be effective utilized for managing appraisal and for supporting analysis, particularly for those issues associated with management, government policies and changes, which is the key step in establishing a culture of compliance and trust (Adequate Records Management, 2006, para 11-13).
An information management and organisational governance can be captured effectively and efficiently through starting an information governance framework as the benchmarks, introducing an electronic information management system and setting up a comprehensive information management reinforced program.
To start with, the priority is to place an information governance framework as benchmarks. The related benefits above demonstrate that the needs to come up with for a consistent information management system regardless of medium. Setting standard governance principles and framework of strategies, directions and good benchmarks for recordkeeping practices and information management system can give organisational structure confidences to achieve a high level of performance. Certainly, the guidelines in the information management should consider where resources need to be allocated to handle the relationships and cultural sensitivity with the managements of other organisational resources.
Generally, complying with the best practice standards for good benchmarks can be a shortcut with practised and systematic guidelines to manage information system, such as the international quality assurance standards (ISO 9000), professional and industry standards and codes of practice, as well as voluntary codes of practice of general applicability (e.g. Privacy Charter for protecting privacy). These are three key principles should govern the information management practice: the principle of provenance - keep contextual relationships of records for integrity, the principle of original order - the order is evidentiary trail of a transaction, and the principle of the responsible chain of custody-- set obligation to guarantee the safety (Adequate Records Management, 2006, para 10).
Additionally, a vital process followed by is to launch an electronic information management system (see Table 1). As a large multinational organisation, all current records stored in hard copy leastways may impel corporation suffer from inefficient retrievals because of the huge records stored across the boundaries. Moreover, it is indispensable to choose cross-references that make organizing structures cover both paper documents and electronic groupings of records at the same time. By introducing electronic standard recoding procedures, the corporate governance capability can be more successfully enforced, on recording, accessing and sharing documents in electronic format, as well as the retrieval time, than in paper surrounding long distance embranchments (Jevec, 2005, para 4-7). Thus, an e-government and e-commerce can be achievable over time. Allow staffs to search for an electronic document by keywords, or by authority can impact a dramatic improvement in convenience and productivity, which will enhance the use of documents and records as a corporate information source. Furthermore, the accommodation environment will improve as storage requirements reduce.
Initially, the organisation could come up with plans and timetables, exam the business workflow and assess the functional requirements through a need-analysis. Obtaining organisation staffs' support is a key step here. Then, train users involved in the pc implementation to provide appropriate understanding and supporting of new work practices and new information management system in organisation.
Secondly, the organisation possibly will seek expert advice in developing the implementation process which can be effective. However, it is a practical way to outsource the information management reinforce program to a committed agency. Additionally, organisation needs to set up effective back-up procedures to provide a security arrangement and a disaster recovery plan in relation to hard paper and electronic documents for minimizing the risk of loss, corruption and unauthorized access (Pearce, 2005, para. 50-90). Ideally, such a task of setting a good information management system should be undertaken as a clearly-identified corporate review at key intervals (ranging from an enhancement of existing 'good benchmarks' procedures to user participation and satisfaction) and a further reinforcement program (Jevec, n.d., para. 20-27).
This report has examined the advantages of implementing an effective information management system which can underpin successful corporate governance through widely utilization of information. Managing information is an essential element to the competitiveness and accountability of an organization. It is imperative for international organisations to establish effective and efficient information management practice in order to contribute a sound corporate governance and organizational success as competitive advantages, meet accountability requirements as evidences, response for community expectation and support decision making. And consequently, this report advocates a reinforced program for further organisational development- Electronic Information Management System underlined by a governance framework.