For a new business, business plan is an outline prepared for the purpose of capturing credit and supports. This business plan is trying to get financing for the new startup company-- My Mp3--. This plan focuses on the financing aspect to submit a comprehensive business plan over a five year period. After a brief executive summary, there are various revenue and expenditures categories that will be applied to the new business. Subsequently, the possible source of finance to fund the project will be reviewed and analysed.
My Mp3 is a new small-sized public limited e-company which is worked out its business online. The web page will be designed to sell various brands' Mp3 and Mp4 with the focus on the market mainly in China. Customers can easily compare different brands' products within similar functions (the price-value) and purchase their favorites on a discount price on www. mymp3. Com. While, there are also additional services including downloading music.
The digital products - such as the Mp3 and Mp4--- are popular fashion products which are received by a board target. It is a growing industry where the customers and digital products providers are keeping changing their digital products frequently for updated or new-fashioned products. Moreover, although the competition is increasing by new market enters; a qualified service with well designed use-friendly webpage will help My Mp3 to success in this industry. The operational management team will include one full-time office clerk and one manager (the owner) to manage the website, post-sale and after-sale customer services, and one part-time IT professional designers to help the setup work for web pages.
Cash flow is regarded as the vital factor for a business in most contexts, which is a evidence if business is in a credit risk. This business plan comprises the revenue models and the cost models for the new business.
My Mp3 will be willing to establish sound debt to equity relationships which contribute to the successful of the business through sufficient equity or excessive leverage (Nevitt & Fabozzi, 2004). My Mp3 is planning to obtain funds for business through a number of different sources.
Firstly, because My Mp3 is a small e-company with a manageable business risk, long-term loans on a annual payment basis - 5 years loan-- are an excellent and main source of finance when the interest rates are relative low at current (Green, 2006). My Mp3 will give a loan guarantee scheme to require financial supports from financial institutions (such as banks), individuals or business angels (which will provide 3-5 years within small investment size). Loans, being engaged about 50 percentage of the working capital ( 25,000), are often used for fixed assets payment such as warehouse and machinery at business starting up period. The advantage of is long-term loans that the interest payments will be lower than short-term, and brings advantage of tax deductions (Banks. 2001).
My Mp3 will quest additional short-term financing to manage the uncertainty affects the cash budget (Broyles, 2003). It will be probably 10 percentage of the total working capital ( 5,000). The main source is the flexible rated overdraft bank loan in the bank account for a short period, which will help My Mp3 to overcome the cash shortage (often is used for buying supplies) during the business running.
Alternatively, equity funding is a good proposition to guarantee a good market value for business. It is a long term source of finance, requiring about 20,000 to finance the rest 40% of the total working capital. The self-financing from owner will up to 10,000 (50% of equity), and My Mp3 will give proportional shares (50% of ownership in total) to different private shareholders (individuals). It means a share in the control of the business. However, the advantage is that encourages the directors to operate the business and pay dividends under a well manner (Broyles, 2003). Furthermore, the equity financing will have more potential opportunities to raise additional capital by issuing new shares used for business expansion.
What's more, debentures, venture capital and shares issued to public for a large sum are not suitable for My Mp3 currently. To gain more cash, the funds can come from the business' internal sources, such as reducing stocks, delaying the payments for suppliers and lease finance (as the credit strategy and lease contracts shown above).
My Mp3 is a new small-sized public limited e-company selling various brands' Mp3 and Mp4 with the focus on the Chinese market. This business plan comprises the revenue models, from product sales (60%), advertising (20%), music download, insurance and auction, as well as the cost models, from the cost of products sold, the copy right for songs downloaded, warehouse, equipment and office, work team, transport and marketing activities. This business can be paid back at 2.1 - 3.5 years and the accounting rate of return is between 0.28 - 0.47. Moreover, the main income resources in My Mp3 are coming from lone-term loan (50%), short-term loan (10%), and equity funding (40%) (includes the self-financing (20%) and shares (20%)). From the analysis shown above, it can not be denied that My Mp3 has a potential strength to last the business over a five year.