Rene Descartes puts forward the case for mind/body dualism This theory suggests the mind and body to be two separate entities which, though they can interact, can and must be logically divided in our thinking about human beings and the world. Descartes believes that there is a different consciousness with a different identity in every person, just like everybody has a different body which is distinct from everyone else. Being tow different things the mind has different attributes to those of the body.
Like the body, the mind is an existing thing rather than just a concept or linguistic place holder. So, unlike numbers, the mind is actually out there in the world. This property is held alongside the belief that the mind is non corporeal; it does not have mass or energy. It is "not some thin vapour which permeates the limbs - a wind, fire, air breath, or whatever I depict in my imagination".
As such one cannot touch, see, taste or have any other access to it via the senses.
If the Cartesian position is to be tenable then Descartes' concept of the mind must be meaningful. Without this meaning the Cartesian has very little position left at all. If there is no way to talk about the mind meaningfully then why does the Cartesian say anything at all? There may very well exist things in this universe that as humans we simply do not possess the ability to think or talk about in any way, and our inability to talk about them will have no existential effect on them at all. But the Cartesian clearly is trying to talk about something, he clearly is trying to express a certain position in words. Therefore whether or not the mind exists as a separate entity is somewhat besides the point; if the Cartesian can't talk about it his position it would be untenable.
Perhaps first reactions would be that the concept of the mind must be meaningful, for we have just given a description of the mind and have experienced no problems in understanding the meaning of each attribute. Looking deeper however, we must ask whether the attributes make sense together and whether to make those attributes work more attributes would be necessary. If the attributes already assigned do not work together the Cartesian will be forced to drop at least one of the offending properties (like in the Reductio rule in formal logic). This would change his position radically. If other attributes are found which must be added, these too will have to work in harmony with the already existing attributes, or again the Cartesian position would have to be changed.
P. F. Strawson in 'Mind, Body and Self' suggests one such necessary attribute for the Cartesian mind; individual innumerability. If we wish to keep the concept of the mind as a concept of a thing with objective reality, then for it to be meaningful it must be individually intelligible. Individual intelligibility is a necessary condition for a concept being meaningful because we cannot know what something is unless we know what a single instance of that thing is, or in Strawson's words: "We have no idea what a so-and-so is unless we have some idea what a so-and-so is". You would never be able to understand the concept of elephants if you did not know what an elephant was. You may very well know that elephants are grey, have big ears and have trunks, but you would still not be able to know what elephants are if you didn't know what one elephant was. If you didn't know that a single elephant had four legs and one trunk then I would be able to show you some large grey lumps with 7 legs, 4 trunks and 20 big ears and you would call these elephants. We possess criteria for knowing whether what we see before us is one elephant or two; even if they are exactly the same down to the smallest molecule. Without a measure of individual innumerability, of what a single instance is like, we would not be able to tell one elephant from two, and would not be able to tell an elephant from a large grey mass with trunks and big ears.
This claim applies to the Cartesian mind as well. Descartes very specifically says "I think, I exist" , not 'we exist' nor 'they exist' nor 'I existed'. From this very specific statement I may gather many attributes that he assigns to my mind: that there is only one of them in me, that it is owned by me and that this object has continued and sustained existence. It is this very definite statement about the nature of the mind that commits the Cartesian to the possibility of making the mind individually intelligible.
The singularity implied by the word 'I' can only work if we know what a single instance of the thing 'I' referred to is. To know what a single instance of something is we must know something about what would be the difference between one and two such objects. What we usually say makes two objects distinct, even if they were identical down to the minute detail, is that they travel two different spacio-temporal lines. This means is that two distinct things cannot occupy the same space at the same time.
The mind however is non corporeal and we have no direct access to it with any of our senses. We may be able to see people's bodies, our own included, but we could never see a mind. We would therefore never be able to tell whether there were one or two minds in the bodies we see before us. Taken step further we could not tell if there even was a mind in the body we see before us, and that includes the body we see in the mirror.
If we could not, even in theory, ever tell whether there is one or more such things with distinct spacio-temporal lines, then we would never be able to tell whether there is one object present or two, or for that matter a million or zero. If we cannot, even in theory, say anything at all about the number of such objects, even as basic a statement as whether there is or is not such an object present, then the concept becomes meaningless. If something, by its very nature, cannot be known to exist in any way, then to talk about that concept is to talk about nothing; saying there may or may not be a chair in front of me is not actually saying anything at all. To be able to say something meaning full about chairs, individual enumeration of them would have to be possible.
This point applies just as well to the claim that the mind exists through time. To keep this central property of the mind, we must be able to have some criteria for saying whether the mind exists or not. Otherwise, we could not be able to say that the mind is still existing now, or that it didn't exist a thousand years ago. To know what it is for something to continue existing one must have conditions by which to tell that the thing in question has or has not existed through a set period of time. Without a standard of individual innumerability however, we could not tell if the thing in question has just popped in and out of existence whenever we paid attention to it. We must somehow be able to know that what we have seen is one continuing object, not a string of different objects with distinct spacio-temporal lines. The thing in question must be individually innumerable.
Having looked at the properties originally assigned to the mind, I have come to the conclusion that it does in fact need other things attributed to it for it to remain a meaningful consent. Remembering that the Cartesian mind is to be considered as a thing "which is real and which truly exists", not just a concept or a place holder, we must conclude that for the Cartesian concept of mind to be meaningful the mind must be an individually intelligible thing. The Cartesian clearly wants his concept of mind to be meaningful, and so a method of enumerating distinct minds from one another must be devised. The Cartesian then must be committed to the thesis that it must be possible to make independently intelligible what is meant by identity and difference of human consciousness. Otherwise, he would be committed to a thesis which one of the primary postulates is a meaningless concept. However, whether it is actually possible to assign individual innumerability to a non corporeal thing and still call it a substance is not within the realms of this essay.