Global competition has massively speeded the using of information techniques and online communication to improve business performance. The object of this work is to draw properly technology and Internet solutions, for a small delivery company-- Send-Me Services, and to optimise the utilisation of business resources through the sell-side, buy-side and internal side of business. To specify those applications, these techniques in the sell-side activities of business will be presented firstly with the focus on how to attract customers and how to be interactive with them. Secondly, technologies in the buy-side business seek to facilitate greater efficiency in purchasing within lower operational cost. Finally, integrated business management and control systems will be suggested in the internal part of an e-business.
As a small delivery company, Send-Me Services was formed in 2000 and provides a fast evening-and-weekend delivery service for the public and commercial sectors locally (Aitken, n.d.). The size-related resource limitations and quick-response requirements in delivery service SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises) make them more alert to the value-for-money, reliability, maintainability, effectiveness and productivity ICT solutions (Information and communication technologies) (Chaffey 2004, p18). Establishing a real-time enterprise could be a vital approach for the current delivery business to cooperate the Internet-enabled and other e-commerce mechanisms into an integrated management of within-firm (the internal operation activates) and cross-firm businesses (the sell-side and buy-side activities).
To be a competitive real-time enterprise and to sustain the competitiveness, a "real-time" information system means that business transitions are executed by straight through processing (STP) - an internal online passthrough process. In the internal STP, a front-desk and back-office connection is carried by intranet, and the external STP interconnects business partners which could be inbound if the company get input from selling to customers and could be outbound if the company buys an input from company's counterparties. Therefore, the links between value chains can be tightened instantly with automatic connections to other counterparties' network, such as the fuel suppliers. Rapid performance can help the company to get competitive advantage in the supply chain (such as shorten the delivery lead time and quicken the cash flow in buy-side of business), expand marketplace (such as widen the interaction with customers in the sell-side of business), and especially upgrade the level of confidence for a further improvement in the organisation (such as reduce the work load and increase the profit-margins in internal side of business). (Chorafas 2004, pp83-85)
An e-enabled business system should be a competently interactive system, from a consuming market to a business supply chain, which could be a highlighted task in this delivery company. The Figure 1 below shows the layered structure of business and the applications for the delivery e-business. Within the seamless database supported STP, the real-time information system through the business architecture is guaranteed by other network software solutions, such as enterprise resource planning (ERP), customer relationship management (CRM), Just-in-time (JIT) solution, supply chain management (SCM), online sales order handlers, execution report and treasury package (the controls over transactions, payment and settlement) (Chorafas 2004, p85). Information systems can help to integrate market research, information collection, sourcing, material requirements planning, warehousing and distribution through integrating systems with vertical integration.
Up to now, Send-Me Services has a very sample website interface, which only displays the business background and contacted information in document without an effective price search. There are various online marketing and customer communications techniques to encourage customers to find products using the web than traditional catalogues.
The procurement of procurement of non-production goods and services is an essential part in a company, such as to purchase office equipments, computers, peripheral (printer, storage equipment and telecommunication equipment), packaging tools and materials, transport vehicle and fuel. The major efficiency benefited from e-business in the Send-Me Services will not only from the effective customer service, but also through the well-organized transport of the business supporting materials (such as fuel, vehicles).
First and foremost, to e-enable a delivery business, this is a management challenge. One cost-efficient way is to design a virtual organisation to manage the knowledge resource in environmental uncertainty variables by providing Internet connectivity for staffs. Information through an ERP system can be effectively allocated to balance the business's scarce resources. This ultimate tool designs a Web interface to seamlessly integrate front-end customer service (sell-side) with back-end systems such as finances management, human resources management, knowledge management, and market research, product design, sourcing, material requirements planning, production, warehousing and distribution, as showed in Figure 2.
ERP system is an integrated business management and control application, based on a day-to-day intranet application (EDI links or web-based open-standard groupware systems) which needs to be installed on each desktop to fill orders and provide account information electronically on a real-time basis. However, web-based technique --- many-to-many--- is more appropriate to small organizations than the EDI --- one-to-one. Additionally, Microsoft products often provide greater functionality, e.g. Support for Internet protocol (IP) with HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), XML (Hypertext Markup Language), or Visual Basic. Those methods are more flexible and can be tailored to the organizations needs. Internet Explorer is currently free and can be used in all types of organizations. For further development, Microsoft development tools are likely to be more expensive, so for the small to medium company, non-Microsoft tools are probably best if there are sufficient trained staffs available (PHP/MySQL languages, IBM Open Source). (Norris,al. 2000, pp41-42) However, in any case, the key to a successful e-business is to use the same language and grammar in electronic dialogue.
On a personal level, to increase the speed of the process, e-enabled business involves fewer staffs. An ERP system offers the techniques to help the human resource management to recruit staff, educate staff, review staff and get feedback from staff. HR manager can use the announcement board to publish the company's policies, display job description and issue events for its employees without paper-based booklets. Computers also can memory the whole career of each staff to enhance career and succession planning, coordinate training programs ( using on - line 'hands-on' training software without time and place restriction), and maximise time management (Norris,al. 2000, pp33-34). For instance, in Send-Me Services, the salary for a carrier usually includes a basic salary, performance salary (delivery quantity and quality) and other parameters such as job grade, absentation, as well as the satisfaction feedbacks from customers. All the information can be mentioned and stored in the database which results an efficient way to calculate numbers by computers. Then the payroll within detailed records can be delivered to individual by e-mail or in a personal page with permission to view.
The bulletin boards, e - mail, instant messaging, e - conferencing, virtual white boarding, and forum will help to collect the ideas, share the project process and drive the business intelligence throughout the company in digital form. That sort of value-based strategic management capability can gain from ERP vendors, from PeopleSoft's Enterprise Performance Management Workbench to modules by Oracle and Sap (Norris,al. 2000, p176)). For example, the marketing staff will give a better feasible e-business consideration after sharing the web enhancement technique concepts with webmaster, and otherwise, the webmaster will set up good knowledge of marketing technical on time and within budget after well communication. The intercommunication and multi-comprehension facilitated by e-business will encourage a harmonious company culture.
Moreover, ERP system supports the management of accounting and financial data. Although it requires person to analyse the problems and make decisions at last, computer software with backup database will make the statistical processes more quickly and accurately. Furthermore, in addition to paper documents management, an effective information management is required by EPR system to control the capacity of information and to capture the competent evidence in the first place for the organisational success. The personalised web side under privacy policy requires a sign-on, which is valuable to give individual information and special authorities to access separate information level. Financial report forms can be updated instantly after accountants finish their input work. Within ERP, the resulting financial effect of a physical transition will be shown to provide decision support for corporate leadership, produce strategic measure for performance, and hold a strategic cost management (Norris,al. 2000, p31).
Furthermore, e-business can help to audit the internal information flow-- internal control - in a management information system (MIS). This also is part of knowledge management in business to facilitate the decision making, which make an effort to transfer the various intangible data and information to tangible knowledge can be shared by other ones. The management of the information is broader than maintaining a centralized control on files registry and records management, multimedia and electronic objects (those digital storages, such as CD records and Floppy Disk and Fixed Disk) that combine image and audio are also evolved to reduce the physical forms requirement. The risk of financial records missing or mess also can be avoided if database is duly copied. Good information management system, with an efficient management of both the quality and quantity of the information which links the organisation's routine processes - logistic, manufacturing, sales and marketing, will ensure interoperability as being capable of independently of location and time (Deserno & Kynaston, 2005).
The office workplace redesign, about shared service centers (SSCs), also take account of a range of alternative techniques, such as a standardized allocation of space--the universal footprint which help to configure a flexible setting to meet the alternate needs of individual workstyles. The tools (the software such as CSCW (Computer Supported Collaborative Work), teleconferencing) support cooperation over an distant in virtual offices - which refer to a non-territorial office, shared assigned spaces, and alternative touchdown areas --- afford a new way to work without the limit of location and time, provide an opportunity for home working and flatten management hierarchies, empowerment and customer interaction. (Jackson & Suomi 2002, pp14-15).
E-technologies and the Internet facilitate an efficient and effective re-engineered process for business. This work focus on outlining those cost-and-risks-reduction and time-saving techniques for a delivery SMEs-- Send-Me Services, over through the buy-side e- business (as the inputs of resource), internal processes (as communications and transactional processes), and sell-side e-business (as the output). Buy-side e- business is mainly considered as integrating the marketing management, customer relationship management and downstream supply chain management, sell-side e-business mainly involved in the upstream supply chain management, which focuses on managing the relationships with suppliers - procurement, stock control and distribution (also including intermediaries), and internal e- business is focus on a integrated ERP system, supported by knowledge finances management, human resources management, knowledge management. Additionally, although there are various techniques can be adopted for business, the success of e-enabling the business is basing on the harmonized cooperation of these practicable e-technologies.