The 'e-term' avails e-business and e-commerce with a wide scope of opportunities. The object of this essay is to draw a compacted picture of the future of the Internet Age. The development history of the Internet will be displayed briefly at first place, followed by the broad opportunities turn up from Internet in e-marketplace. Additionally, the essay will present the future drivers of Internet and the future expectations of Internet in business circumstance.
As the Model T Ford full with various interesting devices, the Internet stands as a motivating invention evoking curiosity and fun since last decades, which is primarily suitable for communications covering the obstacles from distance and time. A recent statistics shows online expenditure in some European countries (such as the UK) has a 10-fold growth since 2000, and for instance, no less than 60 percent of 12 million British consumers do online purchase at least once a month (Scarpi 2006, p224).
The Internet grew from a very hard learnable and useable system to a friend interface can be used throughout community, just as the Model T Fords came in many different models (Howe, 2006). It was first used to share information among computers on scientific and military research and development in the early 1960s. The maturation of Internet is resulted from the effects made by numerous organisations. The global communication network emerged only after 1988 when a major improvement in the using of fibre optic transatlantic cable to carry electronic signals transmission (Tuomi 2006, pp59-60). Since the Worldwide Web was located on the Internet in 1991, the globalised Internet has pervasively expanded its impact on every aspect of business and personal life, which affects the information exchange flow, daily entertainment and commerce practice to be interconnected and interactive.
The e-marketing places - the digital markets -- emerged as the transaction hubs in Internet for industries. Using Internet-based systems, e-enabled business offers enormous business opportunities for re-engineering process to share learning information, cross functional teams, development costs and risks for further growth (Gray 2006, pp3-5). The global web site assists the formation of internationalized market and let SMEs to use the Internet as a choice to compete with large companies and penetrate overseas markets. Moreover, there are various benefits derive from this technology, which encourages a reduction in customer service costs and vast improvements in time-based customer delivery performance schedules in business.
Currently, companies in almost all industries are trying to make optimally use of Internet as an online e-marketing to service existing customers and acquire new. When everything is connected through Internet, the data can be delivered directly from customers to business processing sections through supply chain management automatically, not from traditional manual information input with high operational risks such as mistakes and delays. Moreover, communications in the customer relationship management is initiated by company started from the advertisement, and is sustained by quick response. Therefore, there will be more new economic models coming to help companies scramble in this virtual market, such as selling by website advertising through disintermediation; and using message boards, forum and chat rooms for marketing and community communication building (Howe, 2006).
In the region of the business, a company can use Internet to steadily evaluate its business counterparties', competitors' and its customers' needs and performances, and then improve its inside operation processes and its services in the term of cost-efficiency. Now, it is believed that the Internet are moving the business from push model of selling under the support from a passive supply chain distribution to pull models (an emphasis on using the supply chain to deliver value to actively involved customers with personalised product and service specification) or combined push-pull approaches (Chaffey 2004, pp253-55). Information and knowledge shard and mined through Internet, backed up by continuously updated databases.
The same as in the era of Model T Ford with persisting products improvements, in the dot-com ear, Internet will keep on providing the companies a dramatic access to touch the potential profitability coming from broader customer reach and better customer service, communication and marketing. Meanwhile, a reduced cost come form decreased business operating time and improved delivery reliability encourages an escalating attraction on e-business adoption. Chaffey (2004, p16-17) identified the Internet as a enormously powerful change agent with its two drivers in the term of business - the cost/efficiency drivers (the increasing speed in resources rearrangement and the reduced cost on operating cost) and competitiveness drivers (the enlarged marketing share, improved services and other intangible benefits, such as enhanced corporate image and organisation learning ability ).
It is unlikely to adequately explain or predict the adoption of ICT (Information and communication technology) or e-business solutions alone by firms. Effect associated with business service module, distribution partnership and manufacturing and industries size need to be taken into account when affiliate the business to Internet. The value of an organisation will be added from the innovation of Internet, namely e-business which uses Internet to facilitate an integral and effective end-to-end approach adapting to the end user's requirement, making business more productive and easier (Scarpi 2006, pp224).
Primarily, Internet will be persisting to be an innovative channel for optimised resource allocation and aggregation. Raisch (2001, p3-9) believed that the next evolution phase of Internet will be centered on providing value-added service supported by a global knowledge network, and the industry value chain will be progressing into Value Trust Network ultimately. At that time, network will provide a further enhanced security for the collaboration and integration between well-branded organisations. The management will also get more pressures from business environment in conquering employees' adoption and participation in an inter-team net-work, as well as the installment of Internet communication or new software (Raisch 2001, p9).
Adequate exploration of Internet virtual environment evokes positive affect at the use of Internet, such as online purchasing, alongside with sufficient variety selection of brands. As the Model T Ford stated that 'you can have any colour, so long as it is black' (Chaffey 2004, p254), a modern online business will focus on operating a standard customer interface but providing customized service portfolios, in compliance with diversified requirements from customers' characteristics and buying situations. This strategic evolutionary business practice progressively integrates a great automation in the web interface with easily learnable tools. The design for great user interactive interface will be regarded as an art and science, which struggles to humanize the interactive communication in Internet. The video streaming or well-photographed 3D picture will alleviate the visitors' needs of touching that give customers the psychological fell they are dealing with other human being rather than machine. (Raisch 2001, pp231-32)
Secondarily, companies will persist to use Internet struggling for differentiation as a competitive advantage to achieve successes. Because of the increasingly global diffusion in the Internet age, it is an unambiguous tendency that encourages business to customise the web experience as a personalization program, far from the homogenization (Sartori 2006, pp188-189). The Internet will extend the authorities to the customers to possible complete their operations and actions without interruptions from an incomprehensible interface or malfunctions in the shortest quantity of time (Raisch 2001, p9). An enhanced relationship with customers and external services providers can be transferred into a significant economic return. Consequently, the companies will pay more attention on the online marketing and relationship management which are backed up by fine service promises. More meaningful and more actionable website, based on the site using context (overseas language or culture), will be tailored and reexamined for the usability to increase their creation's potential of success among Internet users (Mazzoni 2006, p173).
The next big growth area in the next decade, probably, is the using of smaller devices, such as the pocket PCs, PDA (Personal Digital Assistant), laptops, smart phones and even GPS devices. The "hot spot" will be in city-wide everywhere will help user access to the Internet by wireless (Wi-Fi or wiMAX). Therefore, the campaign is held for both political and economic, which provides a new interconnect channel for extra marketing, communication and customer service activities. Additionally, the Internet will integrate real-time 3D visual view and voice interactivity to facilitate a portable information progress under more compliant standards. (Howe, 2006)
Finally, online trust and commitment is the root of growth of Internet. With the understanding of the significance of intellectual property, e-credit being an increasing controversy stems from the worldwide inequalities in trade conditions. Internet will be providing e-credit scoring and e-rating techniques and transparent e-credit information infrastructures for collecting credit information, to overcome information asymmetry between creditors and borrowers. Especially for the enterprises on developing countries, that online trust and commitment is an interesting avenue to access finance and e-finance related commerce. (Zappala and Gray, pp256-57)
There is no doubt of the advent of the Internet Age, which has dramatically changed the personal life and business model. The essay shows the developing history, the extensive opportunities and the future drivers on Internet in brief. Moreover, the expectations in business circumstance for Internet are presented at last, which involves a further exploration of Internet virtual environment through building of a Value Trust Network under reliable online trust and commitment, a humanized customer interactive interface supported by customized service differentiation, and a widely use of smaller devices, such as the pocket PCs.