Opportunities and challenges are coherent in the target export market of Hong Kong and mainland of China where the market entry strategy will be analyzed basing on the external environments facing by Wallaroo Wines, Australian. Moreover, the each situation of the price, product, place, promotion (4P) strategies relative to four entry strategies: exporting, licensing, franchising and foreign direct investment will be considered. Consequently, a final entry strategy choice- a joint ventures strategy is suggest to company.
The purpose of this report is to recapitulate how an entry strategy is set limited on the the materials provided by Les Brown and Wai-sue - Wallaroo Wines. The socre the report is the price, product, place, promotion (4P) strategies of Wallaroo Wines that will be regulated adapting to particular new environments in Kong Kong and mainland of China. Also, the extent of those particular 4P situations will diverge according to the degree of foreign involvement and the nature of target markets. There are four entry strategies are available, which are exporting, licensing, franchising and foreign direct investment. And finally, link company strengths with final strategy choice- a joint ventures strategy.
As the modern society in the flourished stage, the Hong Kong and mainland of China, especially the eastern coast area including most developed cities like Shanghai are taken as the target markets for Wallaroo Wines.
Pricing, product, place, promotion (4P) strategies of Wallaroo Wines challenges a new market entry strategy as an attack or a response to competitive changes. There are many choices available to Wallaroo with opportunities and threatens.
At the first stage of the market entry, the initial capital investment is such a huge number for Wallaroo. Consequently, joint ventures strategy seems like an appropriate choice for a less risk and financial requirement, what' more important is that provide a short distance to embrace local culture, customers and market pulse.
Besides the retain of competitive element of standard core product - a fruitiness wine, a augmented product with lower alcohol and more sweet taste could be more favored by office lady account for half number of employee in China and Hong Kong, or a lesser acidity and one hundred percent nature without additive sugar can be better to Chinese adults' taste, especially the ever-increasing diabetic for business social intercourse. Traditional branded bottle with a cheery color with classic a tersely shape, plus a marketable price which will help to make the position and image of product linked to other brands at a similar price, adding with a charming advertisement - heath coming from the Australian grapes, is fevered brand is going to stir in the mainland of China and Hong Kong.
It is a fantastic opportunity for these companies to gain exposure and access to key trade contacts and the local wine and trade media, also it is necessary to maintain and ease the wine cellar in multiple cellar locations with multiple notes. Add wines in the Food and Wine Festivals also is good place to show the wonderful brand.