I had been set the task of being group administrator for the first session. We met up in A206A within the first week. The boys had pretty much no ideas for a product, so we started by initialising a thoughts session. I suggested that we got to know eachother a little better, in order that we could brainstorm some ideas that more than one of us had generated. Music and sport seemed to be the main theme. All members got fully involved, there were no "no shows", so we felt as though we were already ahead. For the first 3 weeks, we met regularly at the assigned seminars, and before each one so that we could take full advantage of the time. This was really good for us, as it meant that we could set eachother targets and prepare ourselves. It took us what seemed to be a long time before we settled on a product idea. After considering 2 basic ideas that weren't really very inspiring, the final decision was plucked out of the blue. In fact, we had decided without all group members present, so it was tricky to organise them after that. Eventually, we all became a little unreliable about turning up and knowing about meetings that we'd arranged between us. We had decided on a product that would make scuba diving a lot safer. This had been my idea, that I had been thinking about before proposing to the rest of the group. I thought that I had enough interest, that I could convince them all to take part.
For the making of the business presentation, some of us took clear roles. Joe was in charge of the finances; Ben was all over the Design. Apart from this, the other two didn't really do much. I was quite disappointed that they wouldn't get more involved. I was surprised that Ben had been so efficient - he came up with a design that was perfect for the specification I had described to him, and having drawn it on Solidworks, it looked really professional. I was incharge of making the product feasible. I came up with a lot of marketing advice, as I have a prior knowledge of the diving industry, so this made it a lot easier for all of us, because research was at a minimum. I had given the group a better understanding of the function of the product, by introducing them all to regular diving equipment. I think they got quite excited about this, as I made use of my position within the Sub Aqua club to borrow some equipment and lead a demonstration. From prior experience teaching children, I knew that they would only be able to understand if I actually showed them how everything worked, rather than just telling them.
So we worked on the business plan, combining all of our thoughts to ensure that we made a good impression. I informed the boys that they would have to wear smart clothes for the night. None of them had a suit. Or a shirt. This was a bit of an issue, so I made sure that we all looked like we were from a real business, by having company shirts made up. This was definitely a good choice, because it made us look more professional, and meant that the audience would listen to our speech rather than looking at our clothes (when people are forced to sit and listen, their minds wander).
After the presentation, we had a rest period of 2 weeks before continuing with any further work. After all meeting up before the Christmas holidays, we decided that we should all take a section, and bring it back after the holiday, put it all together, and then input all of our thoughts for making improvements. I was pleased that everyone did actually do this over the holiday. I had been on holiday for most of the time, so they had taken it upon themselves to transfer thoughts between eachother via email. We met up a week before it was due in. Putting it all together into one file, there seemed a fair amount of work to do. I studied it intensively, because my section was to be editor. Rosh and Pascal's sections needed quite a lot of changes, which I did all in one night.