Initially, I was the Group Leader. I tried to make them all feel welcome and foster team spirit by arranging meetings in the Graduate Bar. The idea was to put all group members at ease and encourage the generation of ideas. To a large extent this worked; we got along well and came up with several good ideas to work with; one of which looked particularly encouraging. I was a McGregor's Theory Y type manager which worked well as the team responded to a degree of autonomy with responsible attitudes. However my performance after the initial month started suffering. This was due to poor time management, taking on too many responsibilities and poor prioritisation. I also found it difficult to research market conditions. I left things until the last minute (due to disorganisation) and then found it difficult to ask others for help. With hindsight this could clearly have been overcome with greater organisational skills, recording deadlines and starting well in advance of them.
Despite this I was able to support Team Members A and B, (I shall refer to them as Members A-D and myself for anonymity and consistency) who carried out the Upper Level Pitch by working with them on their presentation skills. I recorded their practices and offered constructive feedback and suggestions for improvement. It went very well: we got a good first. I decided to stand down as group leader at this point because Member A had emerged as a natural leader and I felt it would make more sense to allow him to excel in this role than continue in this role to the detriment of the team. Member A was the Coordinator in Belbin's Team Inventory model, whereas I was more of a Monitor Evaluator, rendering him more suited to the leadership role. He also had the Gallup Management Strengths Finder characteristics of Discipline and Maximizer: this was reflected in excellent organisational skills and clarity of his demands. Member A allocated us tasks to carry out over the Christmas holidays. I think the reality of peer assessments (offering either a harsh rebuttal or encouragement to continue) gave us all incentive to work hard during the break.
Having learnt my lesson, I put considerable effort into my assignments. One of my tasks was to write the Curriculum Vitae of the Chief Executive Officer and the Technical Director. I found this particularly rewarding. Perhaps I spent a bit too long researching their experience and making sure it was all feasible and factually exacting, but forging backgrounds for these two high flyers made me consider that I need to be doing more in pursuit of personal excellence. Consequently, I have begun to seriously undertake completion of extra curricular goals, I will embark on a two month placement at a Global Civil Engineering firm this Summer and I am currently writing a five year plan to aid me in reaching the pinnacle of my abilities annually and raising the bar just as frequently. Furthermore I have decided to narrow the scope of my activities so I can dedicate more time and commitment to each activity.
There was a definite shift in the dynamics of the team after the Upper Level Pitch. Team Member C and I worked considerably harder, whilst Team Member D reduced his efforts. (Team Members A and B worked hard for the duration of the project.) Team Member D was an envisioner: he had excellent ideas at the beginning of the project, but he struggled in developing these ideas after the Upper Level Pitch. This did not create any slack in the group; as I discovered on this project, I have some of the tendencies of an enabler and I am definitely an enactor. I derived great satisfaction from helping to shape our original, vague ideas into the tangible and credible form of a Business Plan. As someone that possesses the Gallup Management Strengths Finder Analytical characteristic I was able to improve the Business Plan overall by challenging each member to back up ideas in the Business Plan with facts and figures.
As a team we seemed to possess most of Belbin's team roles. However, we did not initially tap into the Specialist attributes of Team Member C. He studies an Accounting and Finance module at the Business School. Had the team taken advantage of this earlier on we may have performed even better on the Upper Level Pitch. This was rectified in time for the Business Plan where he produced some excellent financial data. In retrospect I would have requested that all team members, within the first week made a short list of their talents and interests so that what we could bring to the team was outlined at the offset.
The written English of two Team Members was not particularly good so I volunteered to rewrite the Financial Report that Team Member C had written (,changing the linguistic composition rather than content). I feel that this is a good example of team work: his financial acumen (he takes a module at the Business School) and my literary skills combined to form a better financial report than either of us could have produced alone.
I learnt a great deal about the entrepreneurial process from this project. The initial idea generation stage was the one in which I encountered the most difficulty. The kind of ingenuity required at this innovative stage is very difficult to develop, however, if I was to undertake this project again I would go through the stages of my day and reflect on things which annoy me because of their inefficiency and seek solutions to these issues. I would also try and do this from the viewpoint of others in different positions. I have further learnt that organisation is imperative to personal and team progression. I have discovered different means of leading a group from my experience and observing Team Member A. I have found this project very useful and informative.