Midlands Metro is a public transportation business that was created by Centro; the West Midlands Passenger Transport Authority (a Government organisation) to ease congestion and transport issues within the UK's biggest conurbation outside of London, the West Midlands. Altram have a 23 year contract to maintain Midlands Metro. Midlands Metro provides a light rail tram (hereafter referred to as LRT) service from Wolverhampton City Centre to Birmingham City Centre (stopping at 21 other locations along the way). In this report the transport industry in the UK specifically refers to buses, trains and LRTs; modes of transport which can be deemed to be comparable to the service Midlands Metro provides on either a local or national level.
119 businesses are large companies with the SIC code (Standard Industry Classification code) 6010, transport via railways. (FAME, 2006a)
Graph 1 shows figures indicating that the rail industry can have a broad array of profitability.
When considered against 11 of its peers (that share the same SIC code), Altram LRT possess 9.73% market share (by turnover) of a market valued at 57,000,000 (FAME, 2006b). In the locality Midlands Metro is competing with medium sized bus companies such as Arriva Midland North and the Birmingham Coach Company (which have averaged profit before tax levels of 100,000 and 55,000,000 respectively over the past 3 years) (FAME 2006c). LRTs do not generally make this level of profit.
Table 1 documents a PEST analysis undertaken by Centro in evaluating the trends of the local market and outlining their 20 year strategy.
The transport industry within the UK bears many of the hallmarks of an oligopoly. The barriers to entry within the transport industry are high due to the large initial out lay required. For example, in the construction of South Yorkshire Supertram, a comparable light rail tram system, the initial costs were 8.3million/km. (United Kingdom Parliament, 2000). Even this is an order of magnitude less than the cost of railway lines for trains. There are also a large number of well established firms on a more local level (in the Shires and London this would include Arriva, Greenline and Stagecoach buses). Government legislation is also a deterrent to new entrants as acquiring planning approval is often a lengthy and difficult process. (In fact, Midlands Metro's plans for the new lines, Line 2 and Line 3 could not be carried out because land acquisition powers ceased when the government could not fund the Lines.)
The only factor in which the transport industry may not be considered an oligopoly is the fact that a large number of companies operate within it (776 companies also have SIC code 6010) (FAME, 2006d). However, considered locally this may generally be scaled down to an oligopoly. In the West Midlands public transport is dominated by buses: they represent over 95% of all journeys made in the conurbation. Travel West Midlands has 80% of the market share for buses (Centro, 2000b).
The transport industry as a whole experiences some price elasticity of demand, however income elasticity of demand is low (given that the costs of public transport is affordable for most consumers). Half of the top 10 companies (by turnover) with SIC code 6010 (Transport via railways) each reported losses in excess of 93,000 in the past year (FAME, 2006e). LRTs specifically are in the question mark stage of the BCG (Boston Consultancy Group) matrix. However, this looks set to improve (and possibly become a rising star) in the future. This can in part be attributed to it's high efficiency. LRTs combine high capacity and speed with comparatively low damage to the environment and local inhabitants.
The core competencies of Midland Metro are its lack of disturbance to the locality (compared with trains), high efficiency and favourable perception amongst customers. Concentration measures are of little relevance to Midlands Metro because the company is not in competition with similar companies in differing regions. The transport industry is comparable with the construction industry in that it is a large industry, it (generally) requires considerable initial outlay and the government plays an important role in its development. They are also similarly populous as FAME (2006f) reports that 64,700 companies are in the construction industry (as SIC code 4521, general construction of buildings and Civil Engineering works) and 55,204 companies are in the transport industry. However the transport industry is more labour intensive, with 12,700,000 as the average total assets for the top 10 firms which is nearly 200% of the equivalent figure for the construction industry (FAME, 2006g).
Public transport, (and notably buses- the most frequently employed mode of transport in the conurbation) are considered to be of poor quality in this region, so focusing on good customer service, frequent and punctual tram services and brand recognition will give an LRT company operating in this locality a competitive advantage. It is suggested that the best method of entry into this market is to use a focus differentiation approach. Considering the fact that there is a gap in the market for higher quality transport in the conurbation it is likely that if an LRT company in the locality was to provide a high quality mode of transport then high profit levels could be attained. This method was employed by Virgin Trains, a company which over the past 4 years has achieved an average of 28,500 profit before tax and unusually high return on capital employed (for the transport industry) of 24% (FAME, 2006h).
The barriers to entry within this industry and locality are great. In order to overcome the considerable barriers to entry purchasing Midlands Metro is commended as the most feasible method for success. Profit before taxation figures have been negative and ranging from (987) to (11,440) over the years 1999 to 2004 (FAME, 2006i). Exit barriers are significant which maybe a factor in deciding to continue to run Midlands Metro, despite the fact that it is operating at a loss. As the current strategy of Midlands Metro is not proving financially beneficial Travel West Midlands may be willing to sell the business at a low cost. Adopting Michael Porter's generic strategy of focus differentiation will help to recoup the initial outlay more quickly, and help to ensure that profit maximisation occurs as soon as feasibly possible. Midlands Metro, under the guidance of new leadership can also take advantage of any brand loyalty felt towards the company. The ensuing renovations and improvements will help attract new customers whilst retaining the old name will help to ensure existing customers do not feel resistance to change.