Max Weber is the most significant political sociologist in Hong Kong with regard to his thoughts on public administrative governance. It is widely acknowledged that the public administrative structure of Hong Kong is constructed explicitly according to the Weberian ideal typical model of "bureaucracy" (Degolyer and Scott 1996, Lam 2005). The values which are attached to the "Weberian bureaucratic model" such as impartiality, cost-effectiveness and professionalism, have been widely accepted as the desirable values of the Hong Kong government, or even as the "Hong Kong spirit" in general. The "Weberian bureaucracy" stands for a guarantee of "prosperity and stability", which are the foundation of the city's development. In short, the "Weberian bureaucracy" is the model of governance that Hong Kong people are proud of and eager to uphold.
However, the more I read about Weber, the more I found that the bureaucratic model embraced by the Hong Kong people does not depict the completed model as suggested by Weber. The relatively "positive" connotations associated with bureaucracy which is found in his work "Bureaucracy" (ES 956-1003) only constituted part of the discussion. We cannot fully capture the potential dangers and weaknesses of the bureaucratic machine unless we further pursue his other two political writings, namely "Parliament and Government in a Reconstructed Germany" (ES 1381-1462), which discussed the problematic German parliament after the glorious Bismarckian legacy; and the classical teaching materials for politicians, "Politics as a Vocation" (FMW 77-129).
When the three pieces of work are put together, they form a trilogy which is parallel to the political situation of Hong Kong, a British colony until the handover to China in 1997. Weber's work on "Bureaucracy" accounted for the ethos of public administration that the Hong Kong government is eager to promote and safeguard; "The Parliament and Government in Reconstructed Germany" shows remarkable similarities between the parliament of Germany after the resignation of Bismarck, and the legislative council in Hong Kong before and after the handover. Finally, after the People's Republic of China government rejected universal suffrage for the 2007 Chief Executive election in Hong Kong, claiming that the city was not ready for full democracy as it lacked the necessary political talent; people in Hong Kong started to have the same outcry as Weber did in the post World War I Germany, "What was lacking was the direction of the state by a politician - not by a political genius, to be expected only once every few centuries, not even by a great political talent, but simply by a politician" (ES 1405).
Where should we go to look for politicians? The first "politician" was elected (by an 800-people Election Committee) to be the Chief Executive of Hong Kong in 2005. The elected Chief Executive Donald Tsang had been serving the government as a civil servant for his entire career. When Mr. Tsang announced his candidacy and filled in his Chief Executive Nomination Form, he declared himself to be a "politician"(SCMP a). His declaration of turning into a politician caught the city by surprise, but such a turn of event would never gain the approval of Max Weber as well. Weber made clear distinctions between the career of civil servants and that of politicians, with one of the roles of a politician being to combat the ever expanding influence of bureaucracy. For Weber, the two careers could only be in contest instead of harmony.
Although the days of Weber and Hong Kong are a century apart, Weber and the people in Hong Kong had the same demand for political leaders. However, in contrast to the ideologies of Weber, Hong Kong depends on the bureaucracy for the supply of politicians. Why is the "transgression" from bureaucracy to politicians approved, or even appreciated in Hong Kong? What are the implications and consequences of such a transgression? In the first part of this paper, I will analyse the executive-legislative relationship of Hong Kong governance in light of the political writings of Weber. In the second part of the paper, I will present the argument that there are peculiar internal and external factors which "apoliticalise" the city, and these factors lead to the preference of officialdom instead of true politicians to be in charge of the city.
Weber regarded the establishment of bureaucracy as the watershed between the traditional and modern society due to the characters of "rationality" inherited to the bureaucratic structures (Hindess 1987). Rationality is the central theme of the sociological thoughts of Weber, which concerns the "logic in rational social action itself whereby the world and society become increasingly more predictable, more susceptible to control, more formalised, more reducible to rational means-ends calculation" (Breiner 1996: 133). Bureaucracy is the objectification of the spirit of rationality in the modern society.The fulfillment of bureaucracy towards rationality explained the machine's domination in the modern world. However, the positive account of bureaucracy only forms one of the different aspects of bureaucracy in Weber's writings. If we turn to the political writings of Weber, we will see a more critical account of the mechanism of bureaucracy, which has its own danger and weakness (Beetham 1974).
Combining the strength and weakness of the system, Weber provides us with several paradoxes of the bureaucratic mechanism. Firstly, bureaucracy is a powerful creature that is ever expanding, and it is irresistible and irreversible for modern life; however the system can also be fragile and will "fail completely" (ES 1417) whenever it is expected to deal with political problems. Secondly, the technical superiority of bureaucracy aids people to realize their expanding desires and satisfactions in the complex society; however the "impersonal character" of the system also leads to the "expropriation of the means of power" (FMW 82), and the lost of mankind's liberty. Lastly, bureaucracy is merely a machine that works according to documented rules and regulations; however this technical instrument will in turn "grow" out the soul of its own, to the point that it becomes a separate force in society, capable of influencing the other sectors of civilisation. In the following, I will use the political situation of Hong Kong to illustrate these paradoxes.
As I have explained previously, the strengths of bureaucracy echo with the "Hong Kong spirit" that the local people are proud of. The efficient team of civil servants is regarded as one of the bases that guarantees the continuity of "prosperity and stability" of the city. Under the principle of "One Country, Two Systems", the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region inherited wholesale the political- administrative structure from the previous colonial regime. This unusual measure of a post-colonial government indicated that the bureaucracy, which played an important role in Hong Kong governance during the colonial era, would continue to dominate in the post- colonial Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (Lam 2005). The result of such a strong and massive official team is an "executive-led" government, at the expense of a relatively incapable legislative council.
Many parallels can be recognised when we compare the bureaucratic structure depicted by Weber in theory and that of Hong Kong in reality. The day-to-day business of government is carried out by approximately 160,000 civil servants within the 67 departments, which are under the direction of 11 bureaus. The number of these departments has been steadily expanding over the past decades due to the increase of complexity and specialisation of the administration, and also the government's increasing involvement in social welfare. For example, the Medical and Health Department was divided into the Hospital Services Department and the Department of Health in 1989 (Miners 1991).
According to Weber, neutrality and equality are the key features of bureaucracy. These two values refer to a regular and structured system, where officials are responsible to the ranks instead of the person in charge; and the salary and ranking of the officials is tightly related to their seniority. These values are also highly emphasised in the team of civil servants in Hong Kong. Public administration is a career path which is open to almost everyone. The recruitment of the most promising rank in the government, the Administrative Officer (who can proceed to the leading position in the government) is basically open to all, with the minimum requirement of 5 passes in the GCSE and a university degree, regardless of discipline. Furthermore, the relatively generous package of salary and fringe benefits in addition to the structured increment system are all measures to guarantee the neutrality and impartiality of the team.
The extreme professionalism among civil servants is guaranteed by the division of labour and the complicated recruitment procedures. Despite the relatively lax application requirements, the applicants for the position of Administrative Officer have to attend two written tests and two other interviews in order to be selected. Despite the massive amount (over thousands) of applications, only 10 to 30 people will be selected every year. Besides, more specific definitions of responsibility among different departments and different rank of office were also introduced along the expansion of the government. In 1972 the McKinsey Report suggested that the government should be restructured with the introduction of new policy branches (Lam 2005, Miners 1991). From then on, a clear-cut division of labour has been confirmed between the secretaries and the heads of departments. The department heads are responsible for day-to-day operations; while the secretaries have the overseeing responsibilities (Miners 1991). Except for the Administrative Officers who follow a 3 to 5 years of office rotation, the rest of the officials in the government stay in the same office until retirement. The arrangement further reinforces the specialisation in the roles that they play in the bureaucratic machine.
Despite the ever-expanding power of bureaucracy, Weber argued that once the bureaucracy is set in the social and the political context, the system will start to reveal its danger and weakness that we may not be able to realise at the beginning. In the later political works of Weber, he depicted the danger of the domination of bureaucracy in the society, and the potential weakness of the system when it is dealing with political circumstances.
The danger of bureaucracy is stemmed from the "professionalism" within the system. The feature of professionalism allows the bureaucratic machine to "monopolise" the information that is not accessible to the public. Weber distinguished the difference between the information of "technical know-how" and the official information (ES 1417), which the bureaucracy both tried to conceal in order to hide its actions from criticism and to protect the group against supervision of any exterior power. The "technical know-how" refers to the knowledge they acquired through specialised training and the precise division of labour; the "official knowledge" refers to the concrete information relevant to the officials' performance, which is only available to the officials through the means of "administration apparatus" (Beetham 1974: 74). As a result, according to Weber, "The political master always finds himself, vis--vis the trained official, in the position of a dilettante facing the expert" (ES 991). Ultimately, in the modern states, the actual ruler is necessarily and unavoidably the bureaucracy, since "power is exercised neither through parliamentary speeches nor monarchial enunciations but through the routines of administration." (ES 1393)
The measures of secrecy help to preserve the interests of the officials and also allow them to exert a status of superiority. The bureaucrats consider the parliament as merely the "arenas for mere speech making"(ES 1419). Even the monarch is depending more and more on the advice of the bureaucracy to rule, and ultimately submits himself under the bureaucratic control, said Weber, "(the officials) can enjoy the privilege of operating without controls or without being accountable to anybody" (ES 1407).
The domination of bureaucracy is further accelerated under the influence of Bismarck in Germany after unification in 1871. In "Parliament and Government in a Reconstructed Germany", Weber concluded that the lack of political talents and the weak parliament was mostly contributed by the "Bismarckian Legacy" (Eliaeson 2000: 134). Weber resented Bismarck's internal policies which aimed at curtailing the power of German parliament, in order to achieve a "political impotent parliament and political leadership" (ES 1388).
Bureaucracy thus could develop to its fullest under the blessing of Bismarck, and the consequence was devastating. Under the domination of bureaucracy, the German parliament could only enact in the name of public power by approving the government budget, or introducing "unenforceable motions" or rejecting appropriation (ES 1407). Weber described how such an incapable parliament was only enacting "negative politics"; and the parliament was useless, time-consuming and annoying in the eyes of the administration. Besides, the powerless parliament became a place for the demagogues instead of true political talents with a zest to serve, as Weber explained, "in face of powerless parliament... only a fool will venture into this miserable web of mutual resentment" (ES 1413).
The influence of Bismarck was absent in Hong Kong, but the pre- and post- colonial constitution has also been threatening the development of the Legislative Council (Legco) of the city. An executive-led government is characterised by the domination of civil servants who hold most of the power over bill initiation and policy making (Ming 2004). The Legco did not have any representatives from direct election until 1985, when the "functional constituency" was introduced to the legislative council. Nowadays, the legislative council consists of 60 members, half of them remain to be elected through the functional constituency; and the other half (geographical constituency) is directly elected by the citizens of Hong Kong, under the one-man-one-vote system (Ma 2001).
Under the domination of the executive branch, similar "negative politics" are practiced by the Legco members in Hong Kong. Before the handover, the majority of the appointed Legco members made the council function as a "rubber-stamp". After 1997, despite the increase of the number of seats from the directly-elected geographical constituency, the Hong Kong Basic Law - Hong Kong's mini-constitution - has imposed other constraints against the Legco. According to the Basic Law article 74, private members' bills need the Chief Executive's written approval in order to be introduced in the legislature unless the bill is not related to public expenses, public policy or government structure. Moreover, according to Article 67 and the Annex II, while government bills only require simple majority to pass amendment and motions, the bills proposed by individual legislators have to secure more than half of the members of the two segments (functional and geographical constituencies) of the legislature (Hong Kong Special Administration Region). The system on one hand prevents the domination of the majority party in the Legco, on the other hand it curtails the power of the Legco members to propose private members' bill (Ma 2001). The Legco is not able to formulate alternative policy proposals to challenge the bureaucracy; it has greater power to prevent the passage of government legislation than to enact policies of its own (Miners 1991). The politicians' struggles within the fragmented legislature lead to the disgruntled relationship between the legislative and executive branch, and the crippled development of party politics in Hong Kong.
A recent example of the "negative politics" inside the Legco was the rejection of the constitutional reform which was proposed by the Government to the legislature in 2005. The proposal suggested the enlargement of the Election Committee which elects the Chief Executive (from 800 to 1600) and the Legislature (from 60 to 70), however the reform proposal did not guarantee any timetable for universal suffrage on the Chief Executive election. After the pro-democracy members of the Legco failed to solicit sufficient votes for their amendment motion, they voted against the proposal and put an end to the constitutional reform discussion in Hong Kong.
A malfunctioning legislature can only attract demagogic politicians to participate. It happened in Hong Kong during the 2004 Legco election, when the radical "street fighter", Kwok-hung Leung was able to capture sufficient votes and advanced from the petition zone on the streets into the Legco chamber. Moreover, the "political gossip" page on newspaper has been ever expanding at the expense of the shrinking "real" political page. The Legco members' holiday travels now carry more "news values" than the speeches they make inside the chamber. The negative policies have made the council become a "talk shop" or a "subversion base", which is not capable of making any constructive contribution to the society.
The overwhelming powerful bureaucratic machine and the relatively impotent legislature have created the vicious circle of political development in Hong Kong. The legislators are disappointing demagogues; the civil servants on the other hand are the professionals and social elites. Hong Kong people have thus developed a sense of distaste towards the legislative politicians and a sense of trust and admiration towards the professional bureaucracy, without realising that the disappointing performance of the Legco is the consequence of the ever-expanding bureaucracy. As Weber argued, "(The quality of the parliament) depends on whether what happens there matters, or whether parliament is nothing but the unwillingly tolerated rubber stamp of a ruling bureaucracy" (ES 1392). When the Hong Kong people have to look for a leader for the future of the city, they would prefer the professional civil servants over the demagogic politicians.
Weber acknowledged the value and inescapability of bureaucracy in the modern age. However, he also made clear distinctions between civil servants and politicians, and firmly stated that transgression between the two is not desirable, "conventions and internal peculiarities of the bureaucratic hierarchy severely impede the career opportunities... whole nature of officialdom is the most unfavourable to the development of political autonomy" (ES 1414). For officialdom, "discipline" is the absolute precondition of success; on the contrary, for politicians, the most important virtue is the "directing mind" and the "moving spirit" (ES 1403).
In short, Weber envisioned discipline and innovation, subornation and the struggle to power, as dichotomies which are attached to the two different professions. As he concluded, "policy making is not a technical affair, hence not the business of the professional civil servant" (ES 1419). Hence, the importance of true political leaders lies in their ability to supplement the deficiency of bureaucracy, and also to check and control the danger of the ever expanding bureaucratic machine.
More importantly, Weber saw that the right candidate for politics must have a "calling for politics" within themselves (FMW 127). The "calling" does not only refer to passion and enthusiasm in politics - that could easily turn into "sterile excitation" (FMW 115) and emptiness - but also "the feeling of responsibility" and "proportion" (FMW 115). If "passion" directs the politicians to the "ends" that he desires to achieve; "proportion" means the competence to stand out from the passion and to measure the "means" to achieve the ultimate ends imperturbably. After the politician has gained the approval of the masses to lead, Weber believed it is in turn the responsibility of the masses to submit themselves to the leader, "the following of such a leader must obey him blindly... this is simply the price paid for guidance by leaders" (FMW 113); without paying the price, we are determined to be ruled with a "leaderless democracy", the rule of a professional politician without a calling (FMW 113).
In order to deal with the ever expanding bureaucracy and the challenge of reconstructing Germany after the World War I, Weber requested a "political genius" or a "Caesarist figure" (Pfaff 2002) to rescue the country, and he believed that parliament should be the training ground for future political talents. Contrary to the political judgements of Weber, the city of Hong Kong which has been following the "Weberian bureaucratic model" for more than a century, opted to look for the right political candidates from the bureaucracy.
Due to the lack of political talent, the transgression from bureaucracy to politicians is commonly found in Hong Kong, and it is likely to continue in the future. Apart from the bureaucratic background of the Chief Executive Donald Tsang, 6 out of the 11 ministers under the Principal Officials Accountability System at present came from the officialdom. Besides, the 2005 Policy Address titled "Strong Governance for the People" which focused on the grooming of political talents, suggested the introduction of political cadres into the administration, in the hope of fostering a group of young people to move to the senior governmental positions in future. In contrast to the further expansion of the bureaucracy by absorbing young talents, the future of the legislature and subsequently the political parties are remained to be left out in the cold - the electoral reform proposal (which was rejected by the Legco in 2005) merely suggested the increase of the number of seats in the Legco from 60 to 70 without any promise of adopting complete direct election. The environment which would allow the political parties to develop and mature is still missing in the territory.
Why would a city let itself be taken over by the bureaucracy? Apart from the constitutional factor which is in favour of the bureaucratic domination at the expense of a marginalised legislature, another question must be addressed in order to fully understand the situation: Did politics ever take place in Hong Kong, a city which is highly capitalised, and "apoliticalised" under the colonial rule in the past and the current rule of China?
Hong Kong is an apolitical city under the condition that the territory is not, and will never be, an independent state (Roberts 1996). The previous colonial ruler (Great Britain) and the current sovereign state (China) both envision Hong Kong as merely a "city", as described by Weber as a "purely market place" (ES 1214), where politics hardly exist. During the colonial era, the Hong Kong government refrained from attempting to cultivate strong political commitment in the territory (Ma 2004), and the consequence was the creation of a strong executive branch, where only a highly effective and professional bureaucracy was emphasised (Lam 2005). After 1997, the colonial regime was gone and the unprecedented principle of "One Country, Two Systems" was in place to deal with the relationship between Hong Kong and China. However the principles did not operate without flaws and controversies. Several cases of reinterpretation of the Basic Law which overrode the decision of the Court of Final Appeals of Hong Kong indicated that the autonomy enjoyed by the territory may not be as high as the Basic Law originally guaranteed.
In the eyes of China, allowing Hong Kong to maintain its basic freedom and capitalistic features would benefit China from the economic gain, and the city can also perform as a showcase for unification with Taiwan (Yahuda 1995). China is interested in the economic benefits of Hong Kong but far less interested in the political inference of the city (Degolyer and Scott 1996). A conservative and "apolitical" Hong Kong will be the easiest mode of operation for China to handle. The situation favours a bureaucratic head, since important political decisions were not supposed to be made in the territorial level of the city.
There is a recent example to illustrate the apolitical nature of the head of the city. The Chief Executive Donald Tsang's self-declaration as a "politician" which once surprised the city only lasted for a week. On the day he became the Chief Executive, he again declared that his brief period as a politician was over. He proclaimed that he would immediately revert back to a civil servant once his appointment was effective, as he said that "today my country has already appointed me to be the Chief Executive; I am a public servant" (SCMP b). Mr. Tsang clearly understands his position. The head of Hong Kong is indeed an official who is responsible to China, rather than a politician who is responsible for leading Hong Kong. Hong Kong is designated to be apolitical; in consequence an efficient bureaucratic official who is politically neutral is the desirable leader of the city.
Besides the external factor, the capitalistic nature of Hong Kong also explains why the city approves the transgression between politician and officialdom. Weber linked the indispensability of bureaucracy to the capitalistic development in the modern time. He noted that the two systems shared a number of similarities, "today, it is primarily the capitalist market economy which demands that the official business of public administration be discharged precisely, unambiguously, continuously, and with as much speed as possible" (ES 974). Apart from the demand for precision and efficiency, both bureaucracy and capitalism emphasised the necessity of "impersonality", as Weber put it, "objective discharge of business primarily means a discharge of business according to calculable rules and without regard for persons." (ES 975).
For a highly capitalised city like Hong Kong, where the primary mission of the city is the continuity of "stability and prosperity", a predictable political and legal environment is essential to the development of economic enterprises, and the ever-continuing expansion of commerce and industry also depends on the organisational effectiveness and stability, which can only be guaranteed by bureaucracy in the long term (Held 1987). The long standing philosophy of "positive non-intervention" policy of the local government towards the market reflects the city's expectation of the minimum role taken by the government, and also a leader who has the least intention to interfere in the economy of the city - the qualities of neutrality and integrity are far more important than the political zest of the leader. As a result, civil servants can be considered the ideal leader of a highly capitalized city as Hong Kong.
The political writings of Weber have their roots in an attempt to analyse the conditions of Germany in the post-Bismarkian and post World War I period of time (Giddens 1972, Pfaff 2002). However, their roots in Germany do not make his work less convincing when analysing the political situation of Hong Kong. The transgression between bureaucratic officials and politicians in the city has already shown its weakness as projected by Weber.
With the inevitable increase of political responsibilities which were placed on the administrative system after the handover, the bureaucracy that was once considered highly efficient during the colonial era has appeared to show the cracks in the system (Lam 2005, Painter 2005). After the Principal Officials Accountability System was introduced and civil servants were politically appointed to be the ministers in the new system, serious incidents of maladministration and policy confusion, such as the legislation of the Article 23 of Basic Law in 2003, and the mishandling of the SARS epidemic in 2004, have seriously damaged the public's confidence in the government and resulted in the resignation of the responsible ministers, who were once the outstanding officials in their civil servant careers (Painter 2005).
Weber's political writings are contradicting with paradoxes. According to him, bureaucracy is a massive machine which is at the same time powerful and weak; the ultimate end of politics can be opposite to the intended one, as a result "not the true good follows good and evil for evil, the opposite is true" (FMW 123); with regard to the search of political leaders, Weber condemned the domination of the Bismarckian legacy, at the same time he suggested a charismatic solution to the political crisis, and longed for another "Caesaristic leader" to rescue the nation (Pfaff 2002).
However these irrational paradoxes have appropriately depicted the reality of politics. Through reading the characteristics of the "Caesaristic leader" depicted by Weber, it gives us a good reflection about the insufficiencies of the politicians in the reality. For those who would like to consider politics as a vocation, or for those who have a concern about the political future of Hong Kong, should stop being contended with our "Weberian bureaucratic model" but immerse themselves further into the other political works of Weber. Only then will they discover what kind of price the city is paying, if it gives itself up to the bureaucracy.