The alleviation of human misery through medical science has an abstract element that transcends the mundane, thus does not lend itself easily to practical analysis particularly in conjunction with legal regulation. This abstract element is contained within moral constraints on the freedom of science and any regulations must balance these two competing interests through carefully constructed ethical guidelines to protect individuals and society and to facilitate research and testing. This essay seeks to ground the debate with an exposition of the controversies surrounding the use of human embryological stem cells in research to better elucidate these abstract concepts and considerations. The legal framework provides an illuminating insight into the UK's attempt to balance competing interests between science and morality. As such the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 will be considered along with further primary and secondary legislation and caselaw.
It is asserted that the UK has one of the most liberal regulatory systems for these techniques. However the current regulations are by no means clear, cohesive or consistent, and any balance between competing ideologies could be questioned. As a global civilisation we hold answers to the immutable secrets of nature in such research, but the socio-legal ramifications of this could be further reaching than we allow.
In light of these arguments it must be questioned how a meaningful and internally cohesive system of regulation can be devised to reach the aim of balancing the interests of science and morality. As it stands, the development of new medical technologies to alleviate human misery are inhibited more by the lack of a consistent regulatory framework than they are by over-regularisation. Law has a role to play in facilitating scientific research as much as it does in limiting it. As elucidated by Samantha Halliday and Deborah Lynn Steinberg:
Without clarity and consistency it is difficult, if not impossible, to encourage informed debate on an area such as hESC research as there is no common ground from which to work. Halliday and Steinberg recognise the need for the view of 'scientists being objective and of non-scientists being irrational or merely ignorant' must be expelled. This cannot occur without a basic framework on which to build, although this should be based on law reacting to scientific innovation and not setting out the lawful ambit of inquiry.
Roger Brownsword suggests using the teleological approach would be appropriate to not only create such a framework but to underpin the social function of regulation itself. The 'regulatory connection', the balance between flexibility and certainty and generally and specifically applicable regulations, would be afforded through this approach. Halliday and Steinberg suggest a different approach. They would argue that the whole question of genetic exceptionalism needs unpacking, with particular regard to the tumultuous relationship of law and science, and how this illuminates the law's limitations in other spheres. Perhaps the best approach for this post-modern condition would be a post-modernist inquiry.