Clayton Ltd is a small company which sells ski equipment, and has been successful for five years. Recently, Clayton is considering expanding its business into Internet. Additional 2 million capital is needed to support this expansion. Clayton has been given two financing options from different institutions. They need to choose the most feasible and suitable option to fund its expanding.
There may be lots of factors that could contribute to the company's decision in the source of funds available. The basic methods of evaluating it is to consider the present situation of the company's financial status and then based on it decide which source of funds would be the best option for the company's welfare.
This paper will firstly evaluate different financial ratios of this company which are based on Clayton Ltd's historical financial statements for the latest two years and deduce several factors that this company need to consider before expansion. Secondly, the two funding options will be examined both from the positive side and negative side and relative assumptions will be stated according to the ratio evaluation. Thirdly, under the current circumstances, alternative sources of finance for Clayton will be recommended.
Financial ratio analysis mainly aims at determining the overall financial condition of a business (Dennis, 2006). Before any business expansion, it is crucial to analyze the current financial situation of the company and opt for the appropriate funding resources. As Gordon (2006) pointed out, ratio analysis can indicate how far a market might retreat and advance. Ratios for the financial status are to be calculated and referred as the foundation of the analysis. Ratio analysis is also an aid to decision making in the future, particularly in helping companies to decide what kind of funding sources they cold make use of in the future for either development, expansion or maintenance. The following part of the report analyses various financial ratios to help the company decide which source of funding would be ideal for the company.
Many businesses may experience sourcing additional funds when expanding, for Clayton, the lack of sufficient funding may be its most concern in the future. Therefore, alternative forms of finance need to be examined at the early stage of business expanding. In addition, the most appropriate sorts of finance for the business need to be deduced to minimize the risk of business failure.
When a business is trying to raise finance for future development and expansion, the decisions may be based on which is the 'cheapest' source of funding. Alongside the issues relating to cost, another issue that is important is the impact of the chosen financing method on the business.
The valuation of a business is a set of dynamic numbers which may change almost on a daily basis. The company has to be very specific and prudent while deciding the source of finance for any purpose that is of benefit for the company.
Theories are all very well and sound good on paper, but it is not necessary to be a financial genius to know, for example that a business with more fixed interest bearing debt will be more vulnerable to changes in interest rates than a business with less debt.
As a final word, Clayton has to be concerned about their liquid assets while deciding their source of finance. It could be the main factor for them to decide a source of finance form any other sources, as it is seen from the balance and income sheets that they do not have a very good record of keeping liquid sources with them, and could be a major are of concern for them in the future.