Any cellular phone, such as the Nokia 6100, falls under the category of consumer products. A consumer product such as this has a considerable amount of attention paid to its aesthetic details and other aspects that affect its sale such as cost, weight and life span of the instrument. It consists of a large number of small and intricately designed parts that add up to make it look appealing. It is nearly impossible to create and assemble these tiny parts without the help of tools such as Computer Aided Design (CAD) and Computer Aided Manufacture (CAM) from its original design to its large scale production. This is because the high levels of accuracy and tolerance that need to be achieved in the parts in order to design and manufacture such a product cannot be achieved without using these devices. These tools not only assist in making the item, but also help the industry in saving costs, manufacture time and other essentials, which are crucial features for bettering production techniques.
The case study concentrates on the analysis of the outer casing (as shown in Fig. 1) and keypad of the phone (as shown in Fig. 2). The casing is divided into two halves, the top and bottom, that clasp together to enclose the inner body of the phone. The top casing has empty slots through which the keypad fits from underneath. This casing also has a transparent section that fits directly on top of the screen of the phone.
The use of CAD in designing these parts of the phone is important in order to get a perfect fit while assembling all the parts together. For this, they are individually checked and assembled. Assemblies such as this, with numerous small parts, are very hard to put together and visualise with the help of hand-made drawings as compared to 3-dimensional prototypes that can be seen on CAD. Changes brought about in one part mostly affect the dimensions of the rest of the parts in the component. Such changes are difficult to incorporate into hand-made drawings, and hence, CAD makes it practical and easy to make modifications to the design of the component.
The phone casing serves as protective cover for the interior body of the phone. Therefore, its main purposes are to prevent entry of water and dust inside, act as an electrical insulator for safety purposes, and also be light in weight. A good surface finish is also required as it forms the exterior of the component. Both the top and bottom casings are most likely moulded from an inexpensive polymer known as Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS). Its advantage over other substances is that it has excellent strength, rigidity and toughness, and is highly crack resistant. These qualities ensure that the cover is durable because it is prone to a lot of wear. The material is light, so it also helps to reduce the weight of the casing (78 grams), along with being a poor conductor of electricity and being water resistant. All these properties suit the requirements of the product.
The keypad of the phone requires a lot more detailing than the cover. It needs to be aesthetically perfect for a user, and hence, its CAD designs are repeatedly altered in order to have it perfected. The keys are made of a soft polymer and there is a translucent silicon rubber layer that holds together these keys (as shown in Fig. 2). This layer is coated underneath by a substance that has to be a good conductor, presumably carbon. It comes in contact with the circuit on the keypad below when a key is pressed, and completes the circuit to transmit electrical signals. The keys on the keypad are prone to repeated compression and hence have to be very wear resistant. The polymer used to produce the keys should be relatively soft so that the feel of the key is not rough when pressed.
Rapid prototyping techniques are first used to determine and predict whether computer designs of the different parts of a component will fit perfectly once they are manufactured. To make a prototype of the casing and the keypad of the phone, either the process of laser sintering or fused deposition can be used. These rapid prototyping machines are expensive, but they help to assess the feasibility of the designs well in time before production begins. They have excellent accuracy since they are directly made from CAD models.
All the mould designs have to be fully supported by analytical results from Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). This analysis technique will be ideal to ensure that the flow of the injected fluid will be suited to the shape of the moulds so that any gaps or pockets of air will be minimised or altogether avoided. This method finds out the best mould design and injection method for each part of the component.
Finite Element Analysis (FEA) should be used to determine the shrinkage properties of the material in the process of moulding. The mould shape affects the cooling rate of the material as well.
After the rapid prototyping process and CFD and FEA analysis, the designs of the parts are programmed into the Computerised Numerical Control (CNC) machinery to machine the core and cavity of the mould that form a part of the mould that is used for injection moulding. As the parts are small and the numbers to be produced are large, 'multi cavity moulds' are highly recommended. Multiple moulds of the same component can be made in a single injection of the fluid polymer. Industries heavily rely on processes such as this that are more efficient and economical. A 3-axis machine is capable of machining these kind of moulds for the phone casing and keypad.
The cover of the phone has a significant amount of detailing, such as the empty slots and the clasping features to prevent entry of water etc., and aesthetically appealing smooth curves in the design for better hand grip. The keypad also has a very intricate design. Therefore, the parts cannot be produced simply by processes such as pressing or extrusion. Injection moulding seems to be the best process for the manufacture of such aparts. This is because it is quick and gives the finish and the intricacies required by the design. It is perfectly suited for polymers such as ABS and the soft polymer used in the keypad.
The process of reverse engineering can be used to replicate existing components. For example, a version of such a phone that is already being manufactured can be scanned and imported into a surfacing software. The part dimensions and other aspects can be distorted and modified to suit the new product and a new model can be generated that can be followed by rapid prototyping, CNC machining etc. This method can save a lot of crucial time in designing similar parts over again.
Industries always look out for better techniques that optimise cost, time and produce better products for them. The more detailing that products require, the more CADCAM helps in making the process of design and manufacture easy. Ultimately, the most important aspect that affects a product is its quality.