The essay examines the operation of the 'Leniency Notice' as a weapon to destabilise the effects of Cartels which are prohibited by Articles 81 and 82 of the EC treaty or Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act. The essay will begin by giving a definition of the 'European Commissions' Leniency Notice and Cartels followed by a concise discussion of the difficulty of detecting and proving the existence of a cartel which consumers must view in light of the 'leniency notice'. The essay will attempt to address the issues derived from the policy objectives of imposing penalties on those individuals who commit an offence but in effect are not penalised. This essay will address more specifically the operation of the notice in the EU 'although reference will be made to the US antitrust laws where appropriate given its increasing influence in a domestic and EC context." The Commissions notice was firstly introduced in 1996. However, it was revised and issued in February 2002 as it was seen that the notice clearly 'did not emulate the 'DOJ' success in a number of respects." Therefore, the essay will most importantly discuss the limitations of the operation of the EC notice in light of the successes of the 'United States' notice. Nevertheless, despite its limitations its successes so far are promising and undeniably models as a weapon for the beginning of the destruction of cartels. The essay will conclude that the operation of the notice may still have to be improved before it can be as successful as the US notice.
The EC notice guarantees full immunity, as well of a reduction, in fines of an undertaking who 'volunteers self-incriminating information concerning a cartel...in which they have participated. They do so in exchange for' immunity from fines once stringent conditions are met' prior to or during an investigation. The notice aims to protect the interests of consumers by limiting and if possible eradicating the operations of hard core cartels. By 'hard core cartels I mean price fixing, bid rigging, and territorial and product allocations'' with the aim of restricting competition, which in turn harms consumers. Cartels are predominantly conducted on a covert basis, this thereby makes the difficulty of detecting cartels an onerous one. However, cartels are fissile in nature. Therefore, the notice aims to destabilise the operation of the cartel by piercing the unstable secrecy which surrounds it and eventually terminate the cartel. Furthermore, the commission has to provide 'sufficiently precise and coherent' evidence in order to prove the existence of the cartel. Thus, the operation of the notice 'benefits the commission allowing it not only to pierce the cloak of secrecy... but also to obtain insider evidence of the cartel infringement' which in turn helps to detect the existence of a cartel and 'tackles the problem the Commission faces in getting hold of sufficient information to establish the existence of infringements." Therefore, the operation of the notice must be viewed in light of the difficulty of detecting and proving the existence of cartels.
The interests of consumers in ensuring that such practices are detected and brought to an end outweigh the policy objectives of imposing penalties on those individuals whom have committed an offence but who fully cooperate with the competition authority. Despite this, retributive concerns have arisen in regard to the operation of the notice. This is because the notice 'compromises some core values of criminal and penal jurisprudence, by excusing and rewarding a major offender' in a cartel. Therefore, the notice may be seen as a social and criminal limitation as a whole. However, this limitation can be justified in light of the following argument. The notice is 'not...available to a cartel member who...coerced other members of the cartel." Therefore, 'serious delinquency within the cartel will be recognised." Thus, consumers are assured that those cartel members whom coerced, and played 'a determining role' will be penalised and exempt from the benefits of leniency. Further, in violations like cartels there will be several parties involved therefore, 'even though one party gets off, there will be others to prosecute, and their prosecutions will be more certain." This means that the policy objectives of imposing penalties on those individuals who have committed an offence and should be punished are not compromised so that cartel practices are detected and brought to an end. Hence, 'this new notice should not, in any way, be understood as reflecting a more lenient approach in the fight against...anti-competitive practices." In light of this argument, consumers should view the notice positively as retributive arguments have been addressed within the operation of the notice.
In order to discuss the limitations of the EC notice in light of the US notice it is important to mention that 'the US Leniency means immunity from prosecution' and 'in the EU program; leniency is described in terms of reductions in fines." This is because infringements of competition law in the 'European Union' do not give rise to criminal liability but in the US it does. The limitations of the EC notice will be discussed as an entity and also in light of the successes of the US notice.
However, despite the limitations discussed it cannot be denied that the notice, so far has been successful in detecting and prohibiting cartel activity. Therefore, the operation of the notice should not only be discussed in light of its limitations.
One should also note that, the US notice has not always been so successful. It has had its time to develop and improve upon its limitations and the EC notice will do the same and reach more successes in time. However, it is clearly evident that the new notice has and will continue to produce better results than the 1996 notice. Nonetheless, the '1996 notice was very successful' in detecting cartels and 2001 was a remarkable year for the detection of cartels where fines reached a total of 'EUR 1.836 billion...between 1996 and 2002." Specifically 'Out of a total of 24 decisions imposing fines... firms cooperated with the Commission under the scheme in 17 cases." The notice was used in a variety of industries such as chemicals, banks, airlines, beer and paper. The year 2002 was also another successful year for the commission as five out of nine cartels, used the notice and gained immunity. This included the case of 'Sotheby's/Christy's
' Sothebys were fined EUR 20.4 million while Christy's gained immunity, 'Electrical and mechanical carbon and graphite products'
 Morgan Crucible received full immunity and because the second undertaking Carbon Lorraine provided substantial information they received 40% reductions in their fine. Therefore, this reflects that the notice is to a great extent destabilizing cartels and corporations do see the advantages of the notice and have taken it seriously. Therefore, in practice and despite its limitations the notice has indeed 'proved a formidable tool for encouraging firms to cooperate with the commission.'
It should also be noted that the commission are continuously working on the notice. This is reflected through the 'Draft Commission Notice on Immunity from fines and reduction of fines' in cartel cases which if implemented in the future will take away the discretionary nature of the dawn raid test and will introduce a discretionary marker system, as well as other proposed amendments. Therefore, the commission should be commended for their work.
The notice is effective as it addresses the difficulty of detecting and proving the existence of a cartel and also the retributive concerns surrounding leniency for cartel offenders. It has been successful since its introduction in 1996 as it has resulted in a number of cartels being detected. The limitations of the notice such as the lack of criminal sanctions, amnesty plus, a marker system and the fact that a cartel member may be liable to civil and criminal proceedings in member states and the continuous lack of transparency and certainty may reduce the effectiveness of the operation of the notice within the EU. Moreover these limitations fall into the three prerequisites needed to create a successful leniency notice, namely severe sanctions, heightened fear of detection, and transparency. Thus, it is likely that the EC notice may not as yet emulate the successes of the US notice until certain improvements have been made. The improvements consists of the introduction of criminal sanctions for cartel behaviour, the addition of amnesty plus and a marker system, the issues of confidentiality and the vagueness of the meaning of the dawn raid test are addressed and lastly if the member states are willing to align their laws with the ECN Model Leniency programme. However, it must be noted that the notice is a recent reform which needs time to develop as the US notice has had time to develop. In time the notice will create success stories like that of the US as long as it continues to improve on its limitations. The commission is no doubt working to achieve this objective, and this is reflected through the 'draft Commission Notice on Immunity from fines' and the introduction of the ECN model Law.