Please see Appendix A.
Set the original point, P0.Then move to P1 and put down the pen onto the paper. Draw the frame by moving the pen from P1 to P2 to P3 to P4 and back to P1. Lift up the pen and move it to the top right corner of the letter "Y" on the right hand side. Put down the pen to draw the letter "Y" that the finish point is the same as the starting point of drawing. Lift the pen up and move it to the top right corner of the letter "Y" on the left hand side. Put down the pen and again, draw another "Y" on the left. Finally, lift the pen up.
Please see Appendix B.
During the execution of the program, everything went ok. But before the execution, some correction of the program is needed. On the line of "10 APPROS P0:TRANS(-30,45,100)", it should be "10 APPROS P0:TRANS(-30,45,), 100". Also, I declare "Y=0" which the technician said the program is not allowed as it is one of the programming language/ character in the program; it has its own meaning. Therefore, I changed it from Y to YG.
The program would use the end point of the last program as P0 for the second time. It is because P0 in the program is not defined. Therefore, we need to declare where the starting point, P0, is by using the teach pendant. If we didn't do so before the second execution, it will use the end point of the last execution as the starting point of the next execution. Hence, the robot will draw out of the paper.
Linear interpolation and joint interpolation are used to draw the frame. For join interpolation, a precise straight line can be drawn depends on the type of joints that the robot has. It also depends on the positions of the point the robot move from and move to. If only one joint move, the robot will produce a simple arc, centered on the axis of rotation of the joint with a radius equal to the distance from the axis to the point.
To predict the precise shape of the frame, we need to know where P1, P2, P3 and P4 are related to the robot and the distance between.
The path for POINT1 to POINT2 and POINT 3 to POINT4 will be a curved lines while the path for POINT 1 to POINT4 and POINT2 to POINT3 are straight line.
i. The sides were straight and all the corners were perfectly square.
The robot need to stop at the exact points of the frame that the speed can not be too fact when cutting the frame. Therefore, I will use "CPOFF" command as this set the robot to point-to- point mode
ii. The sides were straight and all the corners were "radiused".
The speed must be fast in order to draw "radiused" corner. An extra command is not needed as the robot will move smoothly and not stopping at any corners without setting it to point- to- point mode