This report intends to reveal and explain a few aspects of the biomedical design, function, applications and limitations of the process of Pulse Oximetry.I have done a bit of research on the parameters and mechanism of pulse oximetry.This resource includes a brief description of the parameters that are determined using the pulse oximetry process like the SpO2 levels and the blood. I have also recorded the readings of a subject using an IPOD and OEM oximeters during a lab session we had and with this I also intend to compare the performance and accuracy of these two instruments and also highlight their limitations. I have also given a brief description about the future developments and applications of pulse oximetry.
Pulse Oximetry is a method that is used to determine the oxygen saturation in the blood or the SpO2 levels and heart rate in terms of bpm (beats per minute).It is a NON INVASIVE process that does not require any incisions or injections to be made on the patient's body in order to determine the required parameters.
The blood in our body contains two types of Haemoglobin i.e. oxygenated oxy-Haemoglobin and Plain hemoglobin that is not oxygenated. Thus the ratio of the oxygenated haemoglobin to the total amount of Haemoglobin in the blood in terms of percentage called the SpO2 level of the blood. The oxygen saturation of the arterial blood or the blood flowing out of the heart is called SaO2 while SpO2 is the oxygen saturation of the entire blood in the body. But as far as this report is concerned I have used it interchangeably.
The pulse oximetry instruments normally consist of a probe attached to the finger, ear or even stuck on to the skin. In the IPOD and OEM devices that I happened to use had a finger clip with sensors attached to a measurement board or a computerized unit which displays the parameters that are being measured i.e. the heart rate and SpO2 levels. The measurement board can also be programmed to beep alerts when the heart rate and Spo2 levels fall below permissible levels in the patient being monitored.
The Fundamental principle of all oximeters is the difference in the spectral absorption of oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin. The oximeters produce two different light waves of the wavelengths 640 nm and 805 nm.These light waves are partially absorbed by the haemoglobin in the blood in different amounts depending on whether they are oxygenated or deoxygenated. The sensors compute the absorption of both the wavelengths by the blood and use this information to compute the ratio of the oxygen saturation in the blood or the SpO2 level.
There are 2 methods of transmitting light and detecting it. They are called transmission and reflectance methods. The transmission method has the emitter and photo detector opposite to each other with the tissues in between them. The light from the photo detector passes through the tissues and is received by the photo detector on the other end. The Reflectance method has the emitter and photo detector on top of the tissues. The light from the emitter hits the tissues and bounces back to the photo detector.
The Pulse Oximetry apparatus also works on the principle of Beer Lambert law which states that the Optical density D identifies the concentration of a substance in a solution where the optical density is the log of the reciprocal of the transmission. Thus
In the earlier days before pulse oximetry was invented the SpO2 levels were measured by taking a sample of blood onto a slide. Light is then passed on the sample and the red and infra red transmissions obtained are used to compute the SpO2 level.
The ear helix (pinna) is also a site that is used for measuring the oxygen saturation of the blood using Pulse Oximetry.Given below is a diagram showing the % transmission of oxygenated, deoxygenated haemoglobin and the total blood flowing through the ear with varying wavelength of incident light.
The point at which the transmission of oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin is equal is called the isobestic point and it corresponds to a wavelength of 805 nm.
Ref [1]: page 125
Shown Below is a Simple Diagram of the Pulse Oximetry equipment.
Ref [1]: page 125
The Instrument comprises of a lamp that illuminates a fold of tissues containing the blood vessels. The light transmitted is detected by the infrared detectors P.Amplifiers A enlarges the signals and the ratio circuit R processes the signals using a look up table that uses empirical formulae and calibrates the required values.
Our objective was to use the different Pulse Oximeters available and measure their accuracy and performance. In order to do this we used a subject and measured his heart rate and SpO2 levels at rest, after 20secs of vigorous exercise and at motion.
We used the OEM and IPOD enabled Pulse Oximeters on our lab sessions. The basic mechanism in all these oximeters is quite the same. It's just the signal transmission and calibration process that varies. We used a moderately built 19 year old boy as the subject.
We measured his pulse rate and SpO2 levels at rest.
He was then made to exercise vigorously for 20 seconds and the measurements were repeated.
The measurements were then repeated with physical movement like shaking the hand or head or the body.
We then recorded the readings on to a spreadsheet and plotted a graph of the signal amplitude of the 6 spreadsheets that we obtained.
Byte 1 is a bye that represents the status and is always set to 1.Byte 2 represents status of the data and 511 represents bad data. Byte 3 represents the amplitude of the signal received and 127 represent bad data. The byte 4 represents the actual data carried that is required i.e. the pulse rate and the SpO2 level. It contains a series of 3 zeroes and there are 3 or 4 values after the 3 zeroes which are very significant.
The first value represents the most significant byte for the heart rate
The second value represents the least significant value for the heart rate
The third value represents the SpO2 level
The Pulse oximeters that we worked on measured the signals every 1/75 th of a second. Such high was the level of precision of those instruments. Given below is a graph showing the time intervals on the x-axis and the signal amplitude on the y-axis of the ipod and OEM pulse oximeters readings when the subject was at rest, after exercise and in motion.
On an average the values of heart rate and pulse rate measured using ipod at rest were found to be 70 and 98 respectively and after exercise the SpO2 value initially wavered between 97 and 98 and then stabilized at 98 and the pulse rate shot up to 117.
The advent of Pulse Oximetry has been quite a breakthrough in the field of biomedical engineering as it has made Oxygen saturation measurements easier for the paramedics and less painful for the patients. Earlier the blood was drawn from the patients several times a day and its oxygen saturation level was measured by gas chambers that used chemical detectors or haemoximeters that used spectroscopic principles similar to the pulse oximeters.
Pulse oximetry is now used in a variety of applications like
Intensive care Units
Pulse Oximetry has now been found to be extremely useful in detecting and screening Congenital Heart diseases
Although the Pulse Oximetry Process is widely used in many applications and is fairly accurate. It also has some limitations like any other instrument.
If there is a reduction in the blood flow due to vasoconstriction caused by hypertension, Cold, Cardiac failure, etc, then the signals obtained are insufficient for analysis.
The bright light in the operation theatre and the shivering of the patient could cause error in the readings
Pulse Oximetry cannot distinguish the various forms of Haemoglobin and hence it will cause a serious error in readings. For example Carboxyhaemoglobin is registered as 90% haemoglobin hence the SpO2 level will be overestimated and when Methane blue is used in surgeries it combines with the haemoglobin to form methaemoglobin which will be regarded as 85% oxygen saturation.
The presence of nail varnishes can also cause an error in the readings.
However Pulse Oximetry is still a breakthrough in the field of Biomedical Instrumentation and the technology will be used by the medical professionals for a long time to come and of course the technology shall also evolve with time to suit the needs of the hour till a better technology with a drastically better edge takes over from it.