The UK car industry is one of the most complex and interesting industries to analyse.It is characterized by a number of positive and negative characteristics. In general it is a market filled with Variety, colour, cut-throat competition and obviously wide opportunities.
The UK Car Market is the second largest car market in Europe after Germany.The volume of the market for 2003 was 2.6 million cars.The market is also filled with opportunities as it is growing at the rate of 1.9%. As on 2003.1
The industry is really huge in terms of volume and it can be classified into various segments.Given below is a table of the various segments, their current volumes and their predicted volume in the year 2008
Thus it is very evident that the UK car industry is a really voluminous market with a variety of segments. It is said that "With wider opportunities comes tougher competition.". The UK car market is no exception. The Market has a typical Oligopoly with just too many players fighting for their share of their market.References1.: w
Source:  there is no particular monopolistic dominant player in the market with more than 25% market share so it's a veer healthy market with healthy competition. Thus the customers stand to gain from this situation. Thus the consumers of this market are very powerful dictating terms to the manufacturers unlike a few other monopolistic markets where the companies dictate terms to the market.On the BCG Matrix, I would place the Car market on the Star Grid because anyway people would need some means of transporting themselves. Hence the car market will remain to be a market filled with opportunities. Especially with no alternate fuels in sight and public transport failing to gain popularity in the huge developing countries where cars have a big market due to lack of convenience. The car market will remain to stay in the star phase for a longer time to come.BEHAVIOUR OF COMPETETIONLike mentioned earlier there are too many players in the market and there's cut throat competition with each manufacturer trying to kill the other. The Stiff competition is forcing companies to reduce prices and eventually losing on their margins. The consistent Drop in their margins is even leading to bankruptcy and huge losses with some companiesDaewoo had to close down because they went bankrupt in 2002.Rover MG faced huge losses and is still in trouble.Mitsubishi in Japan is facing problems of bankruptcyFord has been making a net loss world over for the last few years.Thus a lot of companies are facing problems and hence the entire car market is also characterized by a lot of take overs.Daewoo was taken over by General Motors when it went bankrupt.Mitsubishi is to be taken over by GM gradually. Many European brands were bought over by Ford like Land Rover and Volvo. Thus the default characteristic of the market to be successful is bringing a lot of brands under the flag of a bigger company, thus these companies get access to all the segments of the voluminous car market by exploiting the different core competencies of the various brands in different segments. Thus the key to profit making and leadership in the automotive market is about playing the volume game. The more volume you sell, the more money you make.The behaviour of competition is also characterized by companies demonstrating their technological prowess by making hybrid and future concept cars.The world desperately needs alternative technology to the conventional internal combustion engines with the threat of exhaustion of fossil fuels. Thus the manufacturers are preparing themselves for their survival in the markets of the future and there's a close race in between the players.The financial opportunities in the market are immense as discussed earlier. Given below is a table of the revenue on capital employed of some of the leading players in the UK car market.
Source : Fame Database
Peugeot is a French company part of PSA Peugeot-Citroen. Their core competence is small cars and the price segment of the car market. They have a product range of 5 models and a total of 8 models including their variants.Given below is a list of the cars and their prices (in pounds)
Thus Peugeot is present in a wide variety of segments in the market but still their core competence is small cars and with rising fuel prices, I see a better future for small cars as they are more fuel efficient. Peugeot is also more renowned for it's expertise in diesel technology.Peugeot has a very clearly planned strategy for the next few years. They have their product line-up ready for launch and they are also working on the futuristic technologies. Their Mission statement is Reliability, Performance, looks and Innovation - The four values that embody the brand. This reflects their clear understanding of the market and the consumer in a clear and simple manner without using management jargons.They have a well organized World class plant at Ryton with a work force of 2800 workers. They have world class manufacturing equipment and machinery with a lot of Robots and the best manufacturing practices.Their return on capital employed in the UK has also been pretty high over the years. Although they've lost some market share last year, I'm sure they would be able to cope up in the near future. Especially for an entrepreneur investing his money revenue on capital employed is the only measure of how successful his investment can be and hence the money invested in Peugeot would be worthy of it.Thus if an entrepreneur is interested in entering the UK car market I would rather ask him to buy Peugeot rather than entering the market on his own.