Entrepreneurial Activities are always quite interesting and demanding. They demand huge amounts of Motivation, Co-ordination, wit, instincts and Energy levels. The process of preparing the Upper level Pitch for the Business idea that our team came up with was no exception.
We started the process by brainstorming to come up with a business idea. We looked at different type of Business ideas like Making Existing Products, Work on new Inventions, Improve upon Existing inventions, etc.It seemed like we had far too many Envision in our team to get us lost in the world of ideas and creativity. We started at innovating on pens and maybe went as far as Alien technology. We now needed an Enabler who'd think through these ideas, gauge them and give the team a direction to work on one of those ideas.
Our Team Leader, Jill got rid of most of the wild ideas and squared in on two of them. One of them was a Windmill that I built on my rooftop during the holidays as a hobby. It was an existing idea on which I had innovated a bit. The other idea was about sophisticated Micro Electro-Mechanical Devices of which we knew very little. We then decided to do some Market Research before deciding on our idea. After much work from all of my team-mates, we decided on the windmill because the other idea hadn't quite become popular as yet and it was difficult to get information about it.
Now, Technically It was my idea and I had to direct the team into what we needed to do or rather my team expected me to do it. I frankly don't understand People and Markets as well as I understand Technology. Our team then had too many meetings trying to figure out directions in which we should be working towards for the upper level pitch. We talked a lot, came up with more wild ideas but we didn't document any of them nor did we assign particular topics to members of our team to do some research on. As the team leader I thought Jill should've been a bit more assertive in handling the team.
Now I was getting really desperate about people not working in definite directions and also being the informal inventor of the product, I was being a bit passionate and attached to my idea. I didn't want people to mess around with it. If our Business plan fails it's be a failure to my product and hence my personal failure as well. So, I got out a piece of paper in the next meeting and got the team to do yet another session of brainstorming. It was about the various Topics that we'd need to cover during the presentation. We came up with a comprehensive list of Topics like Mission Statement, Organizational Structure, People and Finance, Product, Unique Selling, Points, Costs, Market, Grants, Competition, Marketing, Installation, Warranty and Service, Paybacks, PEST, SWOT analyses, Scope for Growth by innovation, etc.
We then put them in the order that we thought we should present. Under each of these topics we discussed about the details that need to be presented. We then divided these topics among ourselves to do a bit of research and send all the information to the Team Leader Jill to compile together as a presentation.
At this stage we saw a lot of Enactors rising in the team.Primodh went around London doing his Market Survey for our product.
We used insights we got in the lecture about raising capital. We imagined we were going to start the business 2 years after graduation which gave us a fairly good idea about the amount of savings we'd have. We also looked at the machinery cost, renting space, variable costs, etc and got a good idea about the amount of money we'd have to invest. We also looked at grants available for start ups and manufacturing units.
We also aimed at improving our brand image initially by offering a higher warranty period than our competitors.
We also had a marketing plan for targeting the people we thought were our potential customers by getting the details of the magazines and news papers they'd read. We also planned to go to farmers markets with miniature demonstrations as both people and farmers were our target group.
Although the cost Price of our product was quite low, we wanted to ride with the tide of the market and make some cash initially before reducing prices and growing our market share by killing competition. Besides offering the product for a reduced price initially would demean the image of the product in the customer's mind.
At this stage we had an appointment with Francis Greene who directed us towards working on planning permissions, locating a niche in the market, etc.
Fortunately for us, Our Team Mate Amal's Mum works for the Planning Commission and she told us that the houses do not need planning permission for towers of our size and even if some counties needed permission, the planning commissions tend to be quite lenient towards renewable Energy Schemes.
We couldn't quite locate a niche or access to the market until we started working on the slides. While everyone went home for the weekend before the D-Day, Jill and I sat down to work on the slides. I sat down searching for more information on the web while she was compiling these slides. I accidentally stumbled upon the website of the grant agency that gave our customers grants for installing out product. They also had a page in their website about our competeitors.This proved to be quite useful and I was upset that the person who was supposed to work on that aspect didn't look into it.
I then prepared an n approximate cash Flow statement for the company to calculate the Payback for the investment.
During the presentation, I did think Jill did a good Job in presenting and I definitely cooked up facts while answering questions but that's the way business works. We need to win over people at any cost.
Overall it was a fascinating experience that exhausted my brains by making me think of the various factors involved in starting and running a business.