The World Bank should be abolished. Established in 1944 in the form of six principal institutions for the purpose of facilitating post-war reconstruction, the contemporary World Bank slogan is 'Working for a World Free of Poverty' with poverty reduction placed as the World Bank's "overarching goal" (History).
Critiques raised against the World Bank include an undemocratic voting system, lack of transparency, projects involving environmental and human rights disasters, failed poverty reduction projects and an inability to make effective reforms demonstrated by ignoring recommendations made by its own commissions (World Development Movement 2006). Some commentators believe that "certain fundamental changes" in policy and charter can and have been made to address these criticisms (Head 2004: 242). The establishment of a policy on indigenous peoples in 1982 and an environmental assessment policy in 1989 among other reforms are perhaps examples of the capability of the World Bank to 'learn' from mistakes. However, it has also been noted that recognition of human rights in the Bank's work arises selectively and marginally with little substantive relevance to its research agenda and policy development (Darrow 2003: 25), and that projects still do not incorporate issues such as social impact and environmental sustainability in their original conceptualization resulting in "'end of pipe-line' remedies" (Fox and Brown 1998: 9).
Moreover, what remains firmly entrenched is an ideology that continues to be driven by a neo-liberal developmental model. The World Bank is an ideological organization that defines priorities and funds projects according to its own ideas of development. While writers such Rahnema (1997) and Anghie (2004) critically interrogate ideologies behind concepts such as progress, good governance and development, the World Bank, despite evolution in its development thinking throughout the decades, remains attached to neo-liberal economic policies where poverty reduction requires economic growth, "which in turn could only be the product of the removal of virtually all shackles on private investment" (Bendana 2006: 14). For example, the 'challenges' segment on the Bank's website includes the creation of infrastructure to "implement legal and judicial systems that encourage business, protect individual and property rights, and honor contracts" (Challenges).
The Bank's annual World Development Reports exhibit quintessential neo-liberal 'development talk.' These include discussions regarding property rights and private ownership coupled with reform of legal, financial and governmental institutions (1996 From Plan to Market); issues of governance and corruption (1997 The State in a Changing World); the drive to become a development 'Knowledge Bank' (1998/1999 Knowledge for Development); connecting market players, opening trade and promoting competition (2002 Building Institutions for Markets); and creating a good investment climate (2005 A Better Investment Climate for Everyone). What these reports amount to is a group of people ('experts' and 'consultants') determining a set of ideas and 'development knowledge' and presenting them as "scientific, authoritative truths" for (forced) consumption by masses (Anghie 2004: 265).
Could the World Bank ever accept that rather than being a neutral and ahistorical concept, development can also be constructed as a violent imposition of power, and (seismically) shift its ideology to recognize and accept other paths to development? The answer is most likely 'no'; therefore, abolition is the solution because "suffering demands epochal shifts" (Bendana 2006: 10). Whether a new institution should be created in its place demands revisiting the World Bank's ultimate goal - poverty reduction - and unraveling the inherited hegemonic discourse on development before simply replicating a new body with a different agenda, and the answer may lie far from a single overarching international, or even regional, structure making decisions regarding the destiny of millions of impoverished peoples.