The state was the focal point from which the presentation on globalization and global governance was presented. The Westphalian model of international law that emerged in Europe was largely based on the existence of sovereign territorial states regulating their internal affairs, creating and enforcing laws based on national interest, and engaging in diplomatic relations with other states allowing for mutual coexistence but without interfering in internal matters (Held et al. 1999: 37-38). The character of the state, the way it operates in the world system and its role as a tool of governance has changed as a result of the globalization process within the last several decades that has witnessed the "dramatic intensification" of transnational interactions (Santos 2002: 165).
One of the prominent features of this process is the manner in which governance is fragmented into a "multi-layered network of bodies and institutions" besides the state (Piccioto 1996-7: 1021). The presentation moved on to examine the changing nature of governance, looking at international regulatory regimes (economic governance, environment, health, and human rights); types of different actors (MNCs, NGOs, social movements); and mechanisms (use of 'soft law' such as codes of conduct, guidelines, understandings) that are used to govern. The totality of the interaction of these various elements represents global legal pluralism.
Finally, the presentation identified the challenges of global governance. These include the concerns about where the centre of power lies and who wields it, how the notions of right and wrong will be applied in modeling the new order, and the challenges faced by the 'globalisation' of terrorism, crime, drug-trafficking, and sex-trafficking.
My section of the presentation examined the international regulatory regimes that highlight not only the multifaceted nature of globalization, but also the inadequacy of the Westphalian model of the sovereign state to deal with the wide-ranging governance issues that globalization entails. The regimes identified were:
Global Economic Governance: Institutions such as the WTO, the IMF, the World Bank, MNCs/TNCs have transformed the nature of economic relations. Some of the prominent features of this global economy are the distribution of production facilities across different countries and the fragmentation of production and ownership (Snyder 2002: 66). Policy implications for this new political economy model include the opening up national economies to trade, conformity of domestic prices to international market prices, privatization of state-owned enterprises and the maintenance of private property rights (Santos 167).
Global Mass Media and Communication: The revolution in information technology, telecommunications, the Internet has played a crucial role connecting individuals and groups across geographical boundaries, but unequal access to these new forms has also "created novel patterns of political inclusion and exclusion in global politics" (Held et al. 1999: 58).
Global Ecological Issues: Environmental degradation is increasingly recognized as a global concern, reflected in international environmental agreements, treaties and principles, but involvement of the World Bank and WTO raises doubts on the actual commitment to environmental protection (Elliott 2003: 67).
Global Health Issues: The management of epidemics such as SARS and the Avian flu requires cooperation on a global scale, with a central role played by the World Health Organization (WHO).
Conflict Management: Efforts to maintain peace has become a major part of the UN's work in the form of peacekeeping operations, supervision of elections, humanitarian interventions all of which intrude into internal state affairs.
The International Human Rights Regime: Regional and international human rights conventions spawned within the past several decades undermine the exclusive authority and legitimacy of states if they fail to respect human rights.
Although far from presenting the entire spectrum of governance issues, the above points do indicate reasons behind the "relative decentring of the nation-state as an actor in the world system" (Santos 2002: 53). To give just one example, the WTO's dispute-resolution panels have authority to enforce WTO rules against national governments (Slaughter 2004: 22). It is also important to keep in mind that these regimes do not operate in isolation, but converge in a number of ways. For example, the World Bank's Comprehensive Development Framework covers financial aspects in addition to health and population issues, sustainable development, and environmental and cultural issues illustrating its reach beyond economic spheres of life (Cammack 39). Likewise, Structural Adjustment Policies often have detrimental effects on health and the environment because these issues are approached "from an economic and trade perspective" (Dodgson and Lee 2003: 97).
Sassen (1996) points out that the emergence of multiple regimes and actors has created a contested space, as the logic of global capital and financial markets, which is driven by profit, conflicts with the logic and language of human rights. This contestation is clearly at play in an example provided by Santos (2002) of the struggle of the U'wa people of Columbia to prevent Occidental Petroleum Co from drilling oil in their territory. The U'wa people used a number of resistance strategies to prevent the drilling, such as gaining the support of the Colombian federation of indigenous peoples in addition to global NGOs working on indigenous and environmental issues, and making cases before the Colombian Constitutional Court and the Inter-American Human Rights Commission.
The U'wa's resistance clearly represents a "clash of forces operating at different scales and in different sites" (Santos 2002: 252). Occidental Petroleum Co, which operates in the US, the Middle East and Latin America, has economic interests to drill oil, but this interest is in direct opposition to ecological, human rights, and possibly health regimes.
These struggles highlight how "the process of globalization is...selective, uneven and fraught with tensions and contradictions" (Santos 2002: 177). Although the U'wa's resistance has resulted in a temporary stalemate, it is not difficult to see how the claims of global capital override and encroach upon all other regulatory regimes.