The concept of burden-sharing in the context of forced migration raises a host of questions that ultimately spring from the question of what to do and how to deal with 'strangers' in our midst. In forced migration these 'strangers' arrive seeking safe haven, and particularly in cases of sudden mass influxes, place burdens and strains on the receiving host state. The Preamble of the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (hereafter the '1951 Convention') acknowledges that "the grant of asylum may place unduly heavy burdens on certain countries," and hence "a satisfactory solution of a problem of which the United Nations has recognized the international scope and nature cannot therefore achieved without international co-operation." This short statement raises a myriad number of questions such as what does it mean to have an 'unduly heavy burden'? What is the threshold of such a burden? What kind of 'solution' is envisaged and does it entail monetary compensation, or other forms of compensation? Is international co-operation a binding legal obligation, or simply an ethical one?
This paper focuses in the first part of this essay on the status of claims about justice that were voiced during the drafting of the Convention in the discussion of the notion of 'unduly heavy burden.' In the second part of this essay I analyze recent literature on burden-sharing examine the Tampa boat crisis as a case study where a large of refugees brought to the forefront questions relating to burden-sharing. Finally, I comment on Santos' proposition of a transnational conception of burden-sharing, and whether such a proposition is likely to succeed in light of growing restrictions on state borders.
The term 'burden-sharing' was not used in the Convention, or in the drafting process. Instead, the notion of 'unduly heavy burden' was inserted in the Preamble by the French delegation with the desire to express "the great human importance of the refugee problem," the need to tackle the refugee problem "in a generous spirit", and to emphasize that the problem "could only be solved  on the basis of justice, and not on purely legal considerations. " Here the French delegation is appealing to justice as part of the resolution to solving the problem and not just legal considerations. The question that emerges is why are solely legal considerations insufficient to solve the problem? Could a purely legal resolution to the problem possibly result in an unjust situation? Does justice here refer to justice on behalf of the plight of refugees, or justice on behalf of host countries taking in refugees? How may an ethical policy, if ethics should enter into the framework at all, be constructed in terms of refugee law?
The issue of justice with regards to the refugee situation is interesting for a number of reasons, one of them being the fact that one must think of justice not as a bounded concept within a particular community or nation, but of justice on a global or international scale simply because refugee flows inevitably traverse territorial boundaries, particularly in the case of massive displacement where refugees often spill across the borders of several countries. Refugee movements are by their very nature forced rather than voluntary, and failure to allow exit or entry may result in severe human rights violations. Debra Satz's remark that "humanity's claims are international" and that "neither nationality nor state boundaries, as such, have moral standing with respect to questions of justice" is particularly salient here because refugees by their very nature contest territorial boundaries, and this comes up directly against the states' jealously guarded sovereignty. She adds that one of the main challenges facing contemporary cosmopolitanism is the tension between global justice and "territorially based forms of democratic government" and that unless the latter is restrained in certain instances, such as closed border exclusion, people will be left vulnerable to human rights violations.
However, as Gregor Noll points out, "migration control is traditionally regarded as...the personal sovereignty of a state" and it is "doubtful whether international law obliges states to share the burdens of reception." While massive displacements of people should invite us to think about our responsibilities towards them, what exactly our obligations are is not clear. As will be shown below, recognition of responsibility was not matched by an explicit commitment detailing what actions needed to be taken to uphold this responsibility.
The commentary on the travaux preparatoires claims that the principle of burden-sharing proclaimed in the Preamble "has acquired enormous importance in dealing with refugee problems" and that the debate illustrates that international cooperation was intended both in the field of protection and also assistance. Indeed, much recent literature has been devoted to the concept of burden-sharing both on the international and regional level, the latter focusing on policies enacted within the European Union, and this section will briefly outline some of the ideas presented and their critiques.
On the international level, the writings of Hathaway/Neve and Schuck in particular stimulated heated debate. Hathaway and Neve propose allocating the physical and financial burdens of protecting refugees through 'sub-global associations' of states composed of inner and outer core groups in a kind of insurance scheme. Inner core states are those specifically, and outer core states are generally not immediately affected by refugee flows and so contribution will largely take the form of fiscal support and the provision of permanent resettlement for a small number of cases who cannot return home. Refugees will reside largely in their region of origin with respect of their fundamental human rights, and the goal is eventual repatriation once conditions are safe. Schuck puts forward a similar scheme of allocating protection and financial burdens through the creation of a market in refugee quotas by a group of states, with each assigned a protection quota. States could then trade their quotas by paying other participating states to fulfill their obligations.
On the regional level on the European Union, Noll has developed analytical frameworks based on risk distribution and public goods theory respectively. Noll approaches the problem by analyzing risk distribution along a game-theoretical approach, focusing initially on two host states that are negotiating the sharing of burden, and then expanding to involve other actors, highlighting how risks are shifted among players in "criss-crossing alliances." Noll argues that states adopt four main strategies to externalize costs and risks: shifting costs onto other states through a burden-sharing scheme that presumes agreement on cooperation based on expectation of reciprocity; pushing refugees to other countries, for example, through safe-third country agreements; preventing migration altogether; and significantly reducing asylum seeker's rights on one's territory.
One of the main criticisms leveled against Hathaway/Neve and Schuck on the practicality of their schemes is that the transfer payments from North to South are unlikely to materialize once refugees are contained in the South. On an ethical level, their proposals have also been criticized for the commodification of refugees, particularly by using the analogy of an insurance scheme thus associated refugee flows "with other forms of insurable risk, such as natural disaster." Smith has also argued that out-sourcing obligations to other states would have the added effect of "muffling...these voices that educate us to the persecution in their homelands." The criticisms raise some consensus over the moral and ethical issues of such burden-sharing proposals, pointing out how they fail to recognize the humanitarian element that underpins, or at least should underpin, the provision of asylum.
The Tampa boat crisis is a cogent example of an utter failure to shoulder the responsibility of providing asylum and access to one's territory, thereby inducing great suffering. In August 2001, over 400 mostly Afghan asylum seekers were stranded on the Norwegian freighter Tampa for over a week after being rescued from a sinking boat; although the Tampa was headed for Australia's Christmas Island, it was informed by Australian authorities that it would not be allowed to dock there and instructed to disembark in Indonesia instead. There were reports of illness among refugees, and conditions on the ship were cramped as it was only designed to hold 30 crew. Despite coming under great criticism by the UN Secretary-General and the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Australian Prime Minister declared that, "...it is the right thing to do...and it was in Australia's national interest." In the end, an agreement was reached for 150 asylum-seekers to have their claims assessed in New Zealand, and the rest in the Pacific Island State of Nauru.
What went wrong with burden-sharing in the Tampa case? Was there a case to be made for Australia's "national interest" to trump humanitarian concerns? Or did the Australian government fail to even extend the right to hospitality as outlined by Kant's jus cosmopolticum? It appears that the Australian government preferred to pursue the strategy of pushing refugees onto others as outlined by Noll. The Australian government signed Memorandums of Understanding with Papua New Guinea and Nauru in October 2001 and December 2001 respectively to host more asylum seekers intercepted by the Australian Navy. Savitri Taylor points out that the unequal relationship between Australia and these two Pacific islands which depend a great deal on financial assistance, played an important part in accepting the role of offshore processing centres for asylum seekers and that both countries were in a weak bargaining position when they accepted Australia's terms. The result was the shifting rather than sharing of burdens in a unilateral and unfair manner onto vulnerable neighbours by the Australian government, which exploited "its asymmetric power relationship...to achieve an outcome that was more in its own interests than theirs."
Tampa is just one of many cases where states have failed to honour the spirit of the 1951 Convention and failed to take justice and not simply legal considerations into account when formulating decisions. Taylor points out that because there was "no clear legal obligation" on states to take the responsibility for these rescuees at sea, Australia "took advantage of this lack of clarity" by insisting that responsibility for them lay elsewhere. Without an outright legal obligation to provide asylum it appears almost inevitable, particularly in today's political climate, that states will be concerned with limiting the number of people entering their borders than with the dictates of humanity.
In light of the inequity of the current international system that has placed enormous burdens on already vulnerable countries, Santos asks whether burden-sharing should "be conceived on a global scale? And will this be possible in an interstate system based on state self-centredness?" He suggests that "a new and more solidary transnational conception of burden sharing" ought to be implemented, arguing that in the future, environmental catastrophes will be a major cause of displacement, thus exposing "the dark side of capitalist world development and global lifestyles," and making environmental refugees the ideal candidates for this new transnational conception of burden-sharing. The obstacles faced in actually implementing such an idea is recognized by Santos who points out that they are unlikely to fall within the competence of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. In addition, Noll has noted that most Northern actors prefer regional burden-sharing to a global one because "risks in a regional scheme are a priori more circumscribed than those in a global one, which increases predictability and facilitates consensus among would-be participants."
However, regional schemes also fail to acknowledge that "many of the conflicts leading to mass refugee flows in recent years can themselves be traced either to the legacy of imperialist politics or to its pursuit in the contemporary era," and hence the large number of states in Africa hosting refugees would benefit from a global rather than regional burden-sharing scheme. When taking this externalist view of the reasons for displacement, refugees become more than just "necessitous strangers," and it becomes clear that justice obligations are owed to them. Such a discussion is not entirely different from those raised about global justice and poverty or global justice and the sweatshop industry. The important point, as Pogge points out, is not just an exposition of the goals and values of global justice but the "question of obligation" and responsibilities owed in the global context where harms are caused by a variety of agents. The debate concerning obligation and responsibilities was absent from the travaux preparatoires of the 1951 Convention as shown above, and in the Tampa case, the Australian government neither any obligations nor responsibilities to the stranded asylum seekers.
Suhrke has stated that, "in refugee matters, the logic of burden-sharing starts from the premise that helping refugees is a jointly held moral duty and obligation under international law." However, the practical realities of burden-sharing have shown that most states, particularly those of the North, would prefer to shift their obligations and responsibilities onto others whenever possible rather than recognize the words of Grahl-Madsen who said that,