In order to examine this question, it is important to establish what the term "revolutionary" actually means - a change that can be considered groundbreaking, which has never been experienced before, fundamentally altering the current situation. Therefore, it would be fair to argue that there were many things that were revolutionary about the French Revolution which occurred in 1789 that included not just legal and political changes, introduced for the first time in French society, totally reforming it, but also a whole new way of thinking that was influential in causing the Revolution and implementing these changes in the first place. These new ideas first came about during the middle of the eighteenth-century during a period known as Enlightenment. This essay will attempt to outline the major revolutionary changes that occurred during the French Revolution. However, the general focus of the essay will be on the early years of the Revolution because it could be argued that the it lasted until 1815 with the fall of Napoleon and covering this whole period would be both unfeasible and lacking in depth for such a short essay.
Before analyzing what was revolutionary about the French Revolution, it is important to spend some time to examining France before this momentous event took place in order to provide a comparison between the two periods. Previously France had been an absolute monarchy with the King having enormous power. There was no constitution, and there were three very clear classes in society: at the top were the clergy; next came the aristocracy and finally the "Third Estate" (the rest of the population). The power lay with the first two groups and Andress describes France as 'a society of feudal aristocratic domination' - the nobility (the clergy and aristocracy combined together) made up one percent of the population but owned twenty per cent of the land. The nobility also held many privileges such as exemption from tax or rights to special judicial treatment. Meanwhile, however, the lower classes were severely repressed. France was predominantly agricultural with twenty-four out of twenty-seven million of its population living in the countryside. There was a policy of high and variable taxation, but the "feudal" or "seigniurial" system produced even greater bitterness, as this meant peasants had to pay dues in addition to rent for the land. The taxation system was iniquitous 'With the most wealthy and powerful individuals and institutions (notably the Catholic Church) exempt from most taxes, and with more and more of the better-off buying into such privileges, the state had little choice to burden the poor'. Ultimately the Bourbon monarchy failed to modernize society, which consequently led to problems for the government and eventually culminated in the French Revolution itself - Forrest even claims that 'By the later 1780s even many of the privileged members of society were prepared to concede that they must sacrifice some of their privileges if the monarchy and the social system were to survive'.
A key element that was revolutionary about the French Revolution and in shaping society afterwards, was a new way of thinking, known as Enlightenment, that had initially begun during the mid-eighteenth-century by the philosophes led by writers such as Voltaire and Rousseau culminating in the twenty-eight-volume publication, Encyclopdie. However, later on in the century, these largely critical views of French society began to permeate down to the Third Estate who became more politically and socially aware as the notion of public opinion emerged for the first time in France and they therefore realized that changes could be made to improve their standard of living. Enlightenment prompted new ideas and a sense that change could occur for the better for the majority of the population - 'Science and reason were the keys which would turn the locks and liberate France from her feudal past'. Many philosophes truly believed that the absolute monarchy could improve communal welfare through the introduction of reason and logic by a successful and proficient state administration, but in reality rationalism and science were incompatible with an absolute monarchy and as Jones states - 'It did not take much nous to realize that "enlightenment"... could not be expected to spread beatifically over the nation without significant institutional change'. Therefore, the ideas from the Enlightenment period were indeed revolutionary and helped to contribute to the French Revolution itself as society became increasingly literate and the notion of public opinion arrived. Enlightenment was also important because the ensuing political, legal and institutional changes were largely based on its themes and ideas.
The new regime installed due to the Revolution occurring was itself revolutionary. As explained previously, France had until this point only experienced one form of rule: that of absolute monarchy. This had been the case for centuries, but now a constitutional monarchy was introduced - the king still had some power but the public were now much more significant in that many had the right to vote: 'Men over the age of twenty-five who paid the equivalent in taxes of three days' unskilled labour. These were the people, estimated to number around 4.3 million, who were given the right to participate in the electoral process'. They therefore could influence events that occurred in government, as there was now an attempt to 'shift from a decayed feudal society to one more congenial to the development of liberal capitalism'. Now the king had to rule on behalf of the people not just for the aristocracy. The major aim, though, was not to destroy the monarchy completely and replace it with democracy, but to transform the outdated institutions into a republican form of government. However, this did not prevent the transfer from one form of rule to another being revolutionary, because France had never experienced anything different before, so any change in terms of ruling the country was always going to be revolutionary.
Another highly revolutionary aspect of the French Revolution was the drawing-up of a Constitution, because France had never had one before. This revolutionary document encompassed the key words of "liberty, equality and fraternity" as basic rights were granted to the population for the first time. The Declaration of the Rights of Man was the preamble to the Constitution and within this section, the important changes can be seen, especially in the opening line - 'Men are born free and remain free and equal in their rights'. The government's purpose was to protect these rights (art. ii), arbitrary arrests and punishments were made illegal (art. iii), citizens had the right to participate in the electoral process (art. vi), people were to be considered innocent until proven guilty (art. ix) and free speech, press and freedom of religion were granted for the first time (arts. x, xi). These changes were extraordinarily revolutionary, because they occurred suddenly: the citizens had previously held virtually no rights and now this document changed everything almost overnight.
Not only were a large number of rights granted to the population for the first time because of the French Revolution, other rights and privileges were withdrawn from certain sectors of society, especially from the aristocracy. The writer abb Sieys 'demonstrated that the clergy was not strictly an estate at all but a profession... and that the aristocracy was isolated from the rest of the community by privilege'. There was a radical attack on aristocratic privileges including the withdrawl of exemption from tax, special judicial treatment and the collection of dues from peasants and by November 1790 all ranks of nobility had been abolished. The clergy were also targeted and the Church had vast areas of land confiscated while the population was no longer forced to pay tithes to support the Church either. Therefore, the withdrawl of privileges was equally as revolutionary as the granting of rights, simply because it had never been done before and it also contributed to a fairer society.
Another significant revolutionary change was that France was also vastly geographically altered due to the Revolution. The country was divided into eighty-three departments of roughly equal size, population and wealth. This was done to create a 'unitary form of administration, replacing the hodge-podge of different boundaries for indirect and direct taxes, military affairs, religion, justice and the rest which had characterized Bourbon polity'. Previously there had been provinces, generalities, principalities and municipalities and the change was introduced in order to decentralize power from the government and instead spread it to the individual departments. Thus, the altering of the internal geographical boundaries of France is yet another revolutionary change brought on by the Revolution.
Therefore, in conclusion, there were many revolutionary aspects of the French Revolution, as the ways of the ancien regime were completely destroyed and a new French society emerged. A totally new way of thinking known as Enlightenment was important in contributing to the Revolution and to many of these changes. The main revolutionary features included a completely new system of ruling, a constitutional rather than an absolute monarchy; new rights that the vast majority of the population had never held before, outlined in the declaration of the Rights of Man, including the extension of the electorate; the abolition of many aristocratic privileges which also affected the Church, as well as the decentralization of power through the geographical division of the country into eighty-three departments. These were all revolutionary changes in that they had never existed before and altered the shape of French society forever.