Over the past several decades, the visibility of child soldiers has become increasingly common. Countries such as Sierra Leone, Liberia, Somalia, Afghanistan, Columbia and East Timor, to name but a few, illustrate the ubiquity of problem. While child soldiers are covered by provisions under international law, these rules are inadequate to deal with the conditions of armed conflict in the world today. There remain significant shortcomings and gaps in these laws that leave child soldiers in a more vulnerable and precarious situation than they are in already. One of the prominent features of the contemporary use of child soldiers is that the majority of conflicts in which children engage in hostilities are internal armed conflicts.
When discussing the issue of child soldiers, there are several elements that need to be addressed. The first is the issue of prohibition of the recruitment and use of children and the laws that govern such prohibition. The second is if, despite prohibition, children are used in armed conflict, how they should be treated during the conflict and if captured by enemy forces. The last issue relates more to the post-conflict situation and whether child soldiers should be held responsible and accountable for their actions if they constitute crimes against humanity or other crimes recognized under international criminal law as requiring prosecution.
This report will focus on the laws prohibiting the recruitment and use of child soldiers in addition to looking at what legal provisions exist for the treatment of child soldiers when they are used in contravention to the law. While there is also clearly a problem of the efficiency in the law's execution and implementation, this report will not cover this issue, but will focus on the actual deficiencies of the law.
The regulation of the recruitment and participation of children in armed conflict is covered by a number of international law instruments. International humanitarian law, which regulates the conduct of hostilities, is naturally the most obvious starting point when looking at legal rules governing children in armed conflict. However, a variety of other instruments from human rights law to labour law also have relevant provisions regarding children in conflict. This section will look at the different provisions in international law concerning child soldiers, highlighting any inconsistencies and ambiguities in the law.
There are three main elements that legal rules address with regards to child soldiers. The first is the age limit, which usually revolves around discussion of whether the age of 15 or 18 should be used when determining the minimum age to engage in hostilities. The second is the issue of recruitment and whether or not it is compulsory or voluntary. Recruitment is also tied to the issue of age, particularly when addressing voluntary recruitment, which will be elaborated further below. The third main element is what type of participation is allowed and this is usually divided into direct and indirect involvement.
This section will highlight the deficiencies in international humanitarian law regarding provisions relating to the recruitment and use of child soldiers in international humanitarian law, and how these deficiencies are not made up for in international human rights law, in addition to providing possibilities for review and difficulties and tensions that such a review may raise.
1. The minimum age for recruitment and use of persons in armed conflict, whether this is an international or internal armed conflict should be 18 years. The law should be clear that this minimum age includes voluntary enlistment in addition to direct and indirect participation.
Instigating change in the rules of war is a difficult task, particularly when this requires change in the moral environment. Yet international law and international humanitarian law are always in a constant state of review. The adoption of the Additional Protocols and the inclusion of provisions relating to children participating in armed conflict, which were not in the Geneva Conventions, are just one example of changes in the legal, political and military environment. This process of review is inevitably a political one subject to a wide range of considerations. However, the very brutal nature of war makes it necessary for all involved to ensure that the widest range of protection is given to those under the age of 18 years, and to ensure that the parameters of the law are well-defined and unambiguous. Finally, in raising standards and legal rules, it is also important to expend energy in implementation.