The efficacy of human rights law as a tool for women's empowerment has been vigorously debated over the past several decades. This article explores this debate focusing on the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM). The extensive literature that has been devoted to this practice and grown throughout the 1990s and the wide-ranging impact that this practice has on wide range of planes from the legal, to the political and the cultural, makes it an ideal case study for an examination of both the advantages and drawbacks of using international human rights law in the struggle for women's human rights. The cultural and religious significance of FGM, its strong links to sexual and reproductive health and rights, and the critiques raised by postcolonial feminists in particular on the dangers of gender essentialism and exclusive focus on violence against women has made FGM a contentious and vigorously debated topic.
In the first part of this article, I briefly examine how the practice of FGM gained prominence in the international women's human rights movement. I summarize some of the contentious issues that FGM has raised, particularly the criticism that the FGM campaign essentializes both gender and culture. In the second part of the article, I discuss the role of UN treaty bodies and their articulation of FGM as a human right violation through concluding observations on state reports, and explore whether such exchanges between state officials and committee members provide meaningful dialogue that has an impact on the ground. Finally, I argue that a current gap in the literature on FGM, particularly that written from the international human rights law perspective, is a failure to take sufficient account of the wider social constraints that restrict women's ability to enjoy their rights pronounced under human rights instruments.
When at the 1993 Human Rights Conference in Vienna, the slogan 'women's rights are human rights' became a reality, gender-based violence as a major human rights issue also took off and was the culmination of many decades of activism and lobbying. Another watershed was the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) in Cairo, and the 1995 Fourth World Conference in Beijing which brought to the forefront issues regarding women's reproductive health and choices. It is particularly important to examine the struggle against FGM within the context of gender-based violence and women's sexual and reproductive health campaigns, which these conferences brought to the forefront. Although activists and women's rights advocates had written about the practice much earlier, it was only in the 1990s that a concerted, vigorous and international campaign against FGM truly gained momentum capturing the attention of human rights activists and academics, UN bodies and the media.
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines FGM as comprising "all procedures involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia or other injury to the female genital organs whether for cultural, religious or other non-therapeutic reasons." According to the WHO, FGM has both immediate and long-term health consequences in addition to physical, psychosexual and psychological effects. For this reason, FGM fits well into both the gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive rights and health; not only is it physically injurious and hence a violent act against women but it has the potential to affect women's sexual and reproductive lives and choices.
There are several UN conventions applicable to FGM, but one of the greatest challenges in using international law is the lack of enforceability of human rights instruments is the weak enforcement mechanisms. There are few mechanisms that 'force' states to comply with their responsibilities, and it is largely tools such as international pressure and 'naming and shaming' that prompt states into action. State reporting mechanisms are one of the means used to monitor state compliance with treaty obligations, which also allows experts sitting on the various treaty body committees to engage in a dialogue with states to determine what progress has or has not been made, what measures have been taken to implement the treaties, and what obstacles exist and their possible remedies, in addition to the adoption of concluding observations and comments on state reports. This section will look at lists of issues, replies to issues and concluding observations of the Committee on Civil and Political Rights (CCPR), the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), and the Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) regarding FGM in African countries, and an analysis and critique of these observations.
The above debates illustrate the immense difficulties in bringing about change in people's actions and behaviours through human rights instruments and bodies. Following on from the critique that the wider context of women's lives is almost absent from FGM debates by UN treaty bodies is the notion that the choices women make in their daily lives are often being 'traded' in for others. This means that while women seize upon one right, they are often compelled to give up something for that right in a trade-off. Seif El Dawla et al explore the strategic accommodations made by Egyptian women in their reproductive lives and illustrate how these trade-offs are made; resorting to the traditional practice of baladi dokhla (breaking the hymen) on the wedding night is painful and embarrassing but on the other hand it helps ensure greater freedom of mobility and the ability to go out and work because it 'proves' a woman's chastity.
The different voices that Seif El Dawla et al heard from women during their research with regard to decisions made about reproduction and their bodies made it difficult to pin down one prototypical example of strategic accommodation, and instead they used four categories to reflect the comments that women expressed; the first is 'it is just the nature of things'; the second is 'painful, but necessary'; the third is 'resistance and resistance in disguise'; and the fourth is 'no is no!' The advantages of using these strategic postures as an analytical tool is that rather than presenting a static picture of unchanging gender relations and hierarchies, it highlights how relations and hierarchies change, and how constraints both emerge and dissolve rather than remaining constant. This is particularly important when looking at FGM that "has a social function that many young girls and women find compelling - beyond choice."
This provides a much more nuanced, complex and complete picture of the decisions women make when performing such practices as FGM. UN treaty bodies consistently note their concern about traditional harmful practices and the need to combat them through education, however, women are not necessarily ignorant of the harm but
Legislation, education, the support of civil society, and religious and community leaders are important 'multidisciplinary' strategies, but at the same time they are not always in harmony which has led Egyptian women for example, "to negotiate the conflicting pressures of religious authorities, medical authorities, class divisions, and above all traditional gender norms when it comes to FGM." Ultimately women continuously adopt strategies that sometimes accommodate and at other times resist. At the international level, such nuanced categories and concepts are often simplified, and with limited time and resources it is debatable whether they can delve into the complex underlying reasons that perpetuate 'harmful traditional practices' against women.
International human rights law is only one of several tools that should be used to combat the practice of FGM. The challenged faced is "not only one of opposing harmful practices or mobilizing around rights but of publicly deconstructing the ideological and social system...that makes those practices acceptable and sometimes even desired." Ultimately the task of public deconstruction will not take place at international conferences or in UN forums but at the grassroots level. An-Na'im argues persuasively that, "unless international human rights have sufficient legitimacy within particular cultures and traditions, their implementation will be thwarted." Not only is legitimacy of human rights law needed, but also a recognition that this law's efficacy is contingent on adopting a broader socioeconomic scheme.