Before this project I felt that the factors needed for a successful business were motivation, coordination, planning, opportunity, future prospects, teamwork, etc. Having completed this project I feel I have better understanding of how these factors can help and work to establish an effective team.
We initiated our business plan, by having many brainstorming sections. As we had many envisioners in our team we had a wide range of undemanding, easy, and straightforward to very complex, high tech and challenging ideas about many products and services. We subsequently researched on each idea regarding the engineering behind it and what new can be done in the product to make ourselves different in the market or to come up with a different product. We had a good thought to have a voting among the team to decide upon our business idea which I think made people feel more involved in the project and in the planning process as well. I feel this was a major part of the success of our project.
Our idea was to make desktop phones which can work on both internet broadband connection and normal telephone line. The motivation was basically to make phone calls absolutely free after one time investment. As all members in our team were electronic engineers, it helped us design the phone easily. Therefore, I have learnt that technical knowledge is very important part of the evolution of a start up business.
Our team consisted of mix skilled members. We had envisioners, enactors, leaders and followers. We all had electronic engineering background as common between us. There was a good understanding and co-ordination in the team. We also had fine communication and we could decide easily what role each of us was playing in our team. We believed in team work which I think made many problems simpler. Alex decided to lead the team, and as he had the necessary skills to delegate work effectively.
We had many productive group meetings at regular interval of time which helped us for the upper level pitch. In those meetings we divided the work among ourselves and each member had to research about the topic given to them. So that in the next meeting we could discuss about it and try to think of what more could progress our plan. Our short meeting with our lecturer gave us numerous guidelines about what part of the business which we have not considered or looked upon to improve our plan.
As I had the research and analyzing skills I was given the topic to investigate and make a report of the competitors and market entry barriers. I was also asked to find out the basic cost of outsource this product in India or China. To find out this I used the mentel, fames and other university provided business databases and some search engines like google, yahoo. This project has therefore helped me to confirm my own skills, and knowing this will help me in future projects. In addition to this, I used to think of any ideas or factors which we could consider to make our business plan more efficient.
Over all, I felt as we had productive meetings and as we all functioned effectively as a whole team the final presentation was well structured and tried to cover all the topics needed to attract the investors. In my opinion, I have learned that good team work and dedication are the most important factors which lead to success.