I found the business plan to be very challenging on the first site but I had many learning outcomes and various practical experiences of setting up and running a business.
In order to get the most out of the small period we had for the business plan we thought time management was very essential for this project. Hence we had more frequent and longer meetings for our business plan compared to our presentation. In our first meeting we decided to follow a regularity pattern of work. In this meeting we divided the work among ourselves, and each member had to research about the topic given to them, so that in the next meeting we could discuss it and try to think of what more we could do to progress our plan. I think this was a very good way to work as it allowed people to feel like they were working towards the project. In my opinion we could show our own opinion and knowledge while discussing and deciding upon the best for our business plan.
In spite of our effort, sometimes we lagged behind time because not all of us carried out the work like we were asked to. I found that as a deadline approaches the amount of efficient work increases and it takes me less time to do tasks. Although, the final business plan covered and explained everything in detail I was not satisfied with it as I always found something missing and I tried to discuss with my group but they didn't want to think in so much detail. So I learned that with group work, there are different opinions and it is the person with the higher vote that gets their way.
I was firstly allocated the task of writing about the management of our company. Management plays an important role in company success. With the knowledge I had from the lectures and also with some other course work I got an insight of what kind of people should be at specific designations. Hence, in order to have the right management system I designated each person's position depending upon his skills, ability, character, confidence and experience. I also learned that I had to find out who was the envisioner, enabler, enactor of all the employees and how effectively under time limit they will carry out any task given to them. I learned that it's also vital to set out the duties and responsibilities of each employee. Hence, after finishing this part I had a wide and clear picture of how management is carried out in real business.
I also worked on the legal structure of our company. I had no idea before of what legal structure consisted of so I had to research a lot. I learned that working on topics where you hardly have any knowledge is very difficult. But working on this topic also made me aware of various legal structure and aspects to be considered and the risk involved while starting a business. I also learned about the different types of legal structure of varied companies and how it affected as a whole.
Over all, it was a valuable experience to work in as a whole team and a very effective learning outcome, which can help me if I started my own business or during my career in future.