This report investigates motivation and job satisfaction in the workplace with particular focus being placed on the construction industry. Motivation techniques that are used in the construction industry such as goal setting, incentives, worker participation, positive reinforcement and worker facilitation are detailed and the extent to which they work is analysed. For the purposes of this study, the industry is broken down into four separate professions; the design engineer, the site engineer, tradesman and labourer and the differing motivational and de-motivational factors that affect them are outlined. The extent to which and how the aforementioned techniques motivate the members of the different professions and which are more relevant to each of the professions is also analysed.
It was concluded that the design engineer takes much of their motivation and job satisfaction from the challenges that a demanding and interesting project would entail. A site engineer is motivated by the decision making responsibilities held in supervising a project and the smooth running of a project would induce a large amount of job satisfaction. Tradesmen rely heavily on positive reinforcement and labourers respond well to worker participation. Overall it was thought that the greatest motivating factor, for all job descriptions, was being part of a well organised project and a great deal of satisfaction came from the project physically materialising.
An initial answer immediately springs to mind - the need for money. Clearly this is the main motivation for people to primarily have a job but it is what motivates them to work well and efficiently within this job whilst being stimulated by the work they do that is much more crucial. A highly motivated workforce greatly enhances productivity and project effectiveness.
There are many motivation techniques that are used throughout industry but there are also a great deal of demotivating factors that can undermine these strategies. The aim of this report is to outline in particular the motivational techniques of goal setting, incentives, worker participation, positive reinforcement and worker facilitation with the main focus being placed upon the construction industry.
Different motivating factors exist in the different spheres of the construction industry so it is suitable to discuss them as; the design engineer, the site engineer (or foreman), the tradesman (or craftsman) and the labourer (or operative).
The design engineer is generally motivated by the work they do and can get self fulfilment from it because they are putting into practice what they have studied. When the work seems meaningful and exciting, for example on a large, challenging project, commitment will be generated and motivation and job satisfaction will be high. However, the engineer typically needs to be used to their full capacity to maintain interest as their work is generally associated with higher level needs. Due to this the engineer needs an autonomy over the pace and content of the work that they are involved in and if this is not present then de-motivation will be likely.
The site engineer is motivated by such things as the challenge of running the work, keeping the job on its schedule, the job physically taking shape and good working relations within the crew. Job satisfaction can be achieved through a feeling of importance that comes with being able to make many decisions on site. On larger jobs, when the decisions are taken away somewhat as they are made by others higher up the hierarchy de-motivation may occur. Uncooperative workmen, lack of initiative amongst workers, lack of support from management and lack of resources can also de-motivate the foreman.
Tradesmen take a great pride in the work that they carry out as it is skilled and quite individual. If a craftsman is allowed to be productive through a well planned and organised project then job satisfaction will follow. More so than in other areas, the craftsman is greatly encouraged by praise and lack of recognition can be a de-motivating factor. De-motivation is also inherent amongst craftsmen when the project is badly organised and, for example, they cannot carry out their work through lack of resources or overcrowding due to bad organisation of workers.
Labourers often do not feel a great affiliation to the company that they work for, which is often because they are only on short term contracts and feel that they have limited career prospects with the company, which in itself is de-motivating. Other causes of de-motivation amongst the labourers is poor organisation whereby they are not able to carry out their job properly. Motivation and job satisfaction comes from seeing how their work transforms into the final project, which they have been well informed about and feeling an integral part of the project which can be helped by contributing to decision making. The techniques used to generate motivation across the construction industry are detailed below.
The technique of goal setting can be very useful in giving employees clarity of focus on a job and direction. The management must set carefully established goals for their employees, in particular labourers and craftsmen to follow. These goals can be set based on previous performances for quality and productivity. If the goals are set to a high but obtainable level there is an incentive to work towards and achieve it. If goals are set too low then workers do not need to perform to their maximum capability to achieve it and this leads to low performance. Also, if the goals are set too high then there may be no incentive to perform as it will be evident that it will not be achieved irrespective of how hard they work. Ideally, the goals would be set with worker input and participation which would increase the probability of worker acceptance.
With goal setting performance monitoring and feedback are important so that the workers know how they are performing and this can lead to them setting new goals for themselves and possibly introduce a sense of competition between each other which is desirable as it will drive them to work harder.
Motivation to achieve the goals can be heightened by the implementation of an incentives program, which is detailed later. There are however some disadvantages of such a goal setting program in that it may adversely affect quality if employees are completing the work with haste just in order to meet the target. This could therefore turn into a de-motivating factor if they were required to repeat the work.
Closely linked and often used in partnership with goal setting are programmes of incentives that are used as a way of motivating the employees, where rewards are given to those who perform at a certain desired level. Rewards could come in the form of money, holidays, promotions or profit sharing. Again the target must be attainable otherwise the worker will not attempt to reach the goal and clearly the workers performance would not be altered. Similar to setting goals, it would be more effective as a motivator if the employees had an input in setting the required target for achieving the incentive. This form of motivation also has its downfalls similar to those for goal setting; if a worker is just working to achieve the desired level to get a reward then quality may be affected, safety procedures may be ignored and materials may be used unscrupulously.
A standard incentive used by employers are salary reviews. However, if these are done periodically at a time of year known by the employees it can become taken for granted. A much better way of using them to improve motivation and job satisfaction would be to hold them irregularly as a surprise so that the employees feel fortunate to have achieved it.
Worker participation is a way of involving the employees in managerial decisions. This can generate a feeling of loyalty towards the company and makes the employee feel valued and important within the company. Changes to the working environment will be much more readily accepted if the workers have been consulted in advance as opposed to having the changes enforced upon them.
Worker participation can be conducted in several different ways. Suggestion boxes are a common method of achieving this, where if a workers suggestion is adopted then they receive a certain percentage of the profits/savings that ensue. However, this system is not without its de-motivating elements; if a workers ideas are constantly overlooked, jealousy of other workers who are rewarded for ideas especially if they are in a lower position and some ideas may create saving in one unit at the expense of another. Quality circles is another way of using the worker's creativity, which is based on the idea that the worker knows best how to do the job and would like, if given the chance, to contribute to the success of the company. They are labour-management committees where the objective is to discuss and solve work related problems. The worker therefore has the chance to affect his own work environment, which in turn increases job satisfaction and productivity. The goals are set by the senior management but the route to achieving them is defined by the workers which is another way if making the workers have a more active role in proceedings which is good for motivation.
Positive reinforcement is simply consists of praise and compliments from supervisors. It is based on the idea that workers desire signs of approval from their supervisors and if necessary will change their behaviour to receive it. However if praise becomes a frequent event then it obviously loses its value and becomes useless. Strength can be added to the technique by supplementing praise with rewards.
Tradesmen are thought to take a great pride in their word but typically receive little recognition which could clearly be very de-motivating. Such schemes as craftsman-of-the month awards or letters of commendation can be excellent methods of motivation because of the prestige and visibility that it brings, which, due to the nature of the work can be better than monetary gains as it instils a sense of pride in the job. Newsletters, banners and posters could also be used to again create a sense of pride in the work.
The motivation of workers can be greatly improved if their employer makes an effort to aid their work and shows understanding. Motivation will be high if the employee feels that they are trusted by the employer and this in turn will make the worker feel good about their employer. The worker should feel as though they are able to talk to their management as artificial communication barriers will only hinder motivation. Workers should be kept informed of the performance levels of the other workers as they have tendencies to compete which is healthy in the workplace. Workers should be able to have a sense of contribution to the final product as it feels like what they are doing is meaningful.
The way in which a construction project is organised can potentially be the most motivating or de-motivating factor of all. A well organised project will promote job satisfaction and provide individuals with an incentive to increase productivity. Construction workers can best be motivated through the work itself, when seeing the project physically taking shape. However for this to be the case each worker must feel as though he is a part of the job and not merely making up the numbers. On larger projects, there can be very large hierarchical structures which can create problems in communication that will lead to a de-motivated workforce. If a job is large and complex, individuals will find it hard to identify with the job as a whole and they will find it hard to achieve a feeling of accomplishment. This can be achieved by a well informed work force and a good communication system.
Also on larger projects, the responsibility of the site engineer can be lessened which can adversely affect their motivation as the majority of the decision making is moved higher up the hierarchy. Another major de-motivator inherent in larger projects is the constant modifications that have to be made and the associated slip in schedules and due to the frequency of such occurrences it is hard to keep the workforce informed constantly, which again highlights the importance of an effective communication system.
Effective pre-planning should be carried out so that the availability of resources will never be a problem. The motivation of labourers can easily be affected by this, and will often be highly motivated when they get the proper instruction and resources to carry out the job properly but if the work is not well planned or progress is interrupted by lack of tools or materials then it is easy for them to become de-motivated. Therefore it is essential, through good planning, that workers are allowed to carry out their work without any avoidable hindrances.
Social activities can be a good way to increase the motivation of workers, for example having a project tour for families will help to instil a sense of pride within the worker. Also dinner functions for awardees will show that their efforts have been recognised and again create give the worker a sense of importance.
Flexible working hours can be a good way of providing the worker with an incentive to work well and efficiently; if the work is completed satisfactorily ahead of schedule then the worker would be allowed paid time off as a way of recognising their extra effort.
Each of the five motivational techniques, goal setting, incentives, work facilitation, positive reinforcement and worker participation, detailed in this report have a place in the construction industry. However workers from different professions within the industry may find themselves motivated by different techniques although some will be common to all professions. An design engineer will be primarily motivated by the work itself and the challenges that it holds. A site engineer would find motivation and job satisfaction from the smooth running of a project that they are supervising and the responsibilities that go with it. Craftsmen would be motivated by goal setting, worker participation and in particular positive reinforcement. Labourers would typically be motivated also by goal setting and in particular worker participation.
Overall the greatest motivating factor that seems inherent in all job types in the industry is being part of a well organised project and a great deal of satisfaction comes from the project physically materialising.