Lay beliefs are defined as "beliefs and practices relating to disease which are the products of indigenous cultural development and are not explicitly derived from the conceptual framework of modern medicine" (Hughes cited in Shaw, 2002). Lay people's beliefs about health are different from that of the medical profession because they do not have formal medical qualifications or training. During recent years the term lay beliefs has shifted to lay knowledge, belief implies that is not based on sound fact or evidence and may be wrong whereas knowledge is more factual and systematic. This shift has led to the debate which will be discussed in this essay, the extent to which this is true, that it is no longer just the medical profession who have the medical knowledge. In this essay I will firstly examine how lay concepts of health and illness are in fact lay, using examples from studies and I will then discuss the extent to which lay concepts of health and illness are not as lay as they may seem.
Lay concepts of health and illness vary between people depending on age, gender, class and ethnicity. They also vary depending on how people view health and illness, as a negative concept, positive concept or functional concept (Calnan, 1987). Those who take the negative view believe health is merely the absence of disease, positive concepts of health and illness see health as general well being and functionalists see health as the ability to live a 'normal' life.
Age as a factor that affects how a person views health and illness can be illustrated with an example of a study of 60+ year olds in Aberdeen (Williams, 1983). Data was collected using open ended interviews about their health history, current conditions, disabilities and how they coped with or prevented illness in order to identify their perceptions of health and illness. The main two conclusions drawn about how health was defined were health as the absence of disease and health as strength where a reserve of health is drawn upon to pull the person through (Williams, 1983). These elderly Aberdonians viewed health as being able to get through everyday life and carry on with the activities that they normally did, rather than as a medical construction (Freund and McGuire, 1999).
Class as a factor which affects how lay people see health and illness can be illustrated by looking at some other studies. Herzlich interviewed middle class French people to examine their beliefs about health (cited in Calnan, 1987: 26). He found that they believed health came from the individual, it was an internal process that could be regulated, whereas illness, accidents and chronic illnesses were external processes which were out of the control of the individual. In another study about health Pill and Stott interviewed working class mothers with small children (cited in Calnan, 1987: 27). They viewed health as the ability to cope in everyday life which was important because of their responsibilities to provide for and care for their children. As long as they could continue to do this they viewed themselves as healthy (Pill and Stott in Calnan, 1987). These results were similar to those discovered by Blaxter and Paterson who also researched working class mothers but they also found that an important aspect for these mothers was not to have time off work which meant rarely visiting the doctor (Blaxter and Paterson, cited in Calnan, 1987: 27). All these examples of class and age and their perceptions of health and illness show how different their perceptions can be depending on a number of other factors. These beliefs are all lay because they are influenced by a person's background rather than the medical profession. This shows that lay people may never be lay experts because their individual circumstances are always going to affect their view of health and illness.
Folk illnesses are another area of lay beliefs about health and illness which reflects the notion that lay concepts are lay. Folk illnesses are influenced by the culture within which they are formed and have a range of symbolic meanings that have moral, social and psychological dimensions (Calnan, 1987). These influences on a person's beliefs about health and illness assist in the diagnosis of illnesses. Helman examined ideas about infectious illnesses amongst a North London community and here a folk classificatory system was identified (cited in Calnan, 1987: 56). This system suggested that the lay people within the community can predict, from the symptoms, what the cause of the illness may be and what the treatment should be. An example of this would be with colds, the folk classificatory system associates a cold with cold, rainy days (Calnan, 1987). Folk illnesses therefore show that lay concepts of health and illness are lay as they are influenced by the culture within which they are formed, rather than the medical profession.
Individuals interpret their symptoms and condition themselves before seeking a doctor's advice and so only a minority of ailments are actually seen by the doctor. This is known as the 'iceberg of morbidity' and reflects the notion that lay people form their own beliefs about health and illness before consulting a member of the medical profession (Freund and McGuire, 1999: 167). An ordinary person's own experience, socialisation, their cultural background and their immediate social network such as friends and family help to shape lay people's beliefs about heath and illness (Freund and McGuire, 1999). As Dingwall said, the interpretations of symptoms made within the framework of lay concepts of health and illness are 'intrinsically different to medical knowledge' (cited in Calnan, 1987: 142).
Prior argues strongly against the notion that lay people are experts, she believes that lay concepts of health and illness are lay, and nothing more (2003). Prior argues that although lay people have their own knowledge about health and illness and that they can become experts within this in order to challenge medical hegemony, they can never be complete experts in health and illness (2003). This is because lay people do not have the appropriate skills to correctly diagnose, they can often wrongly identify the causes of illness and in turn take the wrong treatment as they do not have medical qualifications (Prior, 2003). To highlight her argument that lay people only have lay concepts of health and illness she carried out a study about Alzheimer's in Downs's syndrome sufferers. Prior interviewed carers of people who had downs syndrome and either symptoms of, or Alzheimer's itself (2003). Although the carers gave great details about changes in the lives and details about everyday life, they had very little or no knowledge about the disease itself apart from the obvious symptoms. This shows how lay people are not experts about health and illness, they can only recognise and report changes in behaviour rather than knowing anything about the actual disease (Prior, 2003).
A final example of how lay concepts of health and illness may be lay are self help groups. Self help groups are formed either by organisations which support the illness or by lay people who suffer from the illness or by individuals who talk to others about the illness. They offer help, support and companionship to those who are suffering from the illness and it enables suffers to share thoughts and ideas with others in a similar situation (Davison et al, 1992). Self help groups can be face to face meetings or over the internet, and there are an increasing number of self help chat rooms online that lay people can access. Those who offer help in self help groups are not medically trained and so therefore cannot be lay experts. They can offer advice about how to cope with the illness, ideas about suppressing side effects and accounts of what it is like to have illness. Breast Cancer Care is an example of an online and face to face self help group which offers such support (Breast Cancer Care, 2006). A study of coronary heart disease amongst people in Wales is another example of self help, but through individuals rather than a group. CHD causes a large number of deaths each year and so the majority of people known someone who has had or has the disease (Davison et al, 1992). This means that through people's social networks they can gain knowledge about the disease and offer support to one another. The majority of people interviewed for this study therefore, knew what lifestyle behaviours could contribute to CHD, not through the medical profession but through lay people's advice (Davison et al, 1992).
However, this is a contested issue and self help groups can be seen as an example of how lay people do not just have lay concepts of health and illness. Self help groups can lead to lay expertise because they lay people are becoming knowledgeable about the illness (Freund and McGuire, 1999). One argument is that the people who join self help groups have more knowledge about the condition than the medical profession because they have their own experience of it. Personal experience is vary rarely held by the doctor and so they cannot be the only expert about the illness (Freund and McGuire, 1999). Another argument is that with the rise of internet usage by lay people in finding out about health and illness, they are again becoming lay experts. In the US more people use online advice sites than visit the doctor, to either check their symptoms with illness or to find treatments (Nettleton, 2005). Internet websites, such as NHS direct, have empowered lay people to be able to regulate and treat their own health and illness which has led to them becoming more knowledgeable about medical conditions, the celebratory perspective of lay knowledge. There are currently online prescription sites where one can self diagnose, find the 'right' treatment and then get a prescription without seeing a doctor once (Nettleton, 2005).
However, the problems with online information about health and illness is that there is very little regulation. The type of sites which appear when a certain illness is searched for may not necessarily be British, meaning they may not be under the same strict legislation, and they could have been written by anyone (Bee, 2006). Also, the regulation of prescriptions for drugs is hard to do because it is not illegal to offer online prescriptions. A recent initiative has been launched to try and combat this problem and this involves giving reputable prescription sites the RPSGB logo so patients know the drugs prescribed will be legitimate (Bee, 2006). One example of a serious outcome of misdiagnosis and the wrong treatment was a woman from Sunderland who went blind after misdiagnosing her condition and taking the wrong medication for four years (Bee, 2006).
Another argument which presents lay concepts of health and illness as expert is presented by Shaw. Shaw argues that lay beliefs are now being influenced by the medical profession and so cannot be labelled as lay (2002). Stories told by lay people often reflect those of the medical profession and match their analysis of an illness. Cornwell, in her study of individuals living in East London, also highlights the importance of the doctor patient relationship (1984). She says that the medical profession do affect lay people's ideas about health and illness and that to believe otherwise is nave (Cornwell, 1984). Medical ideology has influenced lay concepts of health and illness in such a way that lay beliefs now reflect the views of the medical profession (Calnan, 1987). This shows how lay people may not just be lay people after all and the fact that they receive their knowledge from the medical profession means they can be experts.
The interaction patients have with physicians enables them to reinterpret their thoughts and beliefs about a particular illness and in doing so they become more knowledgeable and an expert about that specific illness (Freund and McGuire, 1999). In Shaw's argument, he goes on to say that people use commonsensical understandings regarding illness and treatments, they are not merely passive recipients of medical knowledge who accept everything the doctor says (2002). An example of patients being active is the case of the single MMR vaccine against separate injections. Due to the high profile discussions surrounding this issue, children's parents are able to make 'commonsensical' decisions about vaccinating their children, and this is based on medical research (Shaw, 2002). He believes that, because lay concepts of health and illness can contain medical knowledge and be in line with medical diagnosis, lay concepts are not lay at all, but instead they are lay experts (Shaw, 2002).
In conclusion, lay concepts of health and illness are largely lay because lay people lack the medical qualifications to be labelled as experts. There are differing factors which affect these lay concepts, such as age, class and culture but none of these cause the lay person to become medically knowledgeable. The argument that lay concepts are no longer lay is a valid one because of the rise in self help, self diagnosis and the internet, all of which contribute to a person's knowledge about an illness or health query but lay people are not members of the medical profession. The majority of people are in-between these two arguments, they will use their common sense to identify their illness but will see a doctor to verify it and to get treatment. The lay population have been put in a contradictory position, on the one hand they are expected to help themselves with trivial ailments but on the other hand they are urged by the medical profession to get professional attention.