Defining ethnicity is a contentious issue because there are a number of ways in which it is defined, and it is often used interchangeably with race even though they are not the same thing. In a broad sense of the term, ethnicity is a term which represents social groups with a shared history, sense of identity, geography and cultural roots which may occur despite racial difference. It is often used to describe those who are of a minority in the country they live in, hence the term ethnic minority.
There are higher rates of mental illness amongst minority ethnic groups in Britain, specifically diagnosed schizophrenia amongst Afro Caribbean men and somatization amongst female South Asian migrants (Annandale, 2000). The reasons for high rates of schizophrenia amongst Afro Caribbean men will be explored first. These statistics however, may not be due to actual differences but due to artefactual explanations. The ethnicity of the people is often determined by their place of birth even if this is not where they have spent most of their lives. Also, ethnic groupings such as Black and South Asian are too general and have inappropriate boundaries because of divisions within them (Nazroo, 1998). The data gathered about these ethnic groupings is then interpreted as if they are a homogeneous group when in fact they are heterogeneous groups. They are heterogeneous because within the classification there are differences of religion, class, culture, geographical location and so on (Nazroo, 1998). Assumptions and generalisations about these groups should therefore not be made without some explanation as to the origin of the data. The link between ethnicity and mental illness is a historical one, not a recent phenomenon, because there was a strong medical tradition that believed brains of black people were inferior to brains of white people (Fernando cited in Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999:65). This medical tradition has developed and now includes a number of other explanations as to why ethnic minorities have poorer health generally and these are as a result of genetics, migration, material disadvantage (class), cultural and racism (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). In this essay I am going to discuss a number of different approaches and explanations as to why ethnic minorities, especially Afro-Caribbean's, are over represented in mental health services. I will also explore the relationship between Asian women and somatization.
Harrison et al carried out a prospective study of Afro-Caribbean males who had been referred to mental health services in Nottingham (1988). They used interviews to try and determine the exact number and the reasons for increased rates of schizophrenia among this particular group (Harrison et al, 1988). They found that schizophrenia rates were around 13% higher than the rest of the population of Nottingham, especially amongst second generation British born (Harrison et al, 1988).
The psychological literature offers two explanations as to why Afro-Caribbean men are over represented with schizophrenia and Asians are under represented. The first explanation looks at cultural difference and explains the under representation of Asians because of low levels of distress (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). Low levels of distress are a result of fatalistic attitudes and psychological robustness which are related to culture. Also, in Asian culture there is often a stigma attached to mental health services so they are accessed less by them (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). The second psychological explanation is vulnerability which is brought on by an adverse environment, social deprivation, unfavourable conditions, financial difficulties and discrimination (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). Ethnic minorities feature heavily in low socio economic groups and are often from lower classes which can cause some of the factors above (Annandale, 2000). The Black Report came to the conclusion that material factors were mostly to blame for the class inequalities in health and, given the data that suggests ethnic minorities were more likely to be in a lower class, this suggests that it is relevant to ethnic inequalities in health (Nazroo, 1998).
Afro-Caribbean's are the ethnic group which are most likely to have contact with mental health services through the police, courts and prison (Annandale, 2000). The majority of mental health patients enter the system voluntarily, in the 1980's approximately a 5 th of Afro-Caribbean's were detained involuntary which makes up 8% of all involuntary admissions (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). Some research into section 136 of the Mental Health Act, which allows the detention of a person for up to 72 hours in a place of safety, has shown that Afro-Caribbean men are two and a half times as likely to be detained than white men and then more likely to be put in a psychiatric hospital (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). The reason they are most likely to come into contact with the mental health system through the criminal justice system is because they are more likely to be stopped on the streets and their behaviour is often interpreted by other ethnic groups as insane or dangerous (Annandale, 2000). The police act as a 'conveyor belt for community prejudice' (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999: 70) and this is known as transmitted prejudice, they create suspicion in the public which in turn means the public are more likely to report 'mad' behaviour in Afro-Caribbean's. Black defendants are classed as mentally vulnerable, are less likely than white people to be given bail by the criminal justice system and are more likely to receive compulsory psychiatric treatment (Brown cited in Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999:69). Five main reasons for this have been identified. The first is due to the culture of black people, especially men. They tend to express distress in a culturally distinctive way which makes them more noticeable to the public and police. This in turn means that higher levels of supposed mental illness come to light due to the criminal justice system (Giddens, 1993).
The second reason may be because of their low level of registration with primary care. Koffman et al carried out a one day survey in the North and South Thames region to analyse the clinical and demographic data about psychiatric patients in this area (1997). The researchers found that more Black patients admitted to wards were not registered in primary care than other ethnic groups (Koffman et al, 1997). They also found that a high proportion of the Black population were admitted to a psychiatric unit, often under section. Whilst there, they were more likely to be kept in locked wards compared to other ethnic groups (Koffman et al, 1997).
Thirdly, Afro-Caribbean people have lower rates of treatment for depression which can be seen in the British Fourth National Survey of Ethnic Minorities. This is explained by cultural differences between the medical profession and Afro-Caribbean people. Although the low rates suggest that depression is lower amongst Afro-Caribbean people, what is more likely to be the case is that the cultural differences between doctor and patients have caused the doctor to misdiagnose.
The last reason is that they are a more visible group in society because much of their social life, especially young male Afro-Caribbean's, takes place on the streets (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). This crosses over with the cultural reason above because Afro-Caribbean's have a more outdoor culture than whites, whose culture is much more confined to indoors with television watching and computer game playing, for example. By having an outdoor culture, signs of 'mad' behaviour are more easily detected and the police have a greater opportunity to stop them because they are more frequently outside (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). These however are very stereotypical generalisations and are definitely not true for many Afro-Caribbean's.
The identification of mental illness by GPs at the primary care level differs greatly, even though it may be assumed that because of the uniformity of medical training there would be uniformity in skills and detection (Bhui and Bhugra, 2002). Cultural views of the practitioners may lead them to misdiagnose symptoms as representing mental illness or not, depending on the meanings of these symptoms in their culture (Rack, 1982). One example given by Odell is of Asian GPs who are reported to be poor at detecting mental illness among Asian patients (cited in Bhui and Bhugra, 2002). A person may behave in a way which the practitioner deems odd or as a symptom of mental illness and so the practitioner would diagnose a mental illness, when in fact the behaviour may be culturally normal to the patient (Rack, 1982).
There are two main types of mental disorders, psychotic and neurotic (Giddens, 1993). Psychotic disorders are defined as interfering with a person's capacity to meet the needs of everyday life e.g. Schizophrenia (Medterms, 2007). Neurotic disorders are defined as a chronic disorder which features irritability of the nervous system and is characterized by anxiety and/or extreme behaviour dedicated to avoid anxiety situations e.g. hypochondria (Medterms, 2007). According to the literature, Afro-Caribbean's are over represented in psychotic disorders but under-represented in neurotic disorders and this has been explained in three ways (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). The first explanation is that the labelling of Afro-Caribbean's as psychotic just reflects actual numbers, that black people, especially men, are more likely to have schizophrenia than white people. The over representation merely reflects reality (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999). However, there are methodological problems which such an explanation and diagnosis and aetiology of schizophrenia question it because schizophrenia has no determinable cause. The second explanation is misdiagnosis, Afro-Caribbean's are over represented in this area because of mistakes by practitioners or bias in diagnosis. Fernando argues that the ethnocentric viewpoint of psychiatrists and practitioners has led to wrong labels being applied to minority ethnics (1988). He also thinks that other explanatory factors need to be considered as well, such as institutional racism (Fernando, 1988). A person's race may result in them being persecuted by the homogenous group in society and this could be a cause of paranoia and distress. By becoming paranoid and distressed, the minority ethnic group is then demonstrating symptoms of mental illness (Rack, 1982).
The types of treatment used to treat schizophrenia are much more likely to be physical when used on minority ethnic groups and the psychiatric system use a more coercive and punitive way. The types of treatment include insulin shock therapy, electronic convulsive therapy and pre-frontal lobotomy, which requires certain neural connections in the brain being severed (Giddens, 1993). Littlewood and Cross found that Afro-Caribbean's are more likely to receive major tranquilisers and intramuscular medication as treatment compared to their white counterparts (1980). The reasons they give to explain this are either differences in psychiatric phenomenology that have yet to be recognised or because of stereotyped attitudes of those working in the mental health field (Littlewood and Cross, 1980). A study by Noble and Rodger into violent incidents in Bethlem Royal and Maudsley Hospital found that a high proportion of Afro-Caribbean patients who tended to be younger and more psychotic were the most violent (1989). This meant that Afro-Caribbean's were more likely to be detained compulsorily and contained in a locked ward using physical treatments (Noble and Rodger, 1989).
Another minority ethnic group in society which experience mental illness is Asian Women and the somatization thesis. Somatization is when psychological needs are expressed through physical symptoms (Medterms, 2007). Asian women tend to, according to research, present distress as bodily symptoms, the somatization thesis. When going to see their practitioner, they focus on their somatic symptoms when in distress, rather than disclosing their emotional state (Lin and Cheung, 1999). Rather than this being because of a lack of psychological mindedness, it is more than likely to be because somatic symptoms are 'used as culturally sanctioned idioms of distress' (Kleinman, cited in Lin and Cheung, 1999:4). Asian women are often aware of the effects their emotional state may be having on their situation but do not tend to present these feelings to the practitioner as they do not see them as appropriate (Lin and Cheung, 1999). Walters argues that mental health services vary throughout the United Kingdom and so Asian people experience different styles and qualities in these services (cited in Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999:77). Many doctors make assumptions about Asian's based on how they present their symptoms rather than considering the cultural differences and how these differences affect their presentation of distress (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999).
In conclusion, there is a strong association between mental illness and ethnicity where certain ethnic groups are more represented in mental health statistics than others. This is especially the case for Afro Caribbean men who are over represented in schizophrenia levels for a number of reasons, and the statistics do not necessarily represent reality. This is also the case for levels of somatization amongst Asian women; different factors affect the numbers of cases that are represented in the literature, including doctors and patients interpretations of symptoms. Therefore, statistics alone cannot be represented as reflecting realistic numbers of mentally ill ethnic minorities; reasons for the figures must be established as then other issues which may have affected the figures are uncovered.