Georges' case indicates two separate grounds for judicial review. The first is substantive: this in itself raises the important issue of what standard of review should be applied and how this affects the constitutional role of the judiciary. This essay will argue that the courts have been too hesitant in applying intensive standards of review, and subsequently litigants are unable to predict the outcome of their cases. Secondly, is on the basis of a violation of the rules of natural justice, namely the rule against bias. These will now be considered respectively.
S.6 of the HRA 1998 provides that it is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is incompatible with a Convention right. George may contend that the regulations breach the right to private life, under article 8 of the Convention, on the grounds that the searches demean his physical integrity
Interference with article 8 may be justifiable only where it is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interest of national security, public safety or prevention of disorder or crime. The standard of review to be implemented in cases concerning convention rights has been the subject of much confusion.
Following the decision of the Court of Appeal in Smith
 it was thought that decisions which infringe upon convention rights should be assessed an enhanced wednesbury grounds in the context of human rights; that is the court will only set aside the decision of a body where it goes beyond the sphere of reasonable options available, and where there is a human right involved a greater justification of the reasonableness is required. However, when that reasoning was rebuked by the ECtHR on appeal, for failing to recognise poorly and often subjectively justified decisions which contravened human rights, but were not wholly unreasonable as to be unlawful, a proportionality based test was advocated. As decisions of the ECtHR are binding against the member state one should think George should be able to legitimately expect the test of proportionality to be applied. However, recent cases have shown this is not so.
The basic facts of the present case are similar to Daly
. Both involve long-term prisoners in a high security prison objecting to regulations on convention grounds. However, the appeal in Daly was confined to the argument that a blanket policy permitting examination of legally privileged correspondence in the prisoners' absence infringed rights recognised under both common law and article 8. Thus it will not possible to ascertain the outcome of the current case based on Daly. However, it will be useful to consider the reasoning of the court, who applied both an enhanced wednesbury
test, in conjunction with proportionality in reaching the conclusion that Dalys' rights had in fact been infringed to an unnecessary and impermissible extent. Closing his argument Lord Steyn stated that the intensity of review in public law cases shall depend on the subject matter at hand, even in cases concerning Convention rights. Thus, intensive review which the ECtHR felt was necessary for protecting convention rights is by no means guaranteed domestically. Before we can discuss the possible reasons behind the reluctance to follow European jurisprudence, it will be necessary Georges' position under the different standards of review,
It may be argued that the regulations were necessary in the prevention of crime and disorder or the protection of public safety in a democratic society. This is a convincing argument. Searches are now routine in many areas of life in the interest of public safety, for example when boarding an aeroplane or entering many high security buildings. One could argue that they are an expected and legitimate aspect of prison punishment. Nonetheless, the regulations must be either reasonable or proportionate to those aims.
Since it is not possible to predict which test will be applied, we must prepare for both eventualities.
Was a blanket policy requiring searching of all prisoners before they are returned to their cells so unreasonable that no reasonable authority could ever come to it, given consideration interference with article 8? One could argue that it is not beyond the sphere of reasonable options available, as a maximum security prison in the interests of public safety and prevention of crime and disorder to require searches of all prisoners for, example, drugs and lethal weapons or other illicit material. It is stressed that the suffering should go beyond the legitimate form of punishment. Whereas Daly did succeed under reasonableness, the illicit contents which may be hid in correspondence is small whereas illicit contents which may be hid on the body is much greater and so is not wholly unreasonable. On the other hand one may speculate, that on the basis of Daly, in general blanket policies ought to be very strongly justified, more so where a human right is involved. Upon weighing up the evidence I am inclined to argue that Daly would be distinguished on the grounds that a greater level of interference existed, thus the regulations are not unreasonable or incompatible with article 8.
The contours of proportionality, as considered in Daly, are that in determining whether an interference of human rights is so excessive as to constitute a breach the court shall consider:
Whether a legislative objective of sufficient importance to justify limiting a fundamental right be identified: There is insufficient information available as to the motives of the prison in enforcing these regulations. However, using the same argument as above, it may be argued that the searches are justified by the need to keep drugs out of prison or ensure inmates do not have access to lethal weapons, in the interest of preventing crime and disorder.
Whether the measures designed to meet the legislative objective are rationally connected to it: Using the example above, this is a suitable method to ensuring those goals.
Whether the means used to impair the right of freedom are no more than is necessary to accomplish the objective: There may be less intrusive means of meeting those goals available, for example using metal detectors or doing random spot checks.
Thus the regulation may be declared incompatible under the latter, but not the first test. The effect of such a declaration is not so wide that it substitutes the regulation but effectively narrows the substantive choices available.
Whilst we do not have enough information to ascertain positively the outcome of proportionality, the above demonstrates the difference between the two standards.
Greater scrutiny of decisions is required, balancing the pros and cons rather than merely what is in the sphere of reasonable options available. Proportionality places the burden of responsibility firmly on the public body, and by return increasing the protection of the citizen.
Where there is no consistency of review, citizens inevitably receive differing standards of justice. The difference, as Elliot notes, is one of degree rather than type. Proportionality scrutinises the same behaviour as the former, only applying a greater degree of scrutiny and contextual awareness. Both standards recognise the need to balance the litigants' rights against competing policy and matters of public interest, but vary in the magnitude of discretion accorded to the court. Elliot writes that the move towards proportionality signifies shifting role of judiciary in constitutional order. Such intrusive reviewing of policy has not been within the traditional jurisdiction of the English judge. The introduction of proportionality demonstrates the impact of European jurisprudence on the role of the domestic judge in ways more subtle and unexpected than expressed in the human rights legislation itself.
And perhaps, this is the root of the problem. The test of proportionality has been developed in a European context, in the ECJ and in the ECtHR, not in consideration of the constitutional role of domestic courts. British courts have long rejected proportionality as an independent grounds for review, regarding it as being both supplementary to their constitutional role and unnecessary. Lord Diplocks' famously espoused dictum that one should not use a "steam hammer to crack a nut if a nut cracker would do" represents the sentiment that the court should intervene no more than is necessary to fulfil their judiciary duties. In fact to do so may be to supercede their powers and to go against the will of Parliament and thus act undemocratically. This was certainly the view of the Attorney-general in the Belmarsh case stating that:
This submission, based upon the assertion that those elected bodies are the only ones qualified to consider matters of policy in a Democratic society must be countered by the need for the courts to intervene, where appropriate, in the protection of human rights and freedoms. This too, according to Lord Hope, is in the interests of a democratic society. This is undoubtedly true. If the Judiciary cannot be entrusted with the task of ensuring elected officials do not use their power inappropriately against civil and human rights, then who can? Lever argues that the Judicial review has an important function in democratic society, not because Judicial decision are necessarily better than legislative decisions, but because it is publicly accessible in a way that Parliament is not and provides a means for holding Government directly accountable.
Numerous cases have been faced with the same question following Daly, with no clear pattern emerging. The Belmarsh case provides the greatest affirmation of the proportionality test yet. It should however be noted that the requirement of such a stringent standard of review was required implicitly by the terms of the order and Convention article under review and sadly such enthusiasm cannot be applied freely too all human rights cases. Whereas the court in the immigration and human rights case  Ahzal
 decided an enhanced wednesbury test was most appropriate, the court in Baiai
, another immigration and human rights case, utilised proportionality . However, as immigration is "a broad social and political area and the judiciary were not policymakers" substantial deference was allowed to Parliament when restricting rights. This shows that whereas the judiciary are becoming more confident in their application of intensive review, progress is painstakingly slow and apprehensive, but necessary. The judiciary cannot properly perform its role of review where it is constrained by too feeble tools. As Lord Cooke in Daly stated, the time is imminent when the courts must accept that:
Natural justice, sometimes referred to as a duty to act fairly, has two governing principles: Firstly is the right to fair hearing and, secondly the rule against bias. This is notwithstanding the right to a fair trial under article 6 of the Convention. The role of the Deputy Governor as responsible for hearing George's case, as responsible for searches, and the fact he was present during Georges search compromises' his impartiality. This appears to contravene the fundamental maxim of natural justice:
It has long been established that public bodies exercising a statutory duty are obliged to observe the rules of natural justice.Thus, George should seek leave for judicial review, within three months, under Order 53 based on his legitimate expectation that the rules of natural justice would be adhered to. To avoid confusion, it will be appropriate to talk about procedural impropriety: In CCSU v. Minister for the Civil Service
 it was held that procedural impropriety includes both a breach of statutory procedural requirements, such as the human rights act, and the common law rules governing natural justice.
This is important as we shall see there is considerable overlap between the right to a fair hearing under article 6 of the convention and the principles of natural justice.
In Re: Medicaments
 the bias test was held to be:
whether the judge has been shown to have been influenced by any actual bias, or;
whether , if on objective appraisal, applying the reasonable man test, the material facts give rise to a legitimate fear that the judge is not impartial (appearance of bias).
In accordance with principles of substantive review, above, the judiciary do not attempt to judge procedure on its' merits but on its' legality. It will be useful to consult similar case law for guidance on whether actual or apparent bias exists.
In Alconbury
 the House of Lords considered the position of the Secretary of State as a policy maker and decision maker within the, a role comparable to that of the deputy governor. They conceded that as minister and politician his dual role meant could not be independent and impartial; he was biased. However, the fact he is accountable to parliament and subject to judicial review negated this bias. However, one obvious factual distinction is that this decision was made with specific reference to a government minister, which the deputy governor is not. He is not accountable to Parliament, but only through judicial review. Alconbury suggests that he would be subject to the appearance of bias where he not accountable in those ways, thus as the deputy governor is not this implies that he is subject to the appearance of bias.
Further support comes from one recent and similar prison case, Al-Hassan (and others) . The House of Lords considered whether the deputy governor for a prison, who was present when a general search order was confirmed, was suitably independent to decide whether that order was lawful. It was reasoned that his presence endorsed the order tacitly so that a fair minded observer could legitimately think that he was predisposed to find the order lawful, as to do otherwise would be to acknowledge that he was wrong to assent to it, even tacitly. Thus the findings of guilt were tainted by the appearance of bias and were quashed accordingly.
The facts are almost identical to the present case, so much so that it would be expected that a judge apply similar reasoning. That is: the fact that the deputy governor was responsible for implementing searches explicitly endorses their use, and his presence when George refused the search which may be said to tacitly condemn his refusal so much so that a fair minded observer could legitimately think that he was predisposed to find the refusal of the searches unlawful, as to do otherwise would be to admit that the searches were wrong and he was wrong to endorse them. Thus, there exists the appearance of bias and the decision should be quashed.
George may also apply for a declaration that the proceeding were in breach on article 6 : right to a fair hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal. The rule against bias, above, and the right to a fair trial under article 6 overlap in many ways as where a judge is biased, then the tribunal cannot be said to be independent and impartial. This is so true that in both Alconbury and the Pinochet (No2) the court considered the right to fair trial under article six under the same ambit as bias, concluding that the right added nothing more than was already contained in the test for actual bias:
Thus, as we concluded the deputy governor violated the rule against bias he also violated the right to a fair trial.
Rather disappointingly, the first thing one can conclude is the answer to Georges' substantive review is inconclusive. We cannot say which standard of review will be applied, although the case law would suggest the higher the interference with the human right, the more likely it is the courts will review more stringently. This raises important constitutional issues which transcend the difficulties of the current case. Where the courts are so afraid of violating their constitutional roles they shy away from more rigorous review, they, paradoxically, fail to fulfil that role fully. Secondly, the role and conduct of the Deputy Governor violates the rule against bias. Consequently the decision shall be quashed and in the long term the hearing functions of the Governor shall have to be transferred.