The pre-trial phase in criminal procedure is considered vital in determining the outcome of a case. Public prosecutors are a central feature of this phase, considered as "the gateway" to criminal justice; they play a crucial role in crime control, enforcement and punishment, as will become apparent. Prosecutors in various jurisdictions possess widely different powers, yet all seemingly comply with due process rights under the ECHR. Independence of prosecution is of paramount importance. All jurisdictions claim to have independent prosecution services, yet the way they are conceptualised as such, varies extensively. This essay presents a discussion of how prosecutors are understood to be independent in England, France and Germany and how true to reality this conception is, with particular emphasis on the role of the prosecutor primarily in investigations and secondly in the alternative disposal of cases.
Since 1985, the Crown Prosecution Service has operated a monopoly on the prosecution of the majority of criminal offences. Prosecution had previously been the unofficial prefecture of the police, but was vilified for failing to take an objective and independent stance. The Confait case, where three boys were falsely convicted and imprisoned for murder after police failed to follow alternative line of inquiry, acted as a catalyst for reform, and a guide to how not to prosecute. The police retained almost exclusive powers over investigation, including arrest and detention.
The RCCP (1981) thought that prosecutors ought to operate separately of the investigative functions of the police, but at the same time co-ordinate resources, neither is to be subordinate. It was felt that the guaranteed independence of the CPS was paramount to avoiding the inadequacies of police prosecution. This became known as the 'Phillips principle', and formed the basis of the CPS.
The DPP emphasized the need for independent decision making, in the "interests of justice",  between the police decision to prosecute and the subsequent presentation of case in court. It is a necessary measure to protect the due process rights of the accused and equality of arms. However, one could argue that such a harmonious relationship, based on cooperation and mutual respect for independence has not truly come to fruition. White argues that the "Philips Principle" was intrinsically flawed as prosecutors were doomed to have their independence compromised by a dependence on police evidence, implicit in the principle itself.
On the other hand, Fionda notes that dependence may not automatically lead to a conclusion of no independence, provided that the relationship is a controlled one. Robb argues that:
Here, Robb has in mind the Scottish model whereby police are legally subordinate to prosecutor, who directs the investigation and takes the decision to prosecute. However, as Fionda points out, such a system is unlikely to be successfully incorporated into a legal culture which has historically placed police in high esteem. It is important to note that the CPS powers where inherited from the police, so to supersede those powers would lead to resentment. Furthermore, the RCCJ felt that this would unacceptably blur the lines between the separate functions.
Nonetheless strained relations between the CPS and Police resulted in numerous political efforts to forge a closer working relationship, in an attempt to improve efficiency. As Jackson notes, these efforts have involved prosecutors taking a more expansive role in investigations. Hunt and Baldwin voiced concern over the growing trend of placing prosecutors in police stations for the purpose of pre-charge advice and the subsequent diminishing ability of the CPS to assert it's independence from the police. Since 2004, prosecutors now select the charge almost all cases. 'Statutory Charging' necessitates a considerably more proactive role in investigation; DPP Guidance for charging dictates a personal review of the evidence by the prosecutor, rather than merely an oral submission by the police. Guidance also stresses the need to consult at an early stage with the investigative team and to give advice as to the lines of inquiry and evidential requirements for the charge the prosecutor has in mind. In particular, the CPS takes a more enhanced role in the investigation of terrorism offences. For example, during a 2006 plot to cause explosions on transatlantic flights, Crown Prosecutors were based in police stations for the purpose of advising ongoing investigations.
There are concerns that the enhanced role of prosecutors is damaging to the Phillips principle so much so that independent decision is no longer possible. One could easily draw comparison between statutory charging and the Scottish Fiscal Prosecutor system (above) which the RCCJ so vehemently rejected. Jackson notes the danger of the prosecution being dominated by the police view of the case and thus losing all the sense of independent decision authority.
In addition to more expansive investigative powers, prosecutors are now more involved with punishment and alternative disposal. Prosecutors can now issue a conditional caution, which goes on the offenders' criminal record and requires action, for example paying compensation or joining a drug intervention scheme. This is as close to court punishment without actually going to court. For some, this unification of functions both investigative and beyond, is a worrying step further away from the reality of an independent prosecution service.
Suffice to say that the understanding of prosecutorial independence has, under the 'Phillips principle', been that of detachment and objectivity from investigation. The above implies that the CPS can no longer be said to represent this independence in any meaningful way. Whether this is a good or bad thing is a matter of great debate.
The procureur has a fundamentally different character to that of the Crown Prosecutor. Whereas the CPS represents the interests of the state, the procureur, as a member of the parquet, is a judicial officer and so acts in the public interest and to ensure due process safeguards are met. She is responsible for the instruction of investigation, which is usually carried out by the police, including extended remand and other coercive measures, and naturally prosecution. One should note that the functional entity of both the police and prosecutors are radically different to their anglo counter parts. As opposed to one multi-tasking police force, there is the police judiciare and the police administrative. The role of the former is to act as an auxiliary to judicial authorities, in particular the procureur
. In this way one could argue that they are an extension of the prosecution rather than a wholly independent entity. However, to say that their functional entities are not separate is not to say the prosecution is not independent, but rather there is a different conception of independence. The independence of the procureur is said to be ensured by the independence of the judiciary as laid down in the constitution. It will be useful to examine more closely the relationship between police and prosecutor.
The powers of the police are to record crime, gather evidence and seek out offenders. They can intervene before the judicial investigation where the offence is not flagrant
, or during under the instruction. They must inform the procureur immediately of any crimes/flagrant
. The procureur supervises and has broad discretion over charging and when the case is passed on to Juge. Independence is conceptualised as through supervision rather than separation.. There are no boundaries between the intelligence of the police investigation and the prosecution.
Nonetheless, police still possess considerable discretion to arrest and detain and are required to report to procureur only "as soon as possible". Furthermore, it is unusual for the  procureur to closely monitor the actions of the police, rather they ensure safe guards are met and may be more realistically describe as a review of the investigation carried out rather than authentic instruction. Hodgson notes a disengagement of the procureur in practice from investigation as part of legal culture of supervision. There is no real expectation that practical investigation from procureur will take place, although she has the power to. In practice the police interrogate and the procureur relies on police accounts of interrogation often over the telephone. Thus the procureur is ultimately reliant on the evidence provided by the police; through a structural paradox whereby the procureur has authority over the police, yet is ultimately dependent on them. The reality is that the procureur does not have as much control over investigations as suggested by formalities of the law. There are worries that this lack of independent control may give rise to deterioration in the due process rights of the defendant, given the limited role of the defence lawyer during preliminary investigation.
In addition to expansive investigative rights, she is entrusted with the responsibility to ensure the sentence of the court is implemented fully. One could argue that this is liable to result in bias. For example, the procureur may not wish to watch a poor single mother suffer a large fine and so chooses a lower charge. On the other hand, the procureur may be vindictive rather than sympathetic and choose the highest charge, and thus punishment possible. Hodgson (2002) found that, despite an alleged impartiality before the law, procureurs in some instances inevitably allowed personal prejudices influence their decisions. Furthermore, where one becomes so involved in the investigation of offences, there is a danger of developing a type of conviction mentality whereby one cannot impartially assess the evidence put forward, having invested so much time and energy . Nothing demonstrates this point more clearly than the Outreu affair, where scores of people were falsely imprisoned where an examining magistrate became so convinced of their guilt based on questionable evidence, he failed to exercise independent lines of inquiry.
Furthermore, the independence which the procureur is deemed to acquire through virtue of judicial independence is compromised by the bureaucratic chain of hierarchal control stemming to the executive; Procureurs are not in a traditional sense judicially independent. They are, unlike the sitting judiciary, removable and politically accountable to the Minister of Justice. The Minister presides over the parquet and is highly influential over the career advancement of the procureur. Whilst direct interference from the Minister of Justice has lessened over recent years, by agreeing not to issue directives on specific cases, the minister still issues guidance on prosecution policy and there of course exists the possibility of more subtle interference vis--vis review. In fact Hodgson found fear of review to be an issue for many procureurs
.
Consequently the procureurs role in investigative, as well as prosecutorial matters is inevitably shaped by this accountability and can not be said to be truly independent. This raises doubts over equality of arms and that the defendant may not be receiving the full protection of the law where his guardian (the procureur) is inevitably biased.
Following the abolishment of the investigating judge in the mid-seventies, the Staatsanwaltschaft is responsible for prosecution of offences. An officer of the law, he represents the state. Considered independent and impartial he is obligated to carry out investigations into evidence that will absolve, as well as incriminate the suspect. However this independence is by no means guaranteed. As Muhm notes, the constiution does not explicitly require independence, notwithstanding that the principle of the rule of law, as guaranteed by Fundamental Law demands such independent prosecution. This "constitutional void", Muhm argues, has inevitably shaped the lack of regulations governing prosecutorial practice and the development of the staatsanwaltschaf, as we shall see.
The relationship between investigator and prosecutors is similar to that in France. Police carry out investigations for which the staatsanwaltschaft is formally responsible for overseeing. The staatsanwalt may perform the investigation himself or request the police to do so, the role of the police in investigatory procedures has been formally disparaged to that of the "extended arm of the prosecution". The prosecutor shares all the powers of the police and they are in all manners considered subordinate. Thus independence may be said to be established through control, in a similar fashion to the Scottish model, above.
However, research has shown that the staatsanwalt carry out investigations themselves only in the most serious of cases, due in large part, to personell and budgetary concerns, and the need to adhere to the principle of a speedy trial. Additionally, the police are legally obliged to take independent action where there is a 'danger of delay'. This is interpreted broadly and such powers used freely. Often the prosecution are not informed until the police have produced a draft report at which point it may be too late to intervene. Even where the prosecutor does instruct an investigation, police control the resources of the investigation. Consequently, the prosecutor can only act on the basis of evidence from "investigations which he no longer conducts", the dangers of which have been outlined above and need not be repeated.
Furthermore, in a predicament similar to that of France, perhaps not surprising giving its descent from the Ancien Rgime, the independence of the staatsanwaltschaft is contrained by a "rigid hierarchal responsibility to the Minister of Justice". This political hierarchy, which Hodgson cites as being characteristic of inquisitorial systems, has been accused of leading to corruption. For example, the seeming inability of the staatsanwaltschaft to bring charges against political figues, the Kohl Scandal being just one sobering example that left the repuation of the staatsanwaltschaft in tatters.
Additionally, the staatsanwalt takes an active role in the alternative disposal of cases, via decriminalisation, whereby the principle of compulsory prosecution is evaded by declaring an offence non-criminal and ordering, or rather suggesting instead a fine. Some maya argue that this evades due process by punishing without trial simply by labelling an act non-criminal. This argument has been rejected, however on the grounds that the offender can reject the fine and opt for a full hearing. Furthermore, he is also involved in the punishment of offenders to the extent that it is his responsibility to request a sentence in court, to which the judge merely agrees or disagrees. Normally a sentence just below that originally suggested is imposed, and rarely above. Furthermore he is responsible for the execution of court sanctions, including fines and perhaps most importantly imprisonment. The staatsanwalt, under the supervision of the Strafvollstreckungsgericht
, makes fundamental decisions about the life and liberty of offenders. The dangers of prosecutorial punishment has been outlined above in relation to France and need not be reiterated here. Suffice to say that where basic rights such as liberty are at stake, an independent stance is imperative, but as can been seen, not a reality.
There are many conclusions that can be drawn from the above discussions. Firstly, independence is not a worldwide concept. It means different things to different legal communities. For England independence is conceptualised as thrugh separation and cooperation, in France through judicial authority and supervision and in Germany through subordination and control. Secondly, and of utmost importance, the reality does not always measure up to the conception of independence implied by the formalities of the law. Finally, the above shows the problems of comparing legal cultures with our own. Not only are the entities we are trying to understand of a fundamentally different composition than the ones we seek to compare them against, but they are a product of legal and political cultures alien to our own understanding. As Guarnieri notes:
Whereas the separation model of England was a reaction to the inadequacies of police prosecution, the powers and role of the CPS were borne out of those developed by the police. On the other hand the procureur and the  staatsanwalt was borne out of the ideal of the examining magistrat and as such inherited many of those powers and functions, Additionaly, as Guarnieri stresses, the roles of legal institutions are a result of the political environment in which they are created. For example, whereas in France there is a greater degree of trust in the political establishment than in England and Wales, it may not be so unthinkable to allow executive control over prosecutions. It is not reasonable to expect all three jurisdicitons to adhere to a common conception of independence, although independence is crucial if a due process and equality of arms is to be respected.