Extract the pennyroyal oil from pennyroyal leaves using a crude steam distillation method and purify the oil by Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC) and column chromatography. Use gas Chromatography (GC), FT- IR and H NMR to characterize the oil extracted.
R- (+) Pulegone is the common oil found in Pennyroyal leaves. Others include isomethone and piperitenone.1
NMR
R- (+) Pulegone
The reference proton NMR and the sample proton NMR were compared so that the purity of the sample can be assessed. In the reference NMR, all the signals were located below 3.0ppm which is the aliphatic carbon chain region. There are many signals less than 3.0ppm in the sample NMR which means that there are traces of the essential oil R- (+) Pulegone. Unfortunately, there are too many signals so making it very hard to interpret therefore, this was used to compare to the reference. It was found that from 1.8 - 2.75ppm, the splitting pattern is exactly identical which strongly indicates the existence of the essential oil. However, the multiplet at 1.35ppm and the doublet at 1.02ppm were masked by large signals so cannot be observed. The extra signals presented could be due to a number of reasons. One of which was that there are many other compounds and oils in pennyroyal leaves that could have been extracted out during the crude extraction process and then later on, failed to separation from R- (+) Pulegone. The sample is of pennyroyal oil and not R- (+) Pulegone so therefore it is not unusual that there are other NMR signals as well as the essential oil's signals. From the TLC analysis, it showed that the sample only contained R- (+) Pulegone in the purified fraction but however, NMR showed different results, This is because TLC is not a very accurate analytical method in identifying the purity of samples as many compounds have similar polarity therefore would travel similar distance and have similar Rf values. From the NMR spectra, one can conclude that there are definitely traces of R- (+) Pulegone in the sample but however, it is not very pure as there are other compounds presented.
In order to interpret and assign the hydrogens correctly, calculations were used to give a rough guide on the chemical shifts.
The GC analysis can be used to assess the purity of the sample. The retention time of the peak indicates the identity of R- (+) Pulegone in the sample. In the reference GC analysis, the commercial R- (+) Pulegone's retention time was 4.04 minutes. This can be used to compare with the sample. Yinan Hao's sample was used to compare. The retention time for R- (+) Pulegone was 4.011 minutes. The GC showed that as well as containing this essential oil, it also contains other compounds which could be other oils or impurities. A ratio of R- (+) Pulegone and other compounds can be determined from the areas of the peak.
The experiment can be improved in many ways. One of which is to undergo the steam distillation for longer which enables the full complete extraction of R- (+) Pulegone to happen. The purification by column chromatography can be repeated with the multiple fractions that contain the R- (+) Pulegone and another compound. A less polar solvent e.g.: 50:1 60/ 80 petroleum ether and ethyl acetate can be used to slow down the rate of elution of compounds. This would improve the quality and the yield.
There are many other analytical techniques that could help the characterization of the oil. One of which was nOe experiment which can help to distinguish H3 and H4. Since the major oil is R- (+) Pulegone, it is important to ensure that the right enantiomer was extracted. Mass spectroscopy (MS) can also be used to analyze the oil as the fragmentation and the molecular weights would give structural information. GC- MS can identify different compounds and enables a specific compound in a test sample to be analyzed. This is particularly good as in the sample there are a mixture of substances. The FT- IR, H NMR and GC used for analysis cannot be used to distinguish different enantiomers. A polarimeter can be used distinguish between different optical isomers as they would rotate the polarized light at different directions. R- (+) Pulegone would rotate the polarized light to the right.4 Chiral column chromatography can also be used to distinguish the different enantiomers. The stationary phase of the column would be chiral instead of achiral so therefore the different enantiomers would elute at different times as their affinities to the stationary phase differ. Chiral GC would also allow this separation. Again, a chiral stationary phase would be used which enables the different enantiomers to travel at different rates. This method would give quantitative results i.e.: the ratio of one enantiomer relative to the other.
R- (+) Pulegone has been successfully extracted and isolated from pennyroyal leaves. However, other compounds were found in the sample so more purification steps such as another column chromatography is needed.