This essay will assess the three most common interpretations of the Bolshevik Revolution of October 1917 in trying to discover whether the Bolsheviks were successful because they had a mass following. It will examine whether the insurrection was a coup d'tat conducted by a small and purely self-interested faction, acting entirely for their own benefit - the view subscribed to by many western liberal historians, or whether the successful insurrection was due to the mass support of the Russian people for the Bolshevik party, which was merely realizing their demands - a rigidly enforced Socialist interpretation which all Soviet authors were forced to portray. The final interpretation and the one that this essay will subscribe to is that the Bolsheviks came to power in October 1917 because they had the support of an important minority in Russian society, namely the workers and soldiers, and that the peasants also saw them as the best potential provider of their wishes at the time, especially regarding the re-distribution of the land. Therefore, there was no real opposition to the Bolshevik coup but it would be wrong to describe them as having popular support. The essay will also examine other decisive factors which meant the Bolsheviks were successful in their quest for power, including the significance of Lenin's role in the Revolution as well as the mistakes and unpopularity of the Provisional Government.
Some historians, the vast majority of whom were living in Russia under Communist rule, believe that the Bolsheviks had the support of the masses in Russia and this was the primary reason for their success - 'In the Soviet view, the Bolshevik triumph was based upon its success in winning the support of nothing less than a majority of the population." They argue that the Bolsheviks managed to educate the people and form a new mass consciousness. Indeed, between February and October 1917, the membership of the Bolshevik party rose from 24,000 to 350,000. The party even managed to attract the support of the peasants - 'Nevertheless the party succeeded in winning [the peasants] over to its programme... In the words of Lenin, "Here was objective proof, proof not in words, but in deeds, of the people coming over to the side of the Bolsheviks."' The increase in support for the Bolshevik party was largely from June onwards and their proposals began to be passed in the soviets in various cities. The July Days had proved that the Bolsheviks had the support of the vast majority of the workers, soldiers and sailors. After the Kornilov Affair, Bolshevik support began to grow even more rapidly as they put forward the motion of a left wing dominated government, which the Soviet passed - 'the social polarization of the summer gave the Bolsheviks their first real mass following as a party which based its main appeal on the plebian rejection of all superordinate authority." The Presidium (the organizing committee) of the Petrograd Soviet now had seven members, four of whom were Bolsheviks - 'Bolsheviks thus stood at the head of the institution that was most representative of the popular movement." This helped to increase their popularity still further - 'During August Bolshevism was growing almost throughout the entire breadth of the land." They were the second largest party in the country after polling 33 per cent in the Petrograd City Duma elections - a massive rise of almost 15 per cent in just three months. This trend continued as the Bolsheviks scored a victory in the local Duma elections receiving 52 per cent of the total vote cast 'winning an outright majority in eleven of the seventeen districts." The total number of Bolshevik voters had doubled between June and September.
Bolshevik support grew in the cities with the workers, on the front with the soldiers and in the countryside with the peasants, especially the closer it got to October - 'Bolshevism took possession of the country. The Bolsheviks became an unconquerable power. The people were with them." Early Soviet interpretations even depicted the Revolution itself as being a popular Revolution with thousands upon thousands of people participating. In his book "Red October: The Bolshevik Revolution of 1917", Daniels quotes from the official Communist history of the revolution, "it was an uprising of thousands upon thousands of workers and peasants, the inevitable struggle of proletariat against bourgeoisie". Films such as Eisenstein's "October" and numerous paintings also portray this image, especially of the storming of the Winter Palace. Under the Communists, the
Revolution became known as "The Great October Socialist Revolution". However, even most Soviet historians generally agree that there were in fact only a small number of participants in the Revolution itself. Trotsky argues that it was impossible for the masses to take power anyway - 'just as a blacksmith cannot seize the red hot iron in his naked hand, so the proletarian cannot seize the power, it has to have an organisation accommodated to this task." He argued that this organization was the soviet but that 'the soviets by themselves do not settle the question... [However] when headed by a revolutionary party the soviet consciously and in good season strives towards a conquest of power." The party he is referring to are of course the Bolsheviks, and he uses this argument to justify their seizure of power. Thus, soviet historians maintain that despite only a small proportion of the population being involved in the Revolution, the Bolsheviks still had mass support for their actions from the masses. Trotsky, in particular refutes the claim that it was a Revolution favoured only by a small minority of people - 'As a matter of fact it was the most popular mass-insurrection in all history." They support this claim by arguing that the support of the masses can best be seen in the quick and largely peaceful transition of power to the Bolsheviks all over the country after the Revolution. Therefore, Soviet historians generally believe that the Bolsheviks were successful in their quest for power because they enjoyed the popular support of the masses, even though most agree that only a small fraction of Russian society actually participated in the Revolution itself - 'the Bolsheviks victory was thus in the truest sense democratic and popular, the political expression and culmination of explosive class struggle.'
In stark contrast, however, other historians offer a completely different view: that the Revolution was conducted by a very small, self-interested group of people, who only wanted power for themselves, and were not acting in favour of the masses - 'the Bolshevik claim that [they] represent the true interests of the masses [is] an arrogant illusion born of a fundamentally false doctrine." They argued that the Bolsheviks effectively hi-jacked the mass movement in order to obtain power but then curbed and ultimately crushed it after the Revolution. They stated that the Bolsheviks were the complete antithesis of the popular and democratic movement that they supposedly stood for and instead relied on organization and ruthlessness for their success. They were also considered lucky as 'power lay in the street at the mercy of any organized group of determined men." This was the perfect opportunity for the scheming Bolshevik party to seize power. Instead of having the support of the whole of the population as the Soviet historians had argued, the liberals stated that the Bolsheviks never had popular support -
The liberals rejected the idea of mass political consciousness among the people. The Bolsheviks were merely opportunists who wanted power and had not educated the masses. 'The October Revolution itself epitomized the Bolshevik approach... It was an act of supreme opportunism. The Bolsheviks could never secure power through a democratic route." The liberals point to the election results following the October Revolution as proof of a lack of support for the Bolsheviks, where the Bolsheviks only won 25 per cent of the votes - 'the evidence from the Constituent Assembly elections [showed] that only a minority of the population wanted the Bolsheviks in power." They also highlight the antipathy of the Bolsheviks in Moscow to seize power as well as the strong opposition that they faced there. The liberal historians also draw attention to the devious ways in which the Bolsheviks operated, by making a number of propaganda promises to the public to attract support, which they then failed to fulfil. One of the Bolshevik slogans was "Peace without Indemnity", but following the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, which Lenin signed with Germany, Russia was forced to pay 300 million gold roubles. Another slogan was "All Power to the Soviets!" - but which, after the Bolshevik coup, other groups were forced to leave, enabling them to rule virtually unchallenged. Peasants had been promised land, but "were not given the land as property, only permitted its use". This abandonment of promises by Lenin can be interpreted as a conscious decision not to take power for the public, as Lenin claimed, but purely for the benefit of the party itself. In Campling's book featuring an interview between Marc Ferro and Alexander Kerensky, Kerensky accounts for Lenin's success: "Demagogy, the Bolsheviks promised the moon, but they got civil war: land to the peasants, but food was taken away; workers' self-management which didn't last six months, more liberties still, and Lenin abolished them one after the other". Therefore, the liberal historians believed that the Bolsheviks never had the popular approval of the masses for their coup, which they consequently regarded as illegitimate. Orlando Figes states that
However, it is far more likely that the truth lies somewhere between the Soviet and liberal interpretations regarding the level of support that the Bolsheviks had and whether this was influential in their capturing of power. It can therefore be suggested that the reality is closest to the revisionist school of thought - that the Bolsheviks had an important core of support among the workers, soldiers and sailors and although the peasantry were not active supporters of the party, they were willing to see a change in the leadership of the country due to their discontentment with the Provisional Government, and the Bolsheviks seemed a better alternative at that time. Overall, the Bolsheviks had a sizable amount of support, particularly among the workers - 'the Bolshevik seizure of power on 24-5 October was welcomed by a big majority of workers in Petrograd... The Bolshevik action was seen as inaugurating a revolutionary government by the people." As few people took part in the Revolution itself, the best way to analyse the amount of support the Bolsheviks actually had, is to examine events leading up to the Revolution. On June 18 th 1917, a rally for the Provisional Government was organized and 400,000 people attended the event, but according to Carr, 90% of the banners were Bolshevik. This was the first real sign that they enjoyed mass support. However, they did not have active support from most of the population who were merely desperate to see the downfall of the Provisional Government. Read states that
The aspirations of the masses tied in with those of the Bolsheviks so although the masses did not actively support the Bolsheviks, they saw them as a better alternative to the present government. Revisionists tend to stress the fact that the masses were not merely duped by the Bolsheviks and instead had their own ambitions - 'Once the February revolution had destroyed traditional authority over them, [the masses] acted upon their would-be leaders as much as being acted upon them. No less than their social supervisors, ordinary men and women were guided primarily by values and aspirations of their own." For example, the peasants were desperate to gain control of the land, the workers wanted control of the factories and the army wanted an end to the war - 'by virtue of its relatively flexible, open and democratic character, its sensitivity to mass opinion, its ability to respond to pressure from below, the party had established itself as the prime vehicle for the achievement of popular goals." Thus, the population believed that the Bolsheviks were the best representatives of the mass movement - 'a growing proportion of workers and soldiers shifted their support to the Bolshevik party because it espoused the very goals towards which they strove." That is to say they were united temporarily because the Bolsheviks were the party which most closely matched their aims. However, it is important to remember that 'the popular movement did not turn towards Bolshevism because they became converts to its basic philosophies' but 'rather that this particular party best expressed the attitudes of the workers at the time." Liberal historians had argued that the number of participants in the overthrow of the Provisional Government was proof that the Bolsheviks had very little support. However, although the number of participants in the coup itself was indeed small, revisionist historians generally argue that this was because a large number was not needed and therefore this theory cannot be used to determine how much support the Revolution actually had - 'the number of active participants in the insurrection was not very large - although of course it must be borne in mind that large numbers were not needed for the task." The Bolsheviks won a large amount of support in a very short time, particularly from the July Days onwards, but consciously decided not to use it because the masses were volatile and dangerous and might jeopardize the coup - 'indeed throughout the October Days the Bolshevik leaders positively discouraged workers from taking to the streets." There are also many instances, which illustrate that the Bolsheviks were acting on behalf of the masses and not just for themselves, indicating that they felt a sense of duty towards their supporters. The majority of the Bolshevik slogans were fulfilled, as in: "Peace, Bread and Land". Peace was obtained with Germany within six months of the Revolution and 540 million acres of Tsar and nobility-owned land was re-distributed among peasants, and the food produced was only taken, in order to be transported to the cities to satisfy the people's demand for "Bread". Lenin believed that he and the Bolshevik party were acting for the good of the masses, everywhere, although merely at a quicker pace than Marx had suggested, because the situation was perfect for carrying out the working-class stage of the Revolution. This evidence all points to the fact that the argument condemning the Bolsheviks as a small self-interested faction must be discounted, as Lenin and the leading party members believed they were acting for the people, when they took power. Therefore, the Bolsheviks did have a large amount of support in October, mainly from the workers and soldiers and this was highly important in making their quest for power successful, because it legitimized their coup. However, it would be wrong to say they had the support of the majority of the country. Nevertheless, most people preferred the Bolsheviks to the Provisional Government, so had little objection to the Revolution. Also many people supported the Bolsheviks only temporarily because their aims tied in with those of the party itself. As Christopher Read explains
Another important reason that explains why the Bolsheviks were successful in their quest for power was the decisive role that Lenin played. From the very beginning of the Bolshevik campaign to take power, Lenin cajoled the rest of his party into following his line in terms of which direction the party should take and when the time to act was right - 'Lenin went to work, by sheer force of personality and argument, to win the party leadership over to his own way of thinking." He insisted that his party members be utterly devoted the cause - 'Lenin wanted it to be an organisation of well-informed active militants... He wanted people prepared to devote their whole lives." He believed it was the role of the party members to spread the consciousness to the masses. The most important policy, which Lenin enforced upon the party, was that the Provisional Government should be given no support. This was decisive because it left the Bolsheviks as the only major party in this position when the government lost support. In effect the other parties sank with the Provisional Government. Instead, Lenin proposed that the party should support soviet democracy. This, too, was vital because the Petrograd Soviet increasingly became more representative of the people than the Provisional Government, and the Bolsheviks were the party most closely associated with it. Lenin's policies were laid out in the April Theses, which were of
The party was initially reluctant to follow Lenin in this matter but he gradually convinced them on the grounds that the Provisional Government was bourgeois and imperialist, and that the next stage of the revolution: the implementation of socialism, was necessary. The Bolsheviks call of "All Power to the Soviets" became increasingly popular with the masses as the year progressed - 'the rising fortunes of the Bolsheviks during the summer and autumn was essentially due to the fact that they were the only major political party which stood uncompromisingly for Soviet power." By October, at the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets, 505 out of 670 delegates voted in favour of this. The support of soviet power was crucial in bringing the Bolsheviks to power. Lenin's positivist approach was also highly significant because it helped to attract support - 'where the Soviet right was constantly warning that things could not be done, Lenin and the Bolshevik leadership promised that anything was possible." As the end of the year drew nearer, Lenin began to demand that the Bolsheviks not hesitate and instead seize power at the earliest opportunity - 'So far as the decision to stage an armed uprising is concerned, the initiative was once again Lenin's. From mid-September, from his hiding place in Finland, he wrote urging the Central Committee to place an armed uprising on the order of the day. He insisted that it would be fatal to delay." Colleagues, most notably Kamenev and Zinovoiev, were vehemently against Lenin's proposal to seize power, as they believed that the insurrection would fail and consequently the Bolsheviks would be crushed. However, Lenin continued to push forward the idea - 'To "miss such a moment and wait for the Congress of Soviets would be utter idiocy, or sheer treachery"' Eventually the leadership decided to act and power was indeed taken. Figes even goes so far as to say that
In terms of the insurrection itself, Lenin's leadership was once again vital. He used the popularity of the soviets to take power for his own party through the Military Revolutionary Committee (MRC). Clearly the insurrection was less likely to succeed had the Bolsheviks declared that power had been taken for themselves and not in the name of the soviets. Therefore, Lenin's leadership was decisive in the Bolsheviks coming to power. Firstly, he distanced the party from the Provisional Government and instead sided with the Soviets to attract support from the masses. He often persuaded his party to follow his controversial line - 'Lenin's leadership was decisive. By psychological pressure on his Bolshevik lieutenants and his manipulation of the fear of counterrevolution, he set the stage for the one-party seizure of power." Also he pressed for insurrection from September onwards, at a time when none of the other party leaders thought a successful coup was possible. Finally, with regard to the insurrection itself, he used the MRC to take power in the name of the Soviets to give the takeover greater legitimacy and support. Clearly Lenin's leadership was extremely significant in the Bolsheviks' successful quest for power.
Finally, the mistakes and unpopularity of the Provisional Government were extremely important in the Bolsheviks coming to power. If the government had delivered on the promises it had made after the February Revolution, and had not made a number of costly mistakes which both undermined its own viability and helped to increase the strength of the Bolsheviks, Lenin and his party would never have had the opportunity to come to power - 'above all, the slowness of the Provisional Government ... to tackle the key issues for the ordinary population - the economy, the war, democratization, the land question - drove away their popular support in Petrograd and other key areas." The Provisional Government consistently failed to punish or even destroy the troublemaking Bolsheviks despite having many opportunities. Even after the July Days, which had seen Bolshevik demonstrations turn into a dangerous uprising of the masses, the government failed to follow through on its initial punishments, and the party soon recovered, garnered support and became a threat to political stability once again. In terms of its policies, it failed to make any concessions to the peasants regarding the re-distribution of land. This immediately meant a lack of support from the largest class, by far, in Russia at the time - 'where the Provisional Government's land policy is concerned... its steady refusal to accede to political impatience for the immediate transfer of private land was suicidal." The Provisional Government also failed to maintain the urban economy, which as a result collapsed spectacularly. A breakdown in trade caused by disruptions to the railway system (the needs of the army were put over the rest of the country) meant that there was a shortage of fuel and raw materials reaching the cities. This caused industrial output to decrease significantly. Consequently, there were fewer goods for the peasants to buy, who had less of an incentive to sell their grain, leading to a food shortage - 'the food situation in the cities was becoming worse and worse... The flow of grain to the army and the towns was dangerously dwindling." Also the government's massive wartime expenditure led to rapid inflation and consequently to 'immense political hardship for almost all sections of the population, and of greatest political significance, for the urban working class who became ever more bitterly critical of the government." Another huge mistake that the Provisional Government made, was its failure to deliver on a promise that it had made when taking office after the February Revolution: that of summoning the Constituent Assembly. This would have provided legitimacy to the regime, which the government consequently lacked. But perhaps the biggest error of the Provisional Government was its failure to end Russia's participation in the First World War. It accentuated its other problems and created obstacles in dealing with them. The army became increasingly radical over its hatred of the war and could not be used to defend the government in times of crisis. It also prevented the government from transferring land to the peasants because it would have led to a mass desertion of the soldiers to claim their share. Also 'the war 's effect on the budget and the economy, on transport, civilian production and the flow of grain, was crippling." The Kornilov Affair also seriously undermined the Provisional Government because it meant that the government now lacked support from both the Right and the Left. Kerensky was forced to call upon the Petrograd Soviet for help, which demanded the release of its prisoners in return, many of whom were Bolsheviks. The Red Guard were armed and the Bolsehviks were significantly strengthened by the episode. The Kornilov Affair produced a split between the Provisional Government and the military, which significantly would not come to the former's defence in the future. By saving Russia from counterrevolution, Bolshevik support was further enhanced - '[The Kornilov Affair] merely accentuated the social and political polarization which had been eroding the base of the Provisional Government since the early summer, and in this sense brought the Revolution closer to its October dnouement." A major reason why the Bolshevik rebellion was successful, despite the small number of people being involved, was due to the indifference of those expected to form opposition. The Provisional Government had lost all credibility since taking over from Tsar Nicholas II in February, and by October the majority of people in Russia despised it. Popular discontent with the Government can be seen by the peasant revolts in the countryside and the strikes that occurred in the cities. Thus, any alternative was seen as preferable. Nobody was willing to fight for a government of bourgeois and landowners. Junkers (military cadets) and Cossacks (elite cavalry), who normally rallied to the Government, gave up their posts with little defence. Therefore, the failure of the Provisional Government was extremely important in the Bolsheviks coming to power because its policies were hated by the population who wanted a change in leadership, opening the way for the Bolsheviks. Firstly, it never crushed the Bolshevik party despite having numerous opportunities to do so. It failed to re-distribute the land among the peasants, could not keep the urban economy afloat and did not end the increasingly unpopular war. It lacked legitimacy because it never called a Constituent Assembly and finally the Kornilov Affair meant its support decreased dramatically, whilst the Bolsheviks benefited. By October 'no one, it seems, was willing to rally to the defense of the Provisional Government.'
Therefore, in conclusion, the Bolsheviks were successful in their quest for power for a variety of different reasons. Although it would be wrong to describe the Bolshevik party as having popular support from the majority of the Russian people, they did have a very significant following, particularly among the working class and military, which the party had built up since the summer months. Indeed, 'the view of October as the product of a truly revolutionary mass movement, and of widespread support for the Bolsheviks both in the cities and in the army, is not so wide of the mark." Their support among the peasants was less widespread, but they faced very little resistance, because virtually everyone saw them as a better alternative to the Provisional Government. Reed argues, "If the masses all over Russia had not been ready for insurrection it must have failed". Thus it could claimed that the Bolsheviks had a degree of popular support. However, there were also a number of other important factors which meant the Bolsheviks could carry out a coup - including the vital role of Lenin's leadership in terms of defining the policies of the party, attracting support and deciding when the time was right to strike, as well as the decision to use the guise of the MRC take power. Finally, the Bolsheviks would never have had the opportunity to take power were it not for the mistakes and unpopularity of the Provisional Government. It failed to deal with the most pressing issues which had brought down Tsar Nicholas II, including the collapse of the urban economy relating to the workers, the land question regarding the peasants and continuation of Russia's involvement in the First World War, affecting the military. It also failed to destroy the Bolsheviks despite having numerous opportunities. Lastly, it had no credibility because it failed to convene the Constituent Assembly depriving it of any legitimacy. By October, the Provisional Government had lost all support and because all the other parties were associated with it, the Bolsheviks were the only party left with any credibility - 'the simple reason for the Bolshevik success in the October revolution was that they were the only party left which associated itself with popular demands, especially for a takeover of governmental power by the Congress of Soviets." Overall, the Bolsheviks were successful because they had a degree of popular support but there were also other important factors such as Lenin's leadership and the unpopularity and mistakes of the Provisional Government. No one was willing to fight for the Provisional Government, which by October had lost all credibility, and the Bolsheviks seized power with relative ease.