On first appearances one may assume that the city of London, given its problems of plague, over crowdedness, social inequality and presence of 'aliens', was ruled by authorities through fear of unrest. However, on closer examination this assumption appears to be untrue. London was in fact comprised of several smaller organisations, such as companies, who were sensitive to the issues of London's population. Many historians, such as Pearl, argue that it is the sensitivity of these smaller organisations that kept London in order. How did these organisations control London? Was order successfully kept?
'Tudor London was an orderly city until the early 1580s, but the rapid growth of population thereafter produced serious problems of maintaining public order in both the city and the suburbs." The population of London doubled between 1580 to 1600, when 200,000 people lived in London, out of a national population of five million. However, by 1650, London's population had doubled again. This rapid rise in population would have created massive social tensions, such as a polarisation of wealth, over crowdedness causing unsanitary conditions, which would have spread plague during epidemics, and a rise in food prices because there were more people for the same amount of food. Between 1581 and 1602, Manning cites thirty-five outbreaks of disorder and then between 1626 and 1628 there were fifteen riots of people protesting about the Duke of Buckingham's disastrous policies. 'No part of England was troubled by popular protest to such a degree as London." Therefore it would seem that if there were attempts to control London's problems, they were unsuccessful. Is this accurate?
Rappaport argues, in comparison to Manning, that many 'historians have exaggerated the severity of London's problems during the sixteenth century and...have underrated the importance of several factors which promoted stability." Although, London lacked a good bureaucracy and competent court system, with government bodies meeting infrequently, there were smaller sub-organisations, which played a vital role in keeping order within London. For example, Companies' Courts of Assistants met monthly, weekly or even bi-weekly. These courts were used by rich and poor men alike. The courts dealt with violations of regulations of trade with fines, closure of shop, or worst expulsion from the company. 'Conflict is inevitably part of human society' and in a society as crowded as London, disputes are going to be a common occurrence. However, the courts resolved conflicts between employers and also between employers and employees, and also between families before they got out of control and led to instability in London. For example, a journeyman was expelled from Pewterers' Company for prowling other men's bargins. Similarly, absenteeism, unpaid wages and violations of contract were resolved within these courts.
The courts also dealt with serious company offences with public humiliation and sometimes beatings. The threat of punishment meant that a good standard of workmanship was kept within London's crafts and trades and helped maintain order within companies. The company courts provided a flexible framework 'thereby containing much of the social tension which must have otherwise erupted into serious instability." The high amount the company courts were used shows that they were effective and did help to 'preserve the stability of London in the sixteenth century." By the middle of the sixteenth century, two thirds of the adult males in London were freemen and belonged to eighty companies, which regulated trade. Therefore, the companies had great control over the population of London and had 'the real and effective power within London's economic structure.'
Another thing the companies provided was a respect for authority in London. In order for stability to be maintained, there must be a respect for authority. London achieved this by making elite status obtainable to all; through hard work you could work your way to the top. Livery companies were vital because they controlled access to wealth and power and therefore privilege in society. So another reason people would behave for the companies because they wanted to better themselves.
While companies were dealing with conflict, the alderman organised mundane chores to prevent London from becoming a city of ruins, such as fixing gates and cleaning ditches, as part of the social services that the government were trying to provide for London. Not only did this keep London cleaner, it also provided work for people in London, keeping them busy and away from crime. However, the aldermen were not in a position to successfully control London alone. 'Even if London's rulers had wanted to establish a permanent, comprehensive system of social services they lacked the means to do so.' The aldermen did not have a regular system of taxation or a good bureaucracy to implement such ambitious ideas. However, the wards, parishes and the Livery Companies had direct responsibility for collecting taxes, providing an informal network of social organisations who supported the poor and their families. For example, Arthur Banks was very ill in 1570, he had migrated to London, but wanted to return to his homeland to die. The company courts granted him the money to return home to his family to die. This again illustrates the vital importance of smaller organisations, particularly companies.
Feeling a sense of belonging in a town means you will be less likely to commit a crime or cause disorder, because you are happy and feel involved in the community. Many people lacked a sense of belonging in London. Of the number of freemen registered in London, a mere seventeen percent were born in London. So by the end of the sixteenth century, almost everybody in London was a migrant. There were language and dialect problems. With no post office to keep in touch with their families, some migrants felt isolated. Therefore, the 'aliens' or foreigners and people from other parts of England could have conflicted, however, companies gave them a sense of belonging and the courts provided an opportunity for fair discipline. 'Londoners must have felt that the courts were available to them for resolving comparatively minor disputes." Also, the government in London was highly participatory, meaning it responded well to communal needs. This combined with the caring nature of these smaller organisations and companies provided a sense of community for Londoners, so everyone looked out for each other and thus stability was maintained.
Dr Pearl agrees with Rappaport's argument that smaller organisations were the key to control and asserts that the 'view of the City dissolving into administrative chaos, conflict and economic anarchy is too stark and simplistic." Both Rappaport and Pearl argue that little is known about the social and economic history of London at this time and so to generalise is too simplistic. Many continental cities experienced much instability during the sixteenth century and were ripped apart by Revolution and Civil War, with violent uprisings against the government. For example, the Saint Bartholomew's Day Massacre against the Huguenots in Paris illustrates how the Reformation was something that caused great conflict in many European cities. Although there was Civil War in England, causing unrest in London, it also caused unrest in other towns across England, so cannot be seen as something solely in London.
In addition, the Crown ensured that the Reformation was not a divisive issue in England. Rappaport's argument for no evidence of riots in London in the sixteenth century, seems to be well founded. There was quarrelling and conflict in London, such as Evil May Day in 1517, but this particular day seems to figure so prominently in historical reviews not because it was a common event, rather because it was rare. However, this is not to say that Tudor London was an absolutely stable society, without tensions, but problems were dealt with, particularly by company courts, so that violent unrest did not arise.
However, Archer argues that 'the capital was notorious for its criminality." Many legislators firmly believed there was an organised criminal underworld in London. However, historians, such as Pearl have argued that evidence for belief in a criminal underworld was based on literary sensationalism, such as pamphlets and plays, which were aiming to be entertainment and thus exaggerated the problems of criminality. 'Pamphlets do not demonstrate the existence of a rogue society...but people's determination to believe in one." Pearl argues that historians have largely overemphasised the idea of urban disorder and their claims that London was a city constantly close to a riot, with criminality as an endemic, is inaccurate. She says that Dorothy George's summary of eighteenth century London as 'combined turbulence with fundamental orderliness', is just as accurate for the century preceding it. This seems a fair description as ultimately crime seems to have been casual and opportunistic, often going hand in hand with the level of poverty. In times of dearth, people stole to survive, for example soldiers returning from war to unemployment.
Youths were another group, making up a large percentage of London's population, who could have caused disorder, particularly through crime. For example, if a youth becomes disillusioned with economic prospects, perhaps because of poor quality apprentice instruction, they may turn to crime or rebellion. However, despite Beier's comments that there was large-scale juvenile delinquency in London, there does not seem to have been large-scale gangs of problematic youths in London. This could perhaps be attributed to the alderman's orders that if apprentice riots broke out, curfews would be emplaced and masters would have to answer for the apprentice's behaviour, which would have encouraged the masters to treat their apprentice well. Generally, apprenticeships were a stabilising environment for the youth. They got moral, practical and religious teachings from their masters, as well as keeping them busy and away from crime. Similarly, control of the youth could be attributed to alehouses, theatres, bowling allies, tennis courts, providing social meeting places for the youth, keeping them occupied, away from crime. Although, some historians have argued that these social places could have been a double-edged sword and also provided a gathering place to organise riots, there does not seem to be much evidence to support this.
So London dealt with the youth successfully, but what about the poor? They were another group who figured predominantly in London's population and could have caused serious unrest. London is said to have offered the best and the worst of urban worlds in the sixteenth century: a fabulously wealthy elite living cheek by jowl with a thoroughly destitute minority." London's poor relief system was the most advanced in England. It 'provided for some poor housekeepers and their children not only the statutory weekly doles...also pensions from the guilds and charitable handouts in money and kind from parochial and ward fines and parish fees." Finaly argues that 'the poor never engineered social uprisings in London,' therefore they must have been reasonably happy with the relief they were given. 'Major cities, such as London, developed institutions precisely to ensure that poverty did not lead to unrest." London's poverty was contained through numerous strategies. For example, the government aimed to maintain food supplies, so that during times of poor harvests the poor still had food to survive. In 1570 they set up permanent grain reserves. The companies and wards took much responsibility for government initiatives such as grain reserves. They brought and stored the grain and then during scarcity decided how much to distribute to different families. There were no major grain riots in London during this period, therefore the permanent grain reserves should be seen as a successful venture maintaining control in London.
There were numerous other government actions to try to control poverty, such as sending vagrants abroad as soldiers, or as indentured servants to the colonies. A key act was the 1601 Elizabethan Poor Law. The sick, old, infirm and mentally ill, known as the impotent poor were looked after in poor houses and able bodied poor were sent to workhouses. Those vagrants who refused to work were sent to houses of correction. Also, poor children were given apprenticeships, and thus the opportunity to turn to crime was removed from them. Some hospitals were founded to care for the poor and infirm. Generally in England, there was no consistent body of practice with this Poor Law, however as Rappaport argues, London had one of the best systems of poor relief in England. This could have been because the centre of administration for the Poor Law was in London, therefore any problems were dealt with head on. There were numerous problems with the Elizabethan Poor Law, which were addressed by the Royal Commission, who created a New Poor Law, however this did not happen until 1832, so the poor must have been well contained in London to not arouse problems until the nineteenth century.
Although many historians, such as Clark and Slack argue for an urban crisis during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, London appears to have escaped large riots or attempts to overthrow the government. This is due mainly to the work of smaller organisations, such as Livery companies, who worked hard to maintain order within the capital. Rappaport concludes that the companies preserved the 'peace within the walls." Their caring nature seems to have helped provide a sense of community, which is also illustrated by the fact that when the Queen interfered there was a rise in disputes in the capital. 'Social stability depended in neighbourly collaboration with a minimum interference from above." There were 'many protests against harsh punishments imposed by city magistrates at the Crown's insistence." Similarly, royal interference became a problem again during the reign of Charles I. If London is compared to other key cities, for example cities in France, then the maintenance of order must be seen as successful. 'Clearly there were problems in the policing of the capital, but they should be kept in perspective." In his conclusion, Archer states that the authorities had a reasonably well co-ordinated system of policing and they did not collapse before challenges, such as poverty and crime. However, this order only applies to the City of London, the suburbs surrounding London were out of the control of the mayor, companies and aldermen. They were more overcrowded, poorer and more disorderly than the city of London. The suburbs were not as well governed, for example, Cornhill had four constables for two hundred and sixty households and in Portsoken four to five hundred, and in the East suburbs the ratios were even worse. Also, there were no deputy aldermen or links between the overworked justices of the peace and the constables, meaning there was a serious lack of organisation and authority in areas that the city of London held strength in. 'Constables played a crucial part in the maintenance of order." Similarly, the Commission of the Peace regulated London and prosecuted misdemeanours, such as assault.