There was no centralised plan and little regulation in the eighteenth century, so asylums were extremely diverse. For example, many asylums relied on chains and physical coercion, but Nathaniel Cotton of St. Albans asylum managed his patients with no restraints. Therefore it is difficult to give a uniform picture for private asylums, many were scandalous, whereas others show signs of therapeutic innovation, such as Spring Vale. However, Scull argues that in private asylums management methods for the insane remained basic. He says that the claim of humanitarianism, science and government inspection creating 'the great nineteenth-century movement for a more humane and intelligent treatment of the insane' was grossly misleading. However, again, this is not to say to say individual madhouses made no effort to secure their inmates wellbeing, rather that private asylums should be regarded not as a general phenomenon but individual. This essay will address private asylums in the light of Porter's description.
Scandal came in numerous forms, for example, false confinement and ill-treatment of patients. Private asylums could be a place to 'get rid of' inconvenient relatives or to get inheritance, in this way false confinement could be seen as a way in which private asylums were running sores of scandal. For example, Foyster's account indicates that mad-doctors like Battie and Monro may have been assistants in errant husbands who sought control of their unruly wives; this could be linked to the money-making proprietor to be mentioned shortly and his wiliness to take paying patients. However, many of these cases were dubious and difficult to prove. The case of Coates the Elder and his wife in 1772 is one of the worst instances of abuse in a private madhouse. The case was over the illegal confinement of Mrs Ewbank and Mrs Mills at the request of their abusive husbands and then they were verbally and physically abused in the asylum, for example being told all their hair would cut off. However, there is much exaggeration in these accounts for effect. There was also much fictional writing on madhouses, which fed their public reputation. However, this is not to say all cases should be dismissed as exaggerated. For example, a pauper at the Dunston Lodge had his two upper incisor teeth removed and was secluded after he bit the proprietor. The proprietor was found guilty of cruelty and his licence was prohibited by the Commissioners in Lunacy. These cases may show abuse, but also the thoroughness of judicial investigations to ensure appropriate treatment for patient's recovery.
Similarly, Alexander Cruden's 'The Patient's View', suggests scandal in private madhouses, not only false confinement but also maltreatment once in the madhouse. For example, he was ordered to eat like a dog and he described the asylum as 'a resemblance of hell." He provided indication that his private asylum was not a medical institution because he was chained every night regardless of his behaviour, which would suggest he was not being properly monitored and was merely seen as a nuisance or a danger. Chaining patients to beds was supposed to have some therapeutic intent, but overuse could be punitive, for example solitary confinement. However, biased and egotistical he is, for example referring to himself as Alexander the Corrector, his piece does illustrate a lack of moral management and that threats were used instead. It seems that his treatment is patchy and it is not a priority to try new treatments. Whatever the motives for confinement 'Cruden's expose gives not the slightest indication...that his asylum...could possibly have been therapeutically beneficial." It is still important to remember that this is only one person's account, and somebody may say good things about the same madhouse.
However, Parry-Jones claims that the evidence for maltreatment of lunatics in madhouses almost entirely relates to a small number of metropolitan houses, which leaves conditions elsewhere down to speculation. Brislington House provides the most detailed description of alleged abuses practised in a provincial madhouse. Abuses included prolonged restraint, theft of patient's personal belongings, raping of women and inhumane procedures. It is difficult to validate these claims. However, Milford agreed, 'the advocates for the extinction of foreign slavery will do well to look at home- to the slavery of whites, in private mad-houses, where they are worse treated than negroes - the maniacs are there abused as an inferior cast of beings, as a degraded and malignant race and they are made so by cruel treatment." Similarly, Conolly argues that patients from lower and middle classes were particularly suffering from maltreatment earlier in the century, because proprietors wanted to attract high paying patients so neglected those paid for by the parish.
'To all intents and purposes, mad-doctors like Battie and Monro were running these madhouses as their own private businesses rather than merely attending the patients confined in them." Brooke House was dismal in the eyes of the patients, described as a 'despicable building' and in a state of 'general squalor', but for the Monros it was very profitable. It was when the building was in ruins that it was thought of as fit to be transformed into a madhouse. The chapter in Scull's book is called 'Mansions of Misery', this would indicate that private asylums were a money making business rather than the centre of therapeutic innovation. Neither public or private madhouses wanted to spend more money than necessary and minimum safety rather than treatment was the yardstick on staffing levels, with private asylums being the worse offenders of this. 'There is considerable evidence that, in the early part of the nineteenth century, private madhouses were...structurally ill-suited for the reception of lunatics and very few indeed were purpose built.'
Another scandal was staff. 'The mad doctor...operating on a limited capacity of medical consultant, appears to have left most decisions about the management of madhouse patients to the proprietor and keepers." Using the example of the Hoxton madhouse, where neither John Miles or his son were medically trained, a site of therapeutic innovation seems unlikely. A medical attendant's ability to alter or improve adverse conditions was limited because he was an employee of the proprietor and thus had to please him. In the early nineteenth century, his role was generally confined to treatment of bodily illness and he had little responsibility for the management of patients. This indicates that private madhouses could be as Porter describes them if there was a conscientious medical attendant, but a harsh, money making proprietor. However, if certain therapeutic treatments were to be tried, such as hot and cold baths, agreement and money would need to be provided by the proprietor. Similarly, although by 1815 a medical man was in regular attendance, the Mileses still relied on the family and friends of patients to provide care for them. This would provide traditional treatment, not innovations, because families were not medically trained.
Analogously, until the second half of the nineteenth century, staff received no professional training, therefore it is difficult to see how uniformly private madhouses can be seen as sites of innovation. The relationship between keeper and patient was unequal, with the keeper having considerable power, which in Browne's 'What Asylums Were, Are, and Ought to Be' is not what should occur. Patients should be explained their treatment, not treated with physical restraint unnecessarily. Campbell, reported that between 1847 and 1858, forty-eight male attendants and twenty female 'nurses' were dismissed for cruelty from private madhouses. In 1850, an anomalous letter was written referring to 'ignorant, idle and ferocious keepers, acting without conscience or control." For an asylum to be a site of innovation, the staff would have to be motivated and specialised. D.J Mellett argues that the alleged functions of the attendants and their practical capabilities held huge discrepancies, because of poor pay, low status and high expectations, such as the expectation of being available day and night, of what keepers should contribute to care of insane. Night staff were not employed until the 1840s. Scull argues that attendants were from the dregs of society and that few people had experience in the field, which would help for therapeutic innovation. However, in some private madhouses proprietors were more involved, such as Bakewell and also the wives of the proprietors. In smaller private asylums, such as Spring Vale, much success of claimed curability is attributed to the family environment and kindness.
Bakewell was a prominent lay proprietor, who saw it as his mission to improve the lives of the insane with therapeutic treatment, giving the patient patience. He wrote the Domestic Guide, which was not a commercial success, which could indicate that other proprietors were not interested in therapeutic innovations. However, his asylum at Spring Vale was a site for therapeutic innovation and not scandal, which again shows how much asylums varied. Advantages of his asylum included; its countryside setting, making it healthy and views were uplifting, large grounds were good for gardening, which could provide work for patients. He also used new treatments, rather than bleeding and blistering, which he deemed unnecessary in many cases. He aimed to treat the patients as rational people to make them rational again and religion was used as a way to divert the patients thoughts. Much of Bakewell's treatment matched other enlightened asylums, such as the York Retreat. It also fits well into Browne's utopia, which makes it an ideal and few other asylums were as therapeutically as innovative.
However, these institutions provided a market for experts, which was isolated from society, so the proto-profession could develop empirically based craft skills in the management of the insane. Therefore, they should have been sites for innovation and they certainly had better doctor patient ratios than county asylums. County asylums ratios were 12:1, whereas in some private asylums the ratio was 2.1. Similarly, the general domestic care was said to be better in private asylums. This could help a patient be more rational and feel less savage, which could only help their recovery. For example, at Ashbrooke House patients went to church, had amusements and music. 'While moral treatment may have disappeared without a trace in the public asylums, it was applied with a vengeance at some of the private ones." In the early nineteenth century, warm and cold baths were introduced as a therapeutic innovation. However, some mad doctors questioned the efficacy of such treatment. Similarly, cold showers could be used for scandal as punishment and deterrent to undesirable behaviour. For example, Sarah Stone, an attendant at Hunnigham Hall in 1848, ordered a patient three shower baths in fifteen minutes for refusing to show their tongue to the doctor. It was often easier to grasp punishment ideas and they were more attractive to implement than treatment.
However, in the metropolis, many poor and pauper lunatics went to private madhouses. 'When families could afford the additional cost...private care was generally - though not universally - preferred." If they were completely scandalous why would families sent their relatives there at cost? However, the scope for maltreatment in private asylums could be considered to be greater than public because they were less in the public eye, and could not be visited in the same way. Therefore evidence of scandal only surfaced if complaints were made. This does also mean that the majority of evidence collected is going to be extreme and negative. However, there is a letter of thanks by John Ryalnd to the Strafford Asylum, which redresses the balance. Therefore, it is important to discuss the private asylum compared to the alternatives. Surely, being in a private madhouse had less scandal than a workhouse. 'Workhouse was ill-suited to provide a secure safe-keeping for those who might pose a threat to life or property." The local jail was another alternative for violent madmen, complaints about their presence came from jailers and prisoners. Alternatively, patients could be cared for in the home. However, patients could be unmanageable, with a tendency to wonder or cause local disturbances. They were also a burden on the families' income and could have brought shame on the family. There would be little chance of therapeutic innovation at home, and whether they were sites of abuse would depend on individual families. County asylums were thought to be places where 'many patients were simply left to rot." Therefore, comparatively, no other asylum was any less scandalous or innovative than private ones.
Changes occurred for private madhouses from the eighteenth to nineteenth century. Legislation was slowly passed, such as the 1774 Regulation of Madhouses Act, attempting to regulate private madhouses. However, it was largely ignored and licences of appalling madhouses could not be revoked. This was not concerned with innovate treatment, but attempting to regulate the number of patients could have reduced scandal. The Madhouse Act and Lunatic Acts improved on this and did introduce medical attendants into visitations. Also the 1815 report on private asylums highlighted neglect of appropriate provisions for pauper lunatics. This pushed for more public money being spent on county asylums. By decreasing the number of pauper admissions in private asylums, the risk of abuse was minimised because there was less chance of neglect and understaffing. However, change was slow and not uniform, but by the nineteenth century private asylums were considered less scandalous than the eighteenth century.
Overall, each asylum was unique and although some asylums, like Spring Vale showed innovations, these were by no means uniform. Pauper inmates certainly received worse treatment in private asylums, but there was scandal of false confinement and poor conditions for all patients. 'Although the rich could buy opulent accommodation, greater attention and more eminent psychiatrists for their crazy relatives, but not more cures." However, by buying better accommodation it could not harm their treatment. Therapeutic innovations could include reading and working, which was more readily available in some private madhouses. Although changes were made in the nineteenth century, they were slow and as stated throughout the essay there is no uniform picture, therefore Porter's statement seems fair.