Neurasthenia is a psychological disorder characterised by profound physical and mental exhaustion. Hysteria is a disease which produces symptoms of excessive or uncontrollable emotion, such as fear or panic. However, neither has a clear organic, medical cause and has multiple symptoms, such as bad dreams, insomnia, fidgetiness, impotence, claustrophobia and vague pains. This list is far reaching and thus could surely be applied to numerous diseases. The vagueness make neurasthenia and hysteria subjective and therefore suggestibly socially constructed. This essay will attempt to assess how plausible this suggestion of social construction is.
Both diseases spread rapidly. Was this because there was a genuine rise in the number of sufferers, with people struggling to cope with modern society, or was it, as Beard's one-time partner Rockwell suggested: that neurasthenia became almost a household word. Physicians often diagnosed neurasthenia because this pleased the patient. However, it was regarded as 'the newest garbage can of medicine' because as it became a term used by everybody its medical status lowered. The disorders spread easily by imitation and suggestion because they were widely publicised. For example, being labelled as suffering from neurasthenia provided 'rest cure' as a reason for vacations so people did not seem lazy. Micale suggested that 'in our psychological century, new or emergent forms of psychopathy are not limited to technical medical discussion, but rather develop strong social and cultural resonances." This means that diseases were in tune with society and could change. Diseases become new and fashionable. However, simply by becoming fashionable does not mean that they did not always exist. Rather it means they have more media coverage. For example, tuberculosis bacteria is natural and has always existed. However, this does not mean that if you died from TB before this label was put on it by society you did not die from the same disease. Micale argued that diseases like anorexia, chronic fatigue syndrome and hysteria are all heavily context dependent. 'They are perceived as social and cultural diseases reflective in some direct...way of social and cultural conditions unique to the present." Illustrating that society labels the disease and shapes its development.
This could similarly explain why neurasthenia faded as a medical diagnosis in the United States by the 1930s. Does this mean the disease disappeared or it became unfashionable to give it as a diagnosis or simply that it was re-branded and re-labelled? The latter ideas are the most likely because people still suffer from symptoms that were once classed as neurasthenia for example, a lack of energy resources and fatigue. Similarly, new labels were placed upon hysteria, for example, 'historionic personality type." What is in a name? A name is simply a label put on symptoms to ease social anxieties. Neurasthenia and hysteria could simply be seen as labels put on conditions which society felt uneasy with because there was no organic cause. This does not mean the disease was not real, simply that it was psychological and the label was placed on it by society.
During the second half of the nineteenth century, there was a rising need for a disease to have scientific respectability because of the germ theory and discoveries by neurologists and anatomists. 'If hysteria was a disease, and not the imposition of self-pitying women striving to avoid their traditional roles and responsibilities - as was frequently charged - it must be a disease with a specific etiology and a predictable course." To be a disease it needed a specific organic malfunction, however, hysteria lacked these characteristics to make it a scientific disease. This is partly because both neurasthenia and hysteria were subjective in their diagnosis. A patient could have a desire to be labelled sick. The physician only had their word that they could not move or were suffering serve pain. A patient could mimic a heart attack or blindness, but a physician could find contradictory evidence that proves they are in perfect physical health. In addition, their symptoms changed constantly. For example, 'headaches would replace contracture of a limb, loss of voice, the inability to taste." This is something that hindered the mental illnesses medical position and made them seem more socially constructed. It has been argued that the patient was in control. If the diagnosis a physician provided was unacceptable, the patient may take his business elsewhere. For example, a patient was often happy with the diagnosis of neurasthenia because it provided a respectable label to their distress and was not life-threatening. This perhaps encouraged physicians to diagnose neurasthenia too readily. 'In the late nineteenth century, neurasthenia proved a satisfactory label to doctors and patients alike.'
However as Weir Mitchell said 'we are hardly wise to stamp these pains as non-existent." For example, palpitations of the heart and depression, often inducing momentary paralysis. There is no denying that hysterics and neurasthenics were experiencing pain, therefore to deny them an illness seems harsh. Treatment for hysteria was often similar to that of other mental illnesses: electric shock, blistering, multiple operations and amputations. The harsh treatment could mean that physicians and society looked down on hysterics. Neurologists such as Mitchell, Beard and Dana defined hysteria as a disease despite lacking an organic cause. They saw hysteria as caused by indolent and unconstructive life of the fashionable middle- and upper-class woman or by the ignorant, exhausted life of the lower class woman.
'The perception of pain, the significance attached to symptoms, even the symptoms themselves vary greatly, depending not only on individual needs but on class and ethnic patterns." This clearly illustrates the social construction of these mental illnesses. Some physicians have claimed that in the patient's eyes neurasthenia was 'a reservoir of class prejudices, status desires, urban arrogance, repressed sexuality and indulgent self-centeredness' thus making it solely a socially and culturally constructed disease. However, this is surely unfair on the doctors because it is in the consulting room and hospital clinic where these illnesses are treated. These mental diseases could only be diagnosed after a physical examination, but once the physician had decided there was no organic disease present in the patient they must still label the condition.
Beard describes neurasthenia as principally a disease of the comfortable class. Patients were from the business and upper classes in large cities. In comparison, Weir Mitchell diagnosed it in male working class patients. This debate over the class of people suffering the disease perhaps indicates it is socially constructed, because the disease changes in different context. Most diseases cross class boundaries. For example, plague. Although it affected more lower classes this was because of their living situation and inability to flea plague ridden towns like the rich. Surely for a disease to be real it should be able to affect all humans lacking natural immunity. Class does not give you natural immunity. Likewise, to suggest a class is excluded is wrong. For example, to assume that lower class women escaped hysteria is pessimistic; the prescriptions of proper female behaviour were internationalised in all classes. Leading from this is the idea that mental illnesses were specific to a gender. 'The hysterical woman can be seen as both product and indictment of her culture." Nineteenth century American society provided only one socially respectable role for women: that of a loving wide and mother. Therefore, all women had to try to adjust to one prescribed social role, which demanded continual self-abnegation and desire to please others. Hysterical patients 'did not function as women were expected to function.'
It was not until the mid nineteenth century that hysteria emerged as an endemic disease among bourgeois women in America. Therefore we can conclude that it is a disease particular to the Victorian bourgeois family. As already discussed, any disease that is particular to one era already indicates that it was potentially socially constructed or that there was a cure. There were many discontinuities between an ideal of womanhood and the real world. Many contemporises noted in the 1870s, 1880s, 1890s that middle class American girls were not ready to assume the intense trials of marriage, motherhood and maturation. 'Physicians reported a high incidence of nervous disease and hysteria among women who felt overwhelmed by the burdens of frequent pregnancies, the demands of children, the daily exertions of housekeeping and family management." The case study of Sarah Butler Wister illustrates society's role in her illness. She lived within the traditional domestic sphere. She cherished taking care of her family and their estate. However, Dr Mitchell believed this was the root cause of her neurasthenia. She could not put housekeeping out of her mind; she saw it as a chore and cherished it as a responsibility. Society placed pressure on women to fulfil the role of good housewives and mothers. Her desperate attempts to successfully fulfil this role meant she was trying to conform to societies pressures, therefore society was to blame for her disease.
Similarly, The Autobiography of a Neurasthene by Dr Margaret Cleaves is, in many ways, an excellent example of how society and culture caused her mental illness. Overwork led to a sprained brain and a sensation of blood pouring into her ears, depression, weeping and fears of going insane. Social events played particular strain on her life. Vital to her cure was her relationship with her physician because during her rest cure she was isolated from New York City life. Rest cure enabled patients to step away from society where they struggled to survive, therefore suggesting that the disease was socially constructed. In addition the case of Amelia Gere Mason, who had gained a degree and became a headmistress in a private school, but had developed neurasthenia. It could have been the fact she stepped away from her subscribed social role that led to her neurasthenia. Her illness forced her into seclusion from the city to hope for recovery. If seclusion was necessary and doctor-patient relations vital as Schuster illustrates, then surely society is key to the illness.
It could be argued that social changes such as a more mobile economy and larger population, but fixed family and gender roles affected people's mental illness. Neurasthenia was a method for women to cope with changes in the economy, society and gender roles. Dr Mitchell's work suggests that neurasthenia was a distinctly modern condition that occurred whilst American's began to leave their traditional family roles. For example, families left the spacious countryside for the bourgeoning cities; men moved from farms to offices; women left family for university and society was modernising with fast trains and telegraphs which created a very fast paced world that 'drained people of their mental strength." Educated women struggled to reconcile their desire to be independent and still fulfil their traditional family roles. For example, Jane Addams described years of backaches, depression and purposelessness following her graduation from college. Mitchell saw the diagnosis of neurasthenia as proof that American society was modernising faster than people's minds could keep up. He argued that America's pursuit of the 'dollar devil' stole energy from the nation.
Similarly, Smith-Rosenberg argues that 'hysteria may have served as one option or tactic offering particular women, otherwise unable to respond to these changes, a chance to redefine or restructure their place within the family." Taking to one's bed may have been a passive aggression. In this sense, neurasthenia is clearly socially constructed because these women were manifesting illness in themselves. Their illness was psycho-somatic. They saw neurasthenia as a chance to bargain with traditional patriarchy. No longer would she devote herself to the needs of her family. For example, household activities were reoriented and children were hushed. 'Consciously or unconsciously, they had opted out of their traditional role." However, as with all classes being affected, so were both genders. However, this was not the common conception. Therefore, the disease could affect everybody, but society's public construction of the disease differed seeing it as primarily a female malady.
Gender and class have been discussed as affecting the perception of society's image of mental illness; what about social outcasts such as criminals? Jackson discusses the belief that photographs were a reflection of reality. The feeble minded were seen to threatened national prosperity and social order, by being the root cause of social problems such as crime, unemployment and poverty. Crime itself was seen as a physiological dysfunction. Ten to twenty percent of the prison inmates were mentally deficient. Photographs of mentally ill people in text books illustrated the 'stigmata of degeneration'. This stigma is socially constructed, as is the label on these people as mentally ill. 'By capturing on camera the anomalous appearance of those considered to be educationally and socially deficient...defectives could be weeded out from normal population and segregated for society's protection." Perhaps photographs labelling people mentally ill was a way to scapegoat people thought to be a threat to society? Jackson concludes that the photographs and accompanying verbal descriptions in medical texts portray broader social, political and professional interests. The photographs fixed the idea that the mentally ill are an inferior class of society, a threat, linked with deviancy. Photographs have clear social and cultural implications as a form of social control and therefore suggest mental illnesses could be socially constructed to label deviants. Similarly, some historian's have argued that neurasthenia 'represented a medicalised tool of social control that victimised Victorian women." Smith-Rosenberg conveys that hysteria should be dealt with as a social product 'produced by and functional within a specific set of social circumstances." Much evidence suggests this. For example, the neurasthenia label only being applied in a set time frame. However, George Beard believed mental illnesses were real diseases. He 'insisted it was as real a disease, with as genuinely somatic a course, as smallpox or cholera." Beard made a clear medical explanation for neurasthenia, believing that everyone had a fixed amount of nervous energy, which was mainly hereditary, which were messengers between body parts. Neurasthenia occurred when demand exceeded supply. A tract by S. Weir Mitchell titled Wear and Tear clearly indicated that it was society that was to blame for this disease, but that it was a medical disease nonetheless. Although hysteria and neurasthenia were not the same, we can place them under one umbrella for answering this question because the themes of this essay, such as being labelled by society, modern life causing a breakdown in traditional values and the disease being more specific to certain gender and classes show the diseases similarities. It is undeniable that people suffered from mental illness. The illnesses had always existed and continued to exist outside the period the labels of neurasthenia and hysteria were used. Society was trying to make explanations for diseases that had no apparent organic cause. 'Writing history of hysteria becomes a way of achieving an understanding of and perspective on, ourselves and our social world." Therefore, it is clear that an argument can be made that mental illness is socially constructed with respect to hysteria and neurasthenia, but this does not deny mental illness is a real disease because people are in pain either physically or psychologically.