The method was carried out as stated in the lab manual with the following alteration: After extraction with diethylether the extracts were washed twice with 20mL water.
RJP1 was purified via recrystallisation with methanol and a few drops of water.
The TLC plate clearly shows that the reaction went to completion, as there is no presence of the ortho - hydroxyacetonphenone starting product present in the final spot of RJP1.
Yield of RJP1: (7.33g, 28.63 mmol, 77.1%)
The method was carried out as stated in the lab manual with no alterations. RJP2 was purified via recrystallisation with 40/60 petroleum ether and a few drops of ethyl acetate.
The TLC plate clearly shows that the reaction went to completion, as there is no presence of the RJP1 starting product present in the final spot of RJP2.
Yield of RJP2: (3.96g, 15.35 mmol, 78.3%)
Method adapted from Bebernitz GR, Dain JG, Deems RO, Otero DA, Simpson WR, Strohschein RJ, A Prodrug Approach for Targeting the Liver, J. Med. Chem. 2001, 44, 512 - 523
RJP2 (2.51g) and THF (15mL) was stirred for 30 minutes under an inert nitrogen atmosphere. NaH (0.45g) was then added to the mixture and stirred for 50 hours. The solution was then concentrated by the addition of HCl and diluted with ether (30mL). The solution was then dried over magnesium sulphate and rotary evaporated. 1.02g of the crude product was purified via column chromatography.
The TLC plate clearly shows that the reaction still contains the starting materials. However, 50 hours stirring should have been easily enough to ensure that the reaction had gone to completion, especially as the reference literature method only suggested around 4 hours of stirring. This suggests that the reaction procedure from the literature may not be suitable for this specific reagents used in this experiment; this will be confirmed or disproved with further analysis of the spectroscopic data.
The TLC's clearly show that fractions 15 - 17 contain the product RJP3. These fractions were collected together and left to crystallise. The product was then desiccated.
Yield of RJP3: (0.34g, 0.98 mmol, 24.9%)
The IR and NMR spectra fit the proposed structure of RJP1 and therefore confirms the structure of the product from step 1 to be RJP1.
The IR and NMR spectra fit the proposed structure of RJP2 and therefore confirms the structure of the product from step 2 to be RJP2. Also clearly shown from comparison of the IR spectrum of RJP1 and RJP2, is the disappearance of the strong carbonyl peak (1663.3 cm -1) and the presence of the strong/broad alcohol peak (3314 cm -1), which suggests that the product from step 2 is RJP2.
From the IR and NMR spectra of RJP3 it clearly shows that the reaction hasn't resulted in RJP3 as the product. The IR spectrum has a broad/strong alcohol peak (3306 cm -1) which should not be present as this should have reacted and become the second ether group in this molecule. This suggests that the reaction has not occurred or is still impure. The NMR of RJP3 suggests a failed reaction further as it contains nearly an exact match of proton shifts and integrals to that of the NMR of RJP2 and does not show any chemical shifts for the presence of the protons k, l, m and n. If the reaction had succeeded then there should at least be an extra chemical shift around ~2.3 ppm which would correspond to proton n. Therefore, my deduction is that the reaction in step 3 failed. This may be due to the fact that the literature method it was based on may not be effective for the specific set of reagents that were used in step 3 of this chemical synthesis.