It has long been commonly believed that money is the key to happiness. This presumption has been one of fundamental importance to economists for many years. The belief being; that as income increases so does the availability of goods and services, thus increasing our well-being. This was the general interpretation of large-scale surveys such as the General Social Survey and the British Household Panel Survey. However, pioneering research into quality of life concluded that personal income exerts little influence over subjective well-being (Easterlin, 1974; & Campbell et al., 1976). Subsequent reviewers have arrived at similar conclusions (Headey and Wearing, 1989; & King and Napa, 1998). This has encouraged cognitive psychologists to develop theories in order to explain these findings. Recent approaches attempt to enable us to better predict the circumstances under which money can make a person happier.
I intend to outline three key findings involving conflicting evidence from economists and psychologists:
Why there is little increase in happiness as national wealth rises.
Why richer nations do not appear to be happier than poorer nations.
Why there appears to be a tendency for richer people within a community to be happier than poorer people.
I shall then discuss how these findings have led to various recent cognitive explanations of how an individual's happiness can be determined based on their levels of income (Brickman and Campbell, 1971; Helson, 1964; Parducci, 1968; & Veenhoven, 1991).
Before discussing the empirical evidence and cognitive theories, it is important to clarify what I shall be referring to as 'happiness'. Within psychological and economic research, the term 'happiness' is often used interchangeably with satisfaction, utility, welfare and well-being. In terms of cognitive psychology, happiness is thought to be a psychometric judgment on which events can be measured and rated accordingly. Happiness is measured using self-report methods thus is a subjective experience. I shall be largely referring to the over-all life satisfaction of a person rather than to the temporal happiness gained from individual events.
The first key finding I shall be addressing is one that suggests there is little increase in happiness as national wealth increases. Myers (2000) conducted a study of the United States in which it was found that although income per capita had risen from $11,000 to $27,000 between 1946 and1991, the happiness dropped from 2.4 to 2.2 (on a 3 point scale). Although this shows a decrease, it is not statistically significant. This suggests that national happiness had remained roughly the same despite an extremely large increase in wealth. Argyle (1999) attributes this finding on the possibility that it might not be possible to reach happiness by earning and spending income after basic necessities are met because "people are really seeking nonmaterial goals such as personal fulfilment... and are disappointed when material things fail to provide them" (Argyle, 1999). However, Frey and Stutzer (2002) advocate that people have become gradually more materialistic, not being so impressed with the things we have become accustomed to and take for granted, suggesting a preference shift for higher expectations. Such findings have led psychologists to consider the idea that our happiness depends on how we adjust our aspirations according to our past experiences. In monetary terms, this would suggest that a rise in income may lead to a sudden surge of satisfaction, but we soon become accustomed to this and, in turn, aspire to new heights. Thus signifying, "happiness is determined by the gap between aspiration and achievement" Michalos (1991).
The second finding is that it would seem that richer nations are not significantly happier than poorer nations. Dieneral. (1995) initially reported a positive association between income and happiness in 55 nations. This was thought to provide "a strong indication... that personal satisfaction raises with the level of economic development of the nation" (Inkeles and Diamond, 1980). However, it was also found that once an annual income per capita of $15,000 has been reached, it appears to have a much smaller effect on happiness (Diener et al., 1995). One of the main results Dieneral. (1995) commented on is that people with the highest income within the wealthy country of Switzerland appear to report less well-being than those with a lower income within the same country. Easterlin (1995) stated that the effect on subjective well-being of a $1,000 increase in income becomes progressively smaller the higher the initial level of income. Further research (Frank, 1997; Frey and Stutzer, 2002; Argyle, 1999; Diener et al., 1993; & Veenhoven, 1991) concludes that although happiness increases with wealth in countries with a lower gross national product per person, once a particular income is met, this appears to no longer be the case, suggesting a curvilinear relationship.
Thirdly, the increase of wealth does appear to have a significant effect within a community. It has been largely presumed in economics that someone with a higher income will gain higher opportunities to achieve, leading to a higher status and ending up with greater perceived utility. European data from the Euro-Barometer Survey Series (1975-01, as cited in Frey & Stutzer, 2002) provided data to support the economic view of utility; reporting that 88% of people in the upper quartile of the income range defining themselves as fairly or very happy, in comparison with only 66% in the lower quartile.
It would therefore appear to be the case that the economic belief has failed to account for some significant findings. The reported evidence has led psychologists to investigate why the happiness-income relationship is not as straightforward as it was originally thought. The following cognitive approaches attempt to answer this question, addressing the matter of how a person's income can make them happy.
The first cognitive explanation that I shall apply to our knowledge of the effect of money on happiness is the absolute explanation, largely adopted by Veenhoven (1991). The suggestion here is that after a country is wealthy enough to cover the basic necessities of life, money will not be the deciding factor in happiness. Veenhoven (1991) maintains "well-being is caused by the satisfaction of basic, universal human rights". In fact, an extreme increase in money will lead to what Veenhoven (1991) coined as "marginal utility of income". This suggests, that after a particular threshold, the influence money will have over happiness will be non-existent. Others have interpreted data to suggest that our happiness may decrease beyond a certain degree of wealth (Dieneral. 1995). The one conclusion that can safely be acknowledged as a condition under which we will be happiest is that we should have an income sufficient to cover basic needs. This can explain why there is little increase as national wealth rises, and why the richest nations are not necessarily the happiest, but it does not give explanation for the greater effect of money within communities.
A more useful explanation of the empirical evidence is one in which it is suggested that perceived utility of events will be evaluated against other factors rather than seen as an inherent value. These are known as relative or context theories. These explanations consider happiness to be a judgment of magnitude based on a subjective scale of cognitive comparisons. For instance, if we were to consider a 10 point scale, one person may rate a particular event as a 5, where as another may rate it much higher with an 8. The main points made in relativist theories are that: happiness results from comparison; standards of comparison change; and that these standards are arbitrary constructs. Relative theories suggest that either the magnitudes will be compared to a mean of all similar stimuli, or that a rating will be based on a range of similar events. The relative theories I shall address here are: Adaptation Theory (Helson, 1964) in which the comparable factors are past experiences; Context Theory (Parducci, 1968) in which social comparisons are made with others; Conceptual-Referent Theory (Rojas, 2005) in which a persons conscious aims are compared to acquired aims.
Helson's (1947, 1964) Adaptation Theory summarises that the judgement for a particular event is proportional to its deviation from the mean value of all other experienced events. It is proposed that the joy or sadness resulting from this judgement is only short term, meaning that our ultimate happiness will remain fairly stable throughout our lives. Therefore, despite how our income may increase or decrease, we will eventually be accustomed to it. This would account for the minor differences between Myers' (2000) results of happiness having stayed roughly the same despite huge differences in wealth.
This theory added to by Brickman and Campbell (1971), reinforcing the theory that people quickly adapt back to hedonic neutrality after an experience, specifically outlining the notion that any efforts to increase our happiness will be doomed to failure. Brickman and Campbell (1971) stated, "people briefly react to good and bad events, but in a short time they return to neutrality... because new goals continually capture ones attention, one constantly strives to be happy without realising that in the long run such efforts are futile". Brickman et al (1978) provided the first empirical support for the adaptation theory whilst investigating whether lottery winners were happier than non-winners, as would be expected. They found that although they had temporary satisfaction, it was not long lasting. The main implication of this theory is that changing our overall life satisfaction is seemingly impossible and that an increase in income will do nothing to affect how happy we are. However, further research has added to this by stating that adaptation to higher incomes will occur quicker in people who have been wealthier throughout their lives than those who experience a single windfall (Diener, 1985). This suggests that our individual circumstances can also play a role in determining the effects of income on our well-being, implying that although adaptation may reduce the impact of events such as windfalls, this may not always be the case.
As with the Adaptation Theory, the Range Principle alone cannot account for all the reported key findings. It is evidentially clear that the position of a particular income on a range of all comparable incomes will not be the only determinant of happiness. It has therefore been considered that the frequency of different levels of income in a social environment may also be influential. Contrary to Helson's prediction, Parducci (1968, 1995) has shown that our satisfaction judgements depend on the skew of the distribution of contextual events. This means that overall happiness will be at its greatest when the distributions of events are negatively skewed. Parduccial. (1960) tested the validity of the Adaptation Theory, as proposed by Helson (1947). They found that the neutral point of the scale did not correspond to the mean of contextual event, but rather to a compromise between the midpoint and median of the distribution. Parducci's Context Theory has therefore based itself around a compromise between the range principle and the frequency principle.
The range principle offers the assumption that we have a tendency to judge an event in terms of the proportion of the contextual range lying below that event. Thus, an event situated near the top of the range in an individual's distribution will induce greater happiness than the same event positioned near the bottom of the range of another distribution (Smith et al., 1989). The frequency principle reflects our preference to judge an event in terms of the proportion of the total number of contextual stimuli lying below a particular event. This suggests that an event can elicit average or above-average happiness despite its position on a range, as long as a high proportion of events in the same context are of a negative value. The implication here is that we do not judge events on their absolute value, meaning that the same event can be viewed as positive or negative depending on the context each individual puts it in.
The range-frequency compromise, when applied to research into income and happiness, suggests several circumstances in which income leads to happiness: For a person to achieve their happiest state they must be aware of others having lower incomes; A person cannot expect to be as satisfied with their earnings if everyone is earning roughly the same; Negative comparisons are necessary. However, it would also suggest that coming into extremely high sums of money, for example through winning the lottery, can have a negative affect on our long-term happiness, allowing us to compare our everyday earnings to relatively high winnings. In terms of how people compare themselves to others in an attempt to judge their own welfare, this theory suggests that we compare ourselves to only those who are in a similar context to ourselves; for example, people in the same income group, people of the same sex and people in the same area of work. We judge our own position on the ranked position within the chosen group, and then compare this to a relative rank and status of someone else in a comparison group. This explains how nations do not differ in happiness because "people within nations compare only to each other on attributes such as income. Therefore, although richer people within a nation are likely to be happier than poorer people in that country, nations ought not to differ" (Easterlin, 1974). It would appear to be the case that the Context Theory (Parducci, 1995) cannot account for all the mentioned key findings. For instance, Diener and Diener (1996) showed that most people have above average happiness, opposing the suggestion here that an average person ought to be neutral in happiness.
Most recently, a theory has been put forward to propose that the evidence on which each of these principles have been based is unfounded. The Conceptual-Referent Theory of happiness (CRT) (Rojas, 2005) suggests that the assumption that happiness is universal is flawed, leading to erroneous speculation. Rojas (2005) suggests "each person has a conceptual referent for a happy life- the conception or notion to which the term happiness refers to - and that this referent plays a role in the judgment of her life". Where Cantril (1965) believed an overwhelming majority of the population base happiness upon material circumstances, suggesting that what will ultimately shape happiness would be similar in most cases, CRT stresses the importance of heterogeneity, explaining that the factors of happiness are neither the same nor equally important for everybody. This would explain the weak correlations of income and happiness, and would also explain why some people are satisfied with less money than others. If this is how we do indeed judge our happiness, previous economic studies investigating the relationship between income and happiness are invalid, as universality has been assumed.
In response to whether or not cognitive approaches can aid our understanding of the conditions in which money will increase a person's happiness, it would appear that they are indeed useful, but only to a certain extent. Veenhoven (1991) points out that beyond a particular level of income, money will bear little relation to our happiness. Further relative approaches add to this by suggesting that this may be due to the personal adaptations, the social comparisons we each make, or simply because we are all seeking different types of happiness. I conclude that these different approaches must be integrated into a single theory before they can have a concrete impact on how we can increase our individual happiness. For now though it can be presumed that in order to gain the most happiness from our income we must try to compare ourselves with individuals who gain less than ourselves, and try not to become accustomed to particularly high levels of money.