Roszak believes we are damaging the planet, in his book The Voice of the Earth he says that "in our hearts we know there is something maniacal about the way we are abusing the planetary environment. The extinction of species, the depletion of the ozone, the annihilation of the rainforests" (Roszak, as cited in Reser, 1995, p.237). However other academics believe these claims that humans are destroying the earth are exaggerated. Lomborg argues that in fact "mankind's lot has actually improved in terms of practically every measurable indicator" (Lomborg, 2001, p.4). He also argues that this improvement has come about without the destruction of the global environment. The debate therefore is whether or not humans are damaging the planet and what if anything should be done about it. Psychologists have recently begun to contribute to this debate with the advent of ecopsychology. However it has been disputed whether psychology really has anything of importance to add to the debate and whether psychologists should in fact concern themselves with these matters.
In 1995, Roszak stated that "there is a great deal to be afraid of and a great deal to be ashamed of in our environmental habits" (Roszak, 1995, p.2). This view of humans as having a destructive impact on the earth is vindicated by a large amount of data collected by environmentalist agencies and the government. In a recent review on climate change commissioned by the government it was found that a huge amount of scientific evidence clearly indicates that climate change is a very serious and rather urgent issue and that the change is due to an increase in greenhouse gases caused by human activity (Stern et al, 2006). The report goes on to say that the effects of global warming will not be felt evenly across the globe and that the poorest countries will be disproportionately affected putting them at risk of vulnerability and poverty, it also reports that an increase in temperature "of only 1-2C could commit 15-40 % of species to extinction" (Stern et al, 2006, p.55). From this it can be seen that human action has huge consequences for the earth and yet greenhouse gases and global warming are only some of the ways in which we are damaging the planet. There is also air and water pollution, urban sprawl, destructive land practices, deforestation and dwindling natural resources. It is therefore easy to conclude that we are heading for an impending catastrophe of our own making, however not all environmentalists agree with this doomsday picture (Lomborg, 2001).
Bjorn Lomborg, a self titled 'skeptical environmentalist' actually believes "things are getting better" (Lomborg, 2001, p.4). In his book The Skeptical Environmentalist he sets out how the world, the environment, and human lives are improving. He points out that human welfare is getting better, life expectancy has improved greatly since 1950 even in the developing world, and that infant mortality in both developed and developing countries has fallen by more than 50%. Humankind is now better nourished and the proportion of starving people has fallen greatly since 1970. Poverty is decreased and incomes in both industrialized and developing countries have tripled over the past 50 years. The Food and Agriculture Organisation predicts that in the future there will be more food for more people and lower prices for this food. Lomborg also argues that we are not headed towards an energy crisis, we have enough oil to cover our energy consumption for the next 5000 years and uranium for the next 14,000 years and renewable energy resources are "incomprehensibly large" and will probably be available at competitive prices within the next 50 years (Lomborg, 2001, p.136).
As for the environment, while deforestation is occurring it is not occurring at such a high rate as feared, about a third of the earth's land mass is still covered by forest. Also biodiversity is being reduced at a much lesser extent than originally thought and this reduction can be slowed by halting deforestation. Lomborg is also positive about pollution, he points out that air pollution has decreased in the developed world and that developing countries are likely to follow this trend. Acid rain has been found to have little effect on forest growth, when it was predicted to kill off forests in the 1980's. The oceans have not been harmed to any significant degree and the quality of coastal waters has increased and rivers have generally improved by almost all indicators. Lomborg argues that contrary to what Roszak believes, all in all the world is now a better place to live (Lomborg, 2001).
From a first look at this debate over whether humans are damaging the living systems of the planet it is difficult to see where psychology fits in. Psychology does not study the impact of humans on the living systems of the planet or campaign for the protection of the environment, indeed this is the study of ecology and the aim of environmentalism. Psychology is defined as "the study of the nature, functions, and phenomena of behaviour and mental experience", therefore it can be argued that psychology should not be concerned with ecological or environmental issues, which do not seemingly fall under this definition (Colman, 2003, p.600). It is therefore often assumed that psychologists have nothing to contribute to a debate concerned with the ecological systems of the planet. For much of it's history this has been true of psychology, it studied humans as defined by their physical bodies and immediate behaviour. This was due to the 'enlightenment project' which led to the modernist tradition of drawing a distinction between the inner world of the mind and the external world of material (Gergen, 2001). However this narrow interpretation of the field of psychology is now under debate, postmodernism brought into question the idea of a knowable subject matter in psychology and instead recognised the ambiguous nature of knowledge, and consequently the relatedness and contextual nature of the self (Kvale, 1992). With this came the understanding that if we are to study mental experience, we cannot do so without studying the world our mental experience is within. This gave rise to the idea of embodied cognition, which argues that "Cognition is not a phenomenon that can be successfully studied while marginalizing the roles of body, world and action" (Clark, 1999, p.350).
This idea was taken even further by ecopsychologists such as Roszak who see ecopsychology as bridging the gap between psychology and ecology and leading the needs of the planet and the person to be seen as a continuum (Reser, 1995). Another ecopsychologist Hillman goes as far as to say that the way in which humans relate to their environment is the "one core issue for all psychology" and that the one question we have to answer is "where does the 'me' stop? Where does the 'other' begin?" (Hillman, 1995, p.xvii). From an ecopsychological viewpoint the answer to Hillman's question is that the boundary between 'me' and 'other' is permeable and therefore these concepts can merge until there is no clear boundary between ourselves and the world. The biologist E.O.Wilson also argues that humans have an innate affiliation with other living organisms, a capacity which he calls biophilia, and that our evolutionary heritage means that all living things are genetically and behaviourally bonded to the biosphere. In this way ecopsychology argues that humans are part of the living systems of the planet and if this is true then psychology can be seen to merge with ecology (Hillman, 1995).
If as ecopsychologists suggest, the subject matter of psychology and ecology are interrelated, it can be seen that psychology is very much part of the debate over whether the claims we are destroying the planet are exaggerated. For whilst looking at what impact human behaviour has on living systems and the planet is important, it is also import to look at what impact this behaviour has on humans. Ecopsychologists argue that the way humans have sought to separate themselves from nature after the 'enlightenment project' has led to not only destructive behaviour towards the planet but also self destructive behaviour. They believe that much of our unhappiness as a species can be seen in the increasing rates of many psychological disorders, as mental disorders and neurological illnesses now affect around 400 million people world wide and the World Health Organisation predicts that by 2020 depression will be the second leading contributor to the global burden of disease if present trends continue (World Health Organisation, 1999). Ecopsychologists also believe that this increase is due to the western cultural trend of exploiting and damaging the natural world and in doing so attempting to make ourselves psychologically separate from it. Shepard argues that this culture has led to a weak identity structure and arrested development due to modern societies need for dependence. He argues that the private cost of this way of living is the massive need for therapy, escapism in the form of narcotics and intoxicants, rage, grief, and "a readiness to strike back at a natural world that we dimly perceive as having failed us" (Shepard, 1995, p.35) In this way it can be seen that no matter what technological advances we make and how many possessions we surround ourselves with, man is still a part of nature and therefore the threat we pose to the earth is a threat to us as well (Devall & Sessions, 1985).
This has led to the realisation that as Hillman puts it "we cannot be studied or cured apart from the planet" and if this is true then the reverse can also be true; the planet cannot be studied or cured apart from humans (Hillman, 1995, p. xxii). Indeed many ecologists have come to believe that it is key to include psychology in the debates and campaigns over the state of the planet, if human behaviour is indeed destructive towards the planet, it is psychology that may have the answers to why this is so and also how it can be changed. As John Seed put it; psychologists can help "ecologists to gain deeper understanding of how to facilitate profound change in the human heart and mind" and it is only in this way that human behaviour towards the planet will be changed (Roszak, 1995, p.3). It is the work of physicists, chemists, meteorologists, biologists, agronomists and ecologists, to analyze information that tells us what problems we are heading for and how serious these problems are. However it can be argued that all of the looming ecological problems share a common factor, which it that they are the result of people appropriating increasing amounts of the Earth for human use, generating huge amounts of waste and thereby placing stress on the planet's ecosystems (Howard, 2000). Perhaps psychologists most important role in this debate is that they are uniquely qualified to assess why these destructive behaviours come about and how they can be changed. Even 'skeptical' environmentalists agree that much could be done to improve the quality of life of people on the planet and to improve the environment and prospects for the earth (Lomborg, 2001). By changing the wasteful lifestyles and systems that currently define and mould people's behaviour, psychologists could help people to lead lifestyles that support global sustainability (Howard, 2000). However these goals cannot be accomplished by psychology alone and more than ever co-operation between subjects needs to be achieved in order to set changes in motion. While psychology can give ideas as to how attitudes and behaviours can be changed, people in the areas of business, law, politics and economics are needed in order to implement these ideas.
However it can also be argued that psychology does not have any place in contributing to the debate over the state of the planet, as many psychologists argue that ecopsychology is not in any "professional, disciplinary sense" a part of psychology (Reser, 1995, p.240). Ecopsychology tends to draw its discourse from popular culture and does so without implementing any of the assumptions, methods or practices of psychology as a discipline. Although postmodernism questioned the concept of knowledge, psychology as a discipline still tends to work on the basis of scientific method. While psychology is misconceived when portrayed as a coherent science, ecopsychologists are largely influenced by Freudian and neo-Freudian sources which are often seen as outdated. They also tend to take a anti-positivist stance that is not compatible with many people's views of modern psychology. Ecopsychology is also often seen as being of an explicitly political nature and at times as quasi-religious, this can be seen as ethically problematic as its association with the discipline of psychology lends it legitimacy and credibility that some believe it does not deserve (Reser, 1995). This is due to the criticisms that can be made of both its discourse and methodology. In much of the discourse of ecopsychology the way in which we are destroying the planet is argued to be akin to a mental illness and our state of connectedness with our natural environment is often seen as barometer of our mental health. These hypotheses are not qualified in any way and no testing has been carried out to assess their validity, these assumptions are therefore "reminiscent of Elizabethan understandings of mental illness as resulting from moral depravity" (Reser, 1995, p.242). Also the way in which ecopsychologists often uncritically appropriate indigenous beliefs and rituals as showing a connectedness to the earth and a therefore mental health can also be criticised as these discussions of indigenous earth wisdom can often be seen to be carried out with naivet, ethnocentrism and misunderstanding (Reser, 1995).
On the other hand, although ecopsychology has been criticised for its discourse and methodology, it is rarely criticised for it's area of study. In fact it can be seen that ecopsychology has much to offer the discipline of psychology in the way it looks at the interaction and interdependency of humans in the greater web of life, suggests a new understanding of selfhood and also the way in which it challenges psychology to get involved in the real problems of the world. While there are still problems with ecopsychology being a "lucid, convincing and useful conceptual platform", many psychologists agree with what they set out to do and with their passionate concern for the planet (Reser, 1995, p.252). For while psychologists may not be able to add to the debate about whether we are in fact damaging the planet, as this is not their area of speciality, this does not mean they should not get involved with preventative work. Psychologists may not be able to say whether we are living in a physically sustainable way but it is their responsibility to discover whether we are living in a psychologically sustainable way. In the consumer societies of the western world this seems doubtful, consumerism pushes us continually to want more and to never be satisfied, this type of thinking can only produce unhappiness (McKibben, 2005).