Sergei Pankejeff, a wealthy Russian aristocrat first presented himself to Sigmund Freud in February 1910, in a "pitiful psychological state" and entirely dependent on others for his care (Gay, 1989, p.285). "Wolf-Man" as Pankejeff was later referred to in Freud's case studies, was diagnosed by Freud as having an anxiety neurosis, an animal phobia in early childhood, compulsive feelings complete with obsessive rituals, attacks of furious rage and neurotic sexual conduct. Overall Freud described him as having "slipped beyond neurosis into a tangle of crippling symptoms" (Gay, 1989, p.285). To treat Wolf-Man's condition Freud employed psychoanalysis to interpret and treat his symptoms.
Freud started Wolf-Man's psychoanalysis by taking his emotional history, from what he found Freud believed he could shed light on Wolf-Man's current neurotic state. Early on in Wolf-Man's life when he was only three his older sister had initiated him into sexual games and he went on from this to exhibit sexual behaviour towards his much loved nurse Nanya. Nanya subsequently warned him that if children did such things they would get a "wound in that place" (Freud, 1973, p.187). Having established that some people don't have penises, from watching his sister, and after Nanya's warning, he subsequently became obsessed with the thought of castration. He began to torture butterflies and to have fantasies about masturbation and beating, which Freud interpreted as a retreat to the earlier anal phase of sexual development. He also began to fantasise about his father beating him and provoked his father in order to make these fantasies become real. Freud interpreted this as showing that after his rejection by Nanya, Wolf-Man had chosen his father as his sexual object. By the age of four and a half Freud reports that Wolf-Man's anxiety neurosis was in place, at this age he would obsess about religious conundrums and compulsively carry out a number of rituals, he also struggled with his sensuality and had fits of rage. These childhood episodes also seemed to lead the way for Wolf-Man's obsessional and compulsive behaviours in later life (Gay, 1989).
However Freud believed that for Wolf-Man's neurosis to have become so severe, an even more traumatic and distressing event must have occurred in his childhood other than the episodes with his sister and Nanya, that he could not presently remember. After years of unproductive therapy Freud believed that the key to Wolf-Man's condition lay in a dream he had just before he was four. In this dream Wolf-Man was in bed, facing a window, when suddenly the window opened by itself revealing six or seven white wolves sitting on the branches of a tree. The wolves looked rather like foxes and were perfectly still and silent, with large tails and alert ears. Wolf-Man reported that at this point he had felt great anxiety at the thought of being eaten by these wolves and screaming, woke up in a state of anxiety (Freud, 1973). Freud, working along the lines that in dreams we often convert experiences and desires into their opposites, believed that the still and silent wolves meant that Wolf-Man had actually witnessed an agitated scene in his childhood. Freud believed this agitated scene to be an unconscious memory of his parents engaging in sexual intercourse, although Freud also later admitted that the dream could have been generated from witnessing animals copulating. Freud believed witnessing these types of acts would allow a young child to see the male and female anatomy and to realise that not everyone had the same anatomy as themselves, and that in boys this could lead to castration anxiety due to them believing that women have been castrated. Therefore Freud interpreted the dream as showing a deep seated fear of the father, which arose from Wolf-Man's wish for sexual gratification by his father, as to have this wish gratified he would need to have been castrated. The conflict between this wish for sexual gratification and the fear of castration is what Freud believed was causing Wolf-Man's anxiety (Freud, 1973).
Freud believed that in order to treat Wolf-Man's neurosis, Wolf-Man would have to bring repressed memories from his past into his conscious and accept the underlying meanings of his anxiety dream. In doing this he would bring the issues of father fear, castration anxiety and the wish for sexual gratification by his father from his unconscious mind in to his conscious, allowing him to be no longer influenced by these internal processes. Freud also believed that the best method to do this was through Psychoanalysis, where the patient is encouraged to transfer their unconscious desires onto the therapist. This can be seen when Freud reported that Wolf-Man in his very first session accused Freud of wanting to "use me from behind", thus Wolf-Man was transferring his unconscious desire onto Freud (Gay, 1995). Wolf-Man's therapy continued over about four years at the end of which Freud believed that he had managed to remove Wolf-Man's symptoms and that he was indeed cured of his neurosis (Gay, 1995).
However although Wolf-Man never returned to the state of complete dependency that he had experienced before Freud's analysis, he had reoccurring symptoms of his neurosis throughout the rest of his life (Gardiner, 1973b). Therefore it cannot be said that he was completely cured by Freud and it hard to say whether Psychoanalysis was really the best treatment for him. As clinical symptoms always "signified the failure of universal mechanisms" Freud did not pay much attention to symptom presentation and therefore the recommendation for treatment, namely psychoanalysis, was always the same (Marshall & Klein, 2003, p.8). However it is now more common to use a biomedical approach to mental health problems when treating someone such as the Wolf-Man, rather than a psychoanalytic model. This can be seen in the use of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV (DSM-IV) by many mental health practitioners today. This system of classification groups mental disorders via their symptom presentation and sees this as an important part of interpreting the symptoms of the patient in order to procure the correct treatment. The first edition of the DSM was published in 1952 and was built on the fact that some symptoms of mental disease tended to occur together, these groups of symptoms could then be used to develop classifications of mental disorders, it therefore became necessary to have inclusion and exclusion criteria for each syndrome (Joseph, 2001). This led Freud's concept of 'neurosis' (which he had diagnosed Wolf-Man with having) to eventually be dissolved, as the only commonality this group had was "an unsubstantiated etiological theory" (Marshall & Klein, 2003, p.12).
The concept of neurosis was replaced by new diagnoses of panic disorder, generalised anxiety disorder, social phobia and post-traumatic stress disorder. New groups of disorders were also created out of symptom clusters previously included in neurosis, these became; somatoform, dissociative, psychosexual, and impulse control disorders (Marshall & Klein, 2003). Therefore if Wolf-Man were to receive treatment today, it is probable that his symptoms would be carefully assessed and he could be diagnosed with one or more of these more specific disorders, using the criteria given by the DSM-IV. This diagnostic criteria which distinguishes anxiety disorder sub-types is now considered necessary as in opposition to Freud's theory of 'universal mechanisms', recent research looking at biochemical imbalances and genetics have found that different sub-types can have "different natural histories, epidemiologies, and, especially, pharmacological and psychotherapeutic treatments" (Stahl, 1997, p.31).
It can be seen that Freud's general diagnosis of neurosis and his belief in the panacea of psychoanalysis may not have provided the best treatment for Wolf-Man, as it is now widely accepted that biological factors are important when looking at the causes and treatments of at least some psychological disorders. Recent research using PET and fMRI technologies have found what appear to be metabolic abnormalities in the brains of people with anxiety disorders. These studies suggest that temporal lobe structures play an important part in the elicitation and maintenance of anxiety states. Drug treatments of anxiety disorders can also give clues as to the mechanisms of the disorders, for example the drug buspirone interacts with serotonin 5HT1A receptors providing relief from anxiety, this suggests that these receptors are abnormal in people with anxiety disorders (Rosenzweig et al, 2005). Therefore if Wolf-Man was indeed suffering with a type of anxiety disorder as Freud's diagnosis suggests, it may due to these metabolic abnormalities rather than Freud's idea of internal processes.
It can also be seen from evidence taken from Freud's case study that Wolf-Man's condition could now be seen to included at least some obsessive-compulsive components. As when he was a small boy he carried out compulsive religious rituals and as a man he suffered from obsessions concerning illness, his appearance and sexual urges (Gardiner, 1973a). Freud believed that these obsessions and compulsions were due to a "sadistic-anal organisation" (Freud, 1979, p.360). However research now suggests that there may be neural mechanisms underlying this type of disorder. Studies such as the one carried out by Saxena and Rauch in 2000, suggest that a circuit among the frontal, striatal and thalamic structures could be the cause of these compulsions and obsessions (as cited in Rosenzweig et al, 2005). There is also some evidence that they could be due to an abnormality of the serotonin system and in particular the "hypersensitivity of postsynaptic 5-HT receptors" (Zohar et al, 2003, p.85). Studies such as the one carried out by Zohar and Kindler in 1992 support this hypothesis as they shown that when serotonin re-uptake is inhibited there is a clear reduction in obsessional thought patterns (as cited in Zohar et al, 2003). Therefore it can be seen that Freud's attempts to cure his patient through a talking therapy may have been in vain, as this evidence suggests the cause of his problems may have at least been partly biological. With our current understanding of these types of disorders many psychologists would now advise their patients to take serotonergic drugs, such as fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, fluvoxamine and citalopram, which inhibit serotonin re-uptake (Mansari & Blier, 2006).
However the biomedical approach to mental disorders has been criticised as being overly biologically deterministic. Whilst it is true that biological factors may be involved in certain psychological disorders including anxiety disorders, it is now generally recognised that it is "only through an interaction of biological and environmental factors that psychological difficulties arise" (Joseph, 2001, p.57). It is also not the only approach that is used within modern psychology to look at and treat disorders such as anxiety. Another perspective that provides explanations and treatments for anxiety disorder is the cognitive approach. From this perspective it is seen that anxiety disorders are caused by a malfunctioning in the regulatory functions of the cognitive system, which leads a person to indiscriminately interpret events as dangerous. This is due to cognitive appraisals of a situation being influenced by a dominant mode which in turn influences which cognitive set (constellation of schemas) a person uses to interpret a situation. Ordinarily there is a balance between modes but in people with anxiety disorders one mode (such as their 'danger' mode) becomes dominant and therefore all information is interpreted with reference to this (Beck et al, 2005).
Therefore from this perspective it can be seen that Wolf-Man's anxiety may have been caused by the over-activity of his danger schemas rather than Freud's interpretation of there being a conflict between his unconscious desires. In their treatment of anxiety disorders, cognitive therapists encourage clients to become aware of their negative thoughts and to monitor them for distortions and illogical conclusions. Once the client has learned to identify their faulty thinking, the therapist will encourage them to restructure this thinking in order for it to be more realistic and adaptive (Beck et al, 2005). Often this type of therapy is integrated with behavioural therapy, which emphasises eliminating unwanted behaviours, which have been learnt through classical and operant conditioning, through such techniques as systematic desensitisation and flooding. This combined approach is called cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) and is now the dominant perspective in psychology as research evidence generally supports its effectiveness (Joseph, 2001). From the cognitive-behavioural perspective Freud's handling of the wolf-man case can be criticised in many ways as cognitive-behaviourists believe that therapy should be kept simple so as not to complicate the clients problems, that it should be free of abstraction, brief and task-relevant. Freud's analysis of Wolf-Man's problems can only be seen to complicate them as he constantly tries to get at the hidden impulses underlying them, often by implementing hypothetical and abstract ideas. Cognitive-behaviourists would therefore see this type of therapy as unhelpful to an anxious person who is already confused and unsure of themselves. Psychoanalysis is carried out by allowing the client to say whatever comes to mind and it is also a very long and drawn out procedure, often taking years. This would be criticised by cognitive-behaviourists as they see anxious people as being in a state of disorder and as such needing a highly structured format in which to approach their problems (Beck et al, 2005).
Other critics of Freud have also criticised his interpretation of Wolf-Man's condition as they see it as arbitrary and assuming many things about Wolf-Man's past that there is simply no tangible evidence for. Critics such as Fish believe that the analysis Freud carried out was not so much an interpretation of Wolf-Man's condition but a persuasion (Fish, 1998). Also professional bodies such as the Department of Health tend to advocate the use of cognitive-behaviour therapy in anxiety disorders, as can be seen in their clinical practice guidelines, due to the experimental evidence supporting this type of therapy (Department of Health, 2001). However on the other hand the lack of evidence supporting psychoanalysis as a treatment for anxiety disorders does not necessarily mean it is ineffective. Although the form of psychoanalysis used by Freud is rarely used today, many therapists still use similar techniques and ideas, reconstituted to form what is now called psychodynamic therapy. Further more, evidence also suggests that brief psychodynamic therapies can be of use in certain conditions and although this evidence does not suggest that it is better than other therapies, it does show that it is more effective than no therapy at all (Joseph, 2001).
In light of our current understanding of anxiety disorders it is easy to criticise Freud's interpretation and handling of the Wolf-Man case as he does not take into account the biological mechanisms involved in the creation and maintenance of anxiety, and there is now some evidence suggesting that a cognitive-behavioural approach is preferable in treating anxiety disorders. However both cognitive-behavioural therapy and effective drug therapies had yet to be realized when the treatment of Wolf-Man was carried out. Therefore the therapy provided by Freud may indeed have been the best option for Wolf-Man, as other therapies around at the time can be seen as much less helpful than psychoanalysis, such as the treatment of taking baths that Wolf-Man underwent in "Dr N.'s institute" in Frankfurt (Gardiner, 1973a, p.87).