Temporal discounting and risk aversion are both phenomenon found in the laboratory when investigating how and why people make certain decisions. Decision making consists of choosing from between various options and with each option there are generally associated benefits and costs. It used to be thought that people behave rationally and therefore would select what would rationally be the best option. This assumption is what normative theories of decision making were built upon, for example utility theory as proposed by von Neumann and Morgenstern argues that we try to maximise expected utility, by assessing the probability of an outcome occurring and multiplying it by the utility (the subjective desirability) of that outcome. However it was soon realised that people do not make decisions in a rational manner and are often affected by factors other than expected utility (Eysenck & Keane, 2005). People tend to violate the criterion set by utility theory as they give more value to certain outcomes than to uncertain ones and also tend to have different attitudes towards gains and losses. To cope with this inconsistent data, new theories were developed such as prospect theory as put forward by Kahneman & Tversky, this theory proposes that peoples decisions can be predicted by looking at a value function as shown in Figure 1 (Levy & Levy, 2002, p.1060).
This value function shows that people form a 'reference point', which is shown at the mid-point of the value function where lower values are seen as losses and higher values are seen as gains (Kuhberger, 1997) This reference point is often formed on the basis of a person's status quo. People's decisions therefore depend largely on evaluating possible losses and gains against this reference point. The value function also shows that people are much more sensitive to potential losses than to potential gains (hence the steeper curve for losses), this is to say that they show 'loss aversion' (Hogarth, 1991). This loss aversion means that people also tend to be aversive to risk. 'Risk aversion' can be seen when people are presented with options, one of which is a certainty and the other which is more risky. In this type of situation people tend to choose the certain reward even when it is of subjectively lower value than the riskier choice. For example when people are given the choice between a prospect that offers an 85% chance to win $1000 or an alternative of receiving $800 for sure, the large majority of people will choose the $800 for certain option, even though the $1000 option has a higher mathematical expectation. This is also due to people's tendency to weigh losses more heavily than gains.(Kahneman & Tversky, 1984). However prospect theory does not always lead to the prediction that people will seek to avoid a risky decision, and many people will participate in risk seeking behaviour. For example if offered the choice between a sure loss of $800 or an 85% probability of losing $1000, most people will take the risky option giving them a chance not to incur any loss, even though they will then actually have a average expected loss of $850 compared with the expected loss of $800 if they took the certain option. Therefore according to prospect theory people tend to be risk aversive for gains and risk seeking for losses (Eysenck & Keane, 2005).
Another phenomenon found in decision making is 'temporal discounting', this is where people tend to choose smaller rewards that are available immediately over larger rewards that are available later. It can be argued that this occurs because people discount the value of a delayed reward, meaning the present subjective value of a reward is reduced as a function of temporal distance in the future (Yi et al, 2006). Normative models of this behaviour assume that the present value of a reward decreases by a fixed proportion over the length of time a person has to wait for the reward, meaning that the "future value is discounted exponentially with delay" (Kirby, 1997, p.54). This would mean that a reward that is preferred from one point in time is preferred from all points in time, however many experiments have shown that this is not the case. Instead it has been shown that people often reverse their preferences over time, this is because unlike what the normative model suggests (that the value of the reward increases by a fixed proportion), that in fact the value of the reward rises by increasingly larger proportions as it gets temporally closer (Kirby, 1997). An experiment carried out by Chapman and Elstein in 1995 also found a 'magnitude effect' in discounting, this means that discounting rates are inversely related to the amount of the reward. This also goes against normative models, as they suggest that discounting rates should be independent of the size of the reward (as cited in Chapman, 1996). Evidence such as this suggests that the normative model which advocates an exponential discounting curve are incorrect and that a hyperbolic discounting curve better fits the data. The implications of hyperbolic discounting are that people's preferences and therefore choices are not inherently stable and can change over time (Ainslie, 2003).
Both of the concepts of 'risk aversion' and 'temporal discounting' have been rigorously tested in laboratory experiments and there is still a huge amount of research going on in this area. From laboratory experiments and investigations into these concepts real world applications, it seems that these concepts are of practical use, and can be used in order to help make sense of people's everyday decisions. For example the concept of risk aversion has been used in applications as diverse as energy conservation, medical decision making, and decisions about out-of-court settlements (Hogarth, 1991). Most applications of this concept use it in the context of the 'framing phenomenon', this is where framing a decision in different ways can change whether people feel they are in a position of gain or in a position of loss, in this way framing can manipulate people's tendency to be risk averse or risk seeking (Kuhberger, 1997). An example of this can be seen in energy conservation, where traditionally campaigns have stressed the amount of money and energy that people may be able to save through investing in alternative energy and conservation projects. These types of campaign therefore portray energy conservation as a chance to make a gain and in doing so encourage people to be risk averse. Prospect theory tells us that in order to be more successful, campaigners should instead show people how much they are losing each month by not taking the chance to invest in alternative energy and conservation. This means people will approach the decision from a position of loss and as prospect theory tells us that people are risk seeking for losses, they should therefore choose to invest in order to return to their status quo (Yates & Aronson, 1983).
This effect can also be seen rather importantly in medical decision making, for example a study carried out by Savadori, Lotto and Rumiati in 2002 found that patients after a heart transplant tend to become risk averse in relation to any activity that may be able to further improve their condition after transplantation (Savadori et al, 2002). This is because when the patient is very ill with cardiac disease, their situation is framed negatively as there is a large difference in utility between their current state and their reference point of good health. This means they are in a state of loss and are therefore motivated to take risks in order to get closer to achieving their reference point. However once they have had the transplant they will feel better and therefore frame their situation more positively, changing their reference point to one of ill health. Therefore with their new heart they will feel that they are in a state of gain and due to the function being more gradual in the positive domain, the difference in utility between the patients current state and a state of health will not motivate them to carry out any risky activity which may further improve their condition. Also they would find any activity that risks them returning to a state of ill health and therefore loss very threatening. From these examples it can be seen that the concept of 'risk aversion' can be applied to a number of real world situations, it can also be seen that knowledge of such a phenomena can help to avoid erroneous decisions made due to it. For example if doctors discuss the actual percentage of risk involved in activities that may further improve patients condition after transplant this may help to avoid patients aversion to them (Savadori et al, 2002).
The concept of 'temporal discounting' can also be seen as useful in various real world applications. It has been used in many cases to explain why people will often carry out "suboptimally impulsive behavior" and therefore sacrifice long-term gains for a short-term pleasures (Kirby, 1997, p.54). As such the concept can be applied in areas such as career decisions, health decisions and marketing. This is because hyperbolic discounting means that the value of something drops slowly at long delays and steeply at short delays, therefore although we may be able to resist making a decision that we know is suboptimal when the reward is far away, this resolve weakens as the object of temptation draws temporally closer (Kirby, 1997). For example in a study carried out by Schoenfelder and Hantula in 2003 it was found that when people make career decisions they are often faced with the choice of early gains, such as a high starting salary, and later larger benefits, such as opportunities to progress. In these situations people often have long-term professional plans which they intend to stick to, but as the career outcome draws closer people often reverse their preference, neglecting their long-term career goals for the less preferred but more immediately available outcome. These findings have implications for both career decision makers and for the organisations attempting to hire them. They suggest that decision makers should actively seek out a source of social influence that will strengthen their resolve to achieve their long-term career goals and that businesses attempting to hire people should offer higher starting salaries if they cannot offer potential employees competitive long-term salaries or professional growth opportunities (Schoenfelder & Hantula, 2003).
Another real world application of 'temporal discounting' can be seen in attempting to understand substance abuse, studies such as the one carried out by Kirby, Petry and Bickel in 1999 have found that greater temporal discounting is found in people suffering from an addiction as compared to non-drug-using controls. Therefore it can be seen that people suffering from an addiction are less able than non-addicts when given the choice between a smaller sooner reward and a larger later reward to choose the later reward. This may help to explain why substance abusers persistently choose the relatively small immediate rewards of drug use over delayed larger rewards such as employment opportunities, good family relationships and good health (Kirby et al, 1999). It is unclear whether these higher discounting rates are part of the cause of addiction or whether they are an effect of sustained addiction. However the implications of this higher discounting rate are that treatments that focus on the later consequences of drug use are likely to have little impact. Instead treatment programmes should focus on the immediate rewards of abstaining, therefore approaches which tell patients to take it one day at a time and provide tangible rewards for abstinence on a short term basis are more likely to be successful (Kirby et al, 1999).
From these examples it can be seen that 'temporal discounting' can be applied to real world situations and that research into this concept is important as it can be used to help people to make rational decisions, such as when looking at career choices and abstinence from drugs. Therefore it can be said that both the concept of 'risk aversion' and the concept of 'temporal discounting' are useful outside the laboratory and applicable to many real world problems. However this position is not supported by everyone carrying out research into these areas, and both of these concepts have been criticised for not relating to actual behaviour. 'Risk aversion' for example can be criticised as choices in everyday life are rarely as simple as prospect theory suggests. Often when people are making decisions there are more than two choices from which to choose and these choices often cannot be measured accurately in terms of how much loss or gain in utility they would provide a person with compared to their 'reference point'. It is also very difficult to know in real life what that reference point would be, as even with an unambiguous measure such as money it is unlikely that a person would know their exact wealth at any one time (Hogarth, 1991). It has also been argued that there is an emotional factor in decision making that prospect theory does not account for. It has been found that people tend to buy insurance for events with a high probability of occurrence but with low losses (like household burglary) but will tend not to buy insurance for low probability events with higher losses (flood or earthquakes). It can be argued that this type of decision is not made by weighing up losses and gains but because failing to insure against such events as burglary which happen often would seem imprudent, whilst people do not feel responsible for failing to protect themselves from acts of God, therefore this decision can be seen to be made on the basis of anticipated regret. Emotional factors can also produce other violations of prospect theory as they can cause people to have preferred alternatives which mean they block out other relevant arguments and even the existence of other alternatives, people will sometimes even "psychologically prepare themselves for the negative consequences of their decisions" (Hogarth, 1991, p.111). Therefore for a full understanding of decision making both its cognitive and emotional determinants should be investigated.
The concept of 'Temporal discounting' has also been criticised for not being of use outside of the laboratory. Most research looking at this phenomena and its effect on decision making, has been carried out in controlled experiments using money as the rewards. Therefore there is little evidence that this concept can be transferred to real life situations where rewards are rarely as salient and measurable. We cannot see into the future therefore it is often difficult to know if a temporally distant reward is in fact more valuable than one that is closer. For example in the case of career decisions, although by taking the option of a higher starting salary it may seem that a person has neglected their long-term career goals and therefore made a short-sighted reversal in their decisions. In fact it may be that when an option is far in the future it can seem very attractive but as it gets temporally closer the disadvantages of that option may become clearer. Therefore the person making the career choice may come to realise that the career they had planned for is not what they actually want, this may be what reverses that persons' decision rather than temporal discounting (Hamm, 2003). Temporal discounting has also been criticised due to the lack of explanation of why discount rates can vary between different decision makers at different times and how these differences can be affected by circumstances, such as life expectancy.
It can be seen that both the concept of 'risk aversion' and 'temporal discounting' can be seen as useful outside of the laboratory as they can be used to help explain why people make certain decisions in a variety of contexts. However it is also clear from the criticisms of these concepts that they cannot be used alone to explain how people make decisions in the real world. Therefore it may be more useful to use these concepts in conjunction with theories that look at other aspects of decision making. For example Anderson's rational-emotional model which accounts for the impact of emotion on peoples' choices (as cited in Eysenck & Keane, 2005). Also more research into the real world applications of these concepts may help to generate a more comprehensive theory of decision making.