In order to decide whether something is alive, an individual must be able to differentiate between living and non-living objects in the world. This is an evolutionarily important distinction to make as it can be critical in identifying predators and conspecifics from inanimate objects and therefore allowing us to distinguish the physical from the social world (Schlottmann et al, 2002). It has been suggested by many psychologists such as Bingham, Rosenbaum and Schmidt that this distinction is made based on whether or not the movement of an object seems to conform to Newtonian laws by conserving kinetic energy, if an object appears to violate these laws it is often identified as being animate (as cited in Tremoulet & Feldman, 2006). Whilst, as will be discussed later, this observation can give an important insight into whether something is animate or inanimate, it is rather ambiguous at the perceptual level (Opfer, 2002). This suggests that other factors such as the perceived intentionality of the movement, the context the movement was within and prior knowledge may also be taken in to account when distinguishing animate from inanimate objects based on their movements (Tremoulet & Feldman, 2006).
In a study looking at how motion provides information which allows observers to identify events, Bingham et al (1995) found that motion was identified as animate when there were increases in energy along the objects trajectory without any mechanical causality. Energy in inanimate objects can only decrease (due to frictional forces) and therefore it is only animate objects that can increase their energy without external causation, this is due to their autonomous energy sources. Bingham et al (1995) believed that the visual system can automatically detect when observable kinetic energy is not conserved and that this is how people detect animate from inanimate objects. From this type of evidence the Newtonian violation hypothesis was formed, this hypothesis states that "animacy is perceived whenever an object's motion path indicates that the object must have access to hidden energy sources" (Tremoulet & Feldman, 2006, p. 1048). Therefore this hypothesis not only suggests that animacy will be perceived when kinetic energy is not conserved but also when the movement of an object deviates from what a Newtonian motion path would predict. It has been found in experiments such as the one carried out by Kaiser and Proffitt in 1987 that when the direction of a ball after collision with another ball deviates from the expected Newtonian direction by more than 25 people are more likely to rate the ball as being animate (as cited in Tremoulet & Feldman, 2000).
However there is also evidence that violation of Newtonian laws alone are not enough for people to identify an object as animate from its motion. A study by Stewart in 1982 found that when participants were shown motions that violate Newtonian laws they did not identify all of these motions as animate and instead sometimes described them as "strange or artificial looking" (as cited in Tremoulet & Feldman, 2006). Gelman in 1995 argued that this type of result is due to the cues of motion being ambiguous; hidden energy sources may indicate an animate object but they may also imply an external energy source which is hidden or invisible (as cited in Opfer, 2002). Therefore just because the energy source is hidden it does not mean that people will simply assume that it is internal or that the object is animate. In a set of experiments by Tremoulet and Feldman (2006) it was also found that even when objects seemed to have an internal source of energy and autonomous movement, if they appeared to collide with a static element in their environment they were less likely to be perceived as animate. This suggests that elements in the objects environment can affect whether they are perceived as animate, also providing evidence against the Newtonian violation hypothesis. It would seem that there are cues other than non-Newtonian movements which people also take into account when distinguishing an animate from an inanimate object.
Tremoulet and Feldman (2006) explained their findings that when objects participate in a collision with a static element they are rated as less animate, by hypothesising that this type of passive behaviour counteracts the animacy cue given by violation of Newtonian laws. They argued that this is because the collision deters the observer from attributing intentionality to the objects movements. Other experiments have also suggested that intentionality is an important cue to perceiving animacy from the movements of an object; many have done this by looking at goal-directed movement. Goal-directed movement occurs when an object moves autonomously whilst also directing its movement "toward (or away from) another object, state, or location" (Opfer, 2002, p. 100). Opfer in an experiment carried out in 2002 found that when unfamiliar entities which he called 'blobs' behaved in a goal-directed manner by moving towards an irregularly shaped dot, they were identified as living organisms and therefore animate. 'Blobs' that moved in an identical manner but with the goal dot removed failed to be identified as living, this suggests that goal-directedness is a decisive factor in deciding whether an object is animate. Opfer (2002) proposed that this was because goal-directed movements suggest that there is a reason for the objects movements and therefore that it has either biological or psychological intention. It is from evidence such as this that a second hypothesis was formed proposing that people only believe an object to be animate when intentionality is perceived (Tremoulet & Feldman, 2006).
The intentionality hypothesis unlike the Newtonian violation hypothesis allows for a variety of factors to affect peoples' perception of animacy. Whereas the Newtonian violation hypothesis relies solely on whether or not energy is conserved in making animacy judgements, the intentionality hypothesis takes into account: the delay before movement, directness of movement, termination of the movement, bodily orientation and the context the movement is within (Tremoulet & Feldman, 2006).
The delay before movement can effect whether an object is seen to be acting with intention as when an inanimate object encounters an element in its environment its movement is only affected when contact is made and this reaction occurs without delay. Therefore when an object reacts to an element in its environment without making contact or if there is a delay before reaction, this can increase the perceived animacy of the object. This is because the non-contact or delay implies that the object is not moving involuntarily in reaction to physical forces but intentionally due to psychological causes (Premack & Premack, 1995).
The directness of movement towards the goal and the point of termination of the movement can also help to convey intentionality as when an object acts in a goal-directed way it is expected that it will move directly towards the target and cease its movement once it has reached it, due to having gained satisfaction (Opfer, 2002).
Bodily orientation is also an important cue to intentionality as was found in an experiment by Tremoulet and Feldman (2000). Their results showed that when the object was rectangular in shape and its axis of elongation and direction of motion were misaligned participants were more likely to rate the object as inanimate, this is because people expect an animate being to face the way it is moving (Tremoulet & Feldman, 2000).
Context also plays an important role when people are trying to determine the intentionality of an objects movements; therefore elements in the surrounding environment of the moving object often play an important part in animacy decisions. Whilst it has been found that changes in speed and direction (non-Newtonian movements) have been found to give a strong cue to animacy, if these changes are used in conjunction with cues given in the environment an identification of animacy is made even more likely. For example if a change in speed or direction can be seen to be caused at a distance by an element in the environment it implies that the object itself can perceive its environment and create its own goals based on this perception. This gives a greater perception of animacy as this ability is the preserve of living things and cannot be carried out by inanimate objects. Evidence for this can be found in Tremoulet and Feldman's (2006) study, where participants were presented with a target that moved in four varying ways in relationship to a static element in the environment. Participants were asked to rate how alive they thought the target was. The four varying movements gave the impression of the static element either being 'prey', a 'predator', an 'obstacle' or 'irrelevant'. The results showed that when the static element was seen as a 'prey, 'predator' or 'obstacle', participants rated the moving object as more alive than when the element was either seen to be 'irrelevant' or when there was no static element present. This shows that elements in the objects environment and the way its movements react to these elements can give cues as to the animacy of the object.
Non-Newtonian movements and all of the cues to intentionality, including context, can be seen as important in helping people to decide whether the movement of an object suggests that it is animate or inanimate. However it has been found that yet another source of information can be used to distinguish animate from inanimate objects which is not included under either the non-Newtonian movement hypothesis or the Intentionality hypothesis. This source of information is prior knowledge (Opfer, 2002).
When adults look at the movement of such objects as paper cups, feathers, cars and aeroplanes it could be expected that the lack of visible outside energy source could cause them to mistakenly perceive these objects as animate. However this does not occur due to adults' prior knowledge that these types of object do not have their own internal energy source or that they only move because a person starts their motor (Opfer, 2002). This also works the other way round; in an experiment by Opfer (2002) it was found that participants judgements of goal-directedness and animacy were affected by the range of organisms they knew to be living things. For example adults' knowledge of such organisms as germs and plants led them to consider an unfamiliar object to be animate on the supposition that it was a micro-organism (Opfer, 2002). Whereas in an experiment by Richards and Siegler in 1986 it was found that children will often only attribute animacy to objects with leg like appendages, based on their limited knowledge which suggests that only animals can be alive (as cited in Schlottmann, 2002). Prior knowledge therefore can affect what movements of objects make people believe they are alive as adults know that some living organisms such as bacteria or cells do not need psychological intention in order to move yet they are still living. This may make them more likely to identify an object as animate even when it displays movements that do not conform to the intentionality hypothesis (Opfer, 2002).
Prior knowledge is also useful in determining animate from inanimate movement as it can help to identify whether an object is acting in a goal-directed manner. Prior knowledge means that we can identify the sort of things that an object would see as a goal and therefore whether an object is moving towards a goal or whether it is just randomly moving towards an element in its environment. An experiment by Richards and Siegler in 1986 involved presenting children with a rectangle which sometimes moved towards a toy truck, the children then said whether they believed the rectangle to be alive or not (as cited in Opfer, 2002). They found that the children did not believe the rectangle to be alive even when it moved in a goal-directed way towards the toy truck. It has been suggested that this is because the children had no prior knowledge that a toy truck would be a goal for rectangles and therefore they may have thought this to be unlikely. This shows that knowledge of what consists of a goal for a certain object can help to identify whether an object is acting in a goal-directed manner or whether some other force is operating on the object (Opfer, 2002).
The fact that prior knowledge and movements which give the impression of intentionality can affect peoples' perception of animacy suggests that people do not use non-Newtonian movements alone to distinguish animate from inanimate objects. However although intentionality cues do affect the perception of animacy it has been found that changes in speed are in fact the primary cue in distinguishing animate from inanimate objects. An experiment by Tremoulet and Feldman (2006) found that when an object increases in speed with no obvious external energy source this will increase ratings of animacy even when there is at least one cue suggesting that the movement was unintentional, for example a collision with a static element in the environment. Tremoulet and Feldman (2006) also found that in all their experiments their environmental manipulation had a small effect on animacy ratings compared to the effects of changes in speed and direction.
Therefore, evidence suggests that whilst non-Newtonian movements are not the only movement cues to animacy that they are perhaps the most important. It would seem that the perception of non-Newtonian movements is not sufficient for the perception of animacy but it is necessary. Although cues to intentionality and prior knowledge can influence these perceptions, observers will only perceive animacy when an objects movements appear not to conserve energy (Tremoulet & Feldman, 2006).