Although the Declaration of Independence was officially ratified on 4 th July 1776, now known as Independence Day, the process of gradual colonial independence from Britain had begun long before this historic day. However, this essay will argue that independence was not assured until after July 4 th 1776, because the war with Britain still had to be won. It is important to distinguish between when the Americans first declared independence and when it actually became inevitable. Britain was not simply going to acquiesce and let the Americans proclaim independence without resistance. Over decades, however, the Americans formed their own cultural identity and no longer felt as connected to the British as previously. A feeling of animosity subsequently developed especially over the issue of taxation which ultimately was one of the main factors in leading to the War of Independence. Even when war broke out between the two nations, independence was not the main objective for the colonies, because Americans were fighting purely for the defence of their rights. The turning point in terms of the Americans uniting behind the cause was in early 1776, but independence only finally became inevitable after the battle of Saratoga in spring 1777 where the Americans were victorious and the consequences of this battle were crucial in leading to Britain's defeat and accordingly to independence.
A change in cultural identity was the first step on the road to independence for the colonies. This took place gradually over decades and by the 1760s the majority of America's population had not been born in Britain. Indeed, in the oldest colonies of Virginia and New England, there were sixth and seventh generation Americans. Also, a significant proportion of the population was not even of British ethnicity as the make-up of the American population included a huge diversity of people, with large minorities of French, German, Dutch and Africans. These people had never been loyal to the British crown and they were constantly increasing in number as the new immigrants tended to originate less and less from Britain. The vast majority of the population which had originally come from Britain, left there because they were unhappy with their situation anyway. They often felt that something was 'missing' and many migrated to the colonies to start a new life, seek a fresh start - one which was unavailable in Britain. That is, they were unlikely to be ultra-loyal to Britain anyway. Events which were unique to the colonies such as the Great Awakening also helped to foster a sense of common identity because Britain was not involved. Overall, whereas previously their situations had been similar, the life of the average American was now hugely different from the life of the average Englishman. It was certainly no co-incidence that at the same time the Americans were just beginning to form their own separate cultural identity from Britain, the British were exercising loose control over the colonies anyway - 'The preoccupation of Englishmen with their own affairs had resulted in general indifference to America and ignorance of her problems." This meant that the Americans already had a degree of semi-independence. This trend towards looser control had been increasing ever since the Glorious Revolution. The colonies also thought that because they had participated in the Glorious Revolution, they too deserved to share the rights which the Englishmen had been granted as the result of the Revolution in 1690 such as a liberal constitutional government. They saw themselves as equals to the British and not subordinates. Therefore, the fact that the Americans were gradually beginning to develop their own sense of identity, as well as the British exercising looser control over the colonies were the first step towards independence, but there was still a long way to go.
Another significant contribution to independence was the Seven Years' War and its effects. Britain was victorious in this war against Spain and France, which meant that there was no longer a common enemy to unite Britain and her colonies. America was now less dependent on Britain for protection against foreign powers. However, despite this, Britain still deployed armies in America to limit westward expansion. This greatly angered the colonists who hated the British interfering to such a great extent from overseas. The Americans did not appreciate the fact that the British were now trying to re-strengthen their hold over the colonies after years of indifference. The Seven Years' War also meant that Britain had a huge national debt which had doubled from 75 million to 150 million. The main reason why Britain had stationed an army to limit westward expansion was to prevent a greater expenditure on defence as protecting the current settlements from Native American attacks was already a costly task. In order to try to reduce the national debt, the British government attempted to tax the colonies to pay for their own administration and defence - 'George Grenville... became the king's first minister in 1763... Britain had spent itself close to bankruptcy... [and] someone had to pay, and in Grenville's view the North American colonies had delayed paying long enough.'. This had never been attempted before and greatly angered the colonists who resisted this apparent abuse of their rights. They pointed to 'taxation without representation' which was illegal in Britain and they argued that it applied to them as they were still a colony and since they did not have any representatives in parliament, they believed that the British had no right to tax them. They viewed the attempts to tax them as acts of tyranny and absolutism as they saw it as bypassing colonial legislation. Consequently, the Stamp Act which was introduced in 1765, was repealed just one year later due to violent protests as well as a general ineffectiveness - stamps were burnt and distributors of stamps were threatened. Britain attempted to tax America indirectly instead by raising duties on imports such as paper, glass, lead and tea in 1767 but the Americans combated this by introducing non-importation agreements. Thus, Britain suffered heavily in financial terms, as the colonies were a big market for its exports. Therefore, the Seven Years' War was extremely important in leading to American independence as it meant that France and Spain were no longer threats to the colonies in North America. Thus, the Americans were no longer so dependent on Britain for protection. However, Britain attempted to re-assert its influence over the colonies after years of indifference, culminating in numerous efforts to tax them. They resisted heavily in every instance and all the British attempts all failed. These were the first signs of resistance and were very important in continuing the gradual process which led to independence becoming inevitable.
An extremely important factor in independence becoming more likely was the slide to war which followed on from these instances of resisitance, as well as the aim of the war itself which changed as the conflict escalated. Armed conflict developed because there was already a pre-existing culture of violence in America. Militias were popular and there were often riots - 'Eighteenth Century Americans accepted the existence of popular uprisings with remarkable ease... [and] in certain circumstances, it was understood, the people would rise up almost as a natural force'. These riots reached new levels of sophistication during the 1760s and 1770s as they had had specific aims and purposes. New 'unconstitutional' (from an American point of view) British laws led to resistance, including the Boston Tea Party in December 1773 where the colonists dumped newly imported tea into the harbour. This in turn put pressure on the British troops to act in response, who were unfamiliar in dealing with civilians. Neither side was willing to back down, as there was an issue of intransigence both from Britain and the colonies. The situation worsened with both sides becoming increasingly suspicious of each other and their views became further entrenched. Conflict was the result. In April 1775 the British army set out to seize arsenal from the Americans at Concord where they were met with resistance and the result was the first blood being spilt in the battles of Lexington and Concord. However, the Americans were certainly not fighting for independence but instead to secure and defend their rights from the British who they regarded as tyrants - 'The war which began in the chill of the dawn at Lexington was waged... in defense of the American rights within the British Empire." It is true that 'a few Americans, including the astute Samuel Adams, were virtually advocating independence as early as the fall of 1774', but the vast majority simply did not feel that way - 'until the end of 1775, the word "independence" remained almost unspoken." Both sides essentially still wanted peace, and America even rejected foreign aid from France and Spain as it did not want to escalate the conflict despite the fact that with these two allies, it stood a far greater chance of winning the war. However, over the next few years, the situation began to change. It became clear that Britain would only try to solve its difficulties in America with force and the colonists re-evaluated their position. 'Lexington, Concord, Bunker Hill and minor military clashes in the summer and fall of 1775 abruptly changed the political objectives of the struggle." The war provided the colonists with a common danger and common enemy by uniting Americans behind a worthwhile cause: independence. This change in the population's views occurred during late 1775 and early 1776 and the conflict became the War of Independence. 'On July 2, 1776, after much debate and soul searching, they announced the secession of the Thirteen Colonies from the British Empire and the birth of a new nation, the United States of America." Therefore, it is important to understand that when the primary objective of the war changed from the defence of rights to that of fighting for independence, a huge step towards realizing independence had been taken.
However, there was a vast difference in declaring independence and actually achieving it - 'It was one thing to assert independence. It was another matter to attain it." The Americans still had to defeat the might of the British army - the best trained and equipped in the world. The first few years of the war were characterized by unimportant battles in which neither side made progress. The Americans certainly did not look like achieving their independence in the near future. However, the turning point of the war and consequently the moment when independence became inevitable was undoubtedly at the battle of Saratoga in autumn 1777 in which the Americans defeated the British army and forced the surrender of almost 5,000 troops. Although the war did continue for another five years, American victory was now almost totally assured and independence became inevitable. It was the battle of Saratoga which 'rescued the American war effort from what looked... to be an inevitable and humiliating disaster, without Saratoga the Americans might well have sued for peace." Its importance cannot be underestimated for a large number of reasons. It was the first significant American military victory and showed that Britain could be defeated in open battle. This further helped to boost the independence cause among the people because it proved to be a huge propaganda boost. It also damaged the English appetite for war and meant that from here on, the British were less willing to commit so many troops and resources to the war. Finally, and most importantly 'it propelled the French into a long-contemplated declaration of global war on Britain." This meant that America now had the military strength to match its ideological fervour and therefore could over-power the British army in the war and finally win independence.
Therefore, in conclusion, independence was a long and complicated process that took decades to achieve, only becoming inevitable with the military victory at Saratoga. It started with a gradual change in cultural identity as the Americans started to feel less attached to a Britain which exerted less influence over the colonies. The Seven Years' War and its effects were the next step as Britain began to reassert itself over the colonies firstly with the deployment of troops, which greatly angered the Americans, and secondly and more importantly with the constant attempts to tax the colonists. This led to resistance and eventually to war. However, the fact that the Americans were at war with Britain did not signify that independence was inevitable. Far from it - as they were merely fighting to defend their rights. The objective of the war did gradually change and independence was declared on 4 th July 1776, but this still did not mean that independence was inevitable, as they had to defeat the strongest military power in the world. Only with the victory at Saratoga did independence become certain, because it was the first major battle of the war and America was victorious. It was also a huge propaganda boost, uniting the people, damaging Britain's enthusiasm for the conflict and finally propelling France into the war. Victory in the War of Independence had now finally become inevitable - 'the question whether or not the colonies would remain under the British Empire was then and there decided... the war continued to patriot victory.'