Process research and development (PR&D) is an important aspect to any chemical industry that requires the production of large quantities of chemical material. In the pharmaceutical industry, however, this department is key to the effective production of profitable drugs. Process chemistry was really established in the 1950s with the development of the modern pharmaceutical industry and more complicated drug molecules. Recognition of its importance steadily grew over the years with the release of the journal Organic Process Research and Development in 1997. To date this journal has published almost 1,300 papers and had an impact rating of 1.749 in 2005. As Figure 1 shows although the number of citations of articles from the journal greatly outweighs the increase in items published each year, showing an increased interest in the journal, which reflects the growing importance of process chemistry in the scientific community.
To fully understand the importance of PR&D, it is useful to know where in the drug development timeline it comes into play. Drug discovery (DD) may spend several years finding hits for a certain biological target, from which lead molecules are developed. The best of the leads is nominated as a candidate drug (CD) and is taken forward into PR&D. However, as Figure 2 shows a developing drug will spend a very large amount of time in PR&D. This is because even the most promising of drugs cannot be marketed without a viable manufacturing process. This can take a significant amount of time, depending on the complexity of the molecule. PR&D can be seen as the interface between organic chemistry and business.
The main role of PR&D is to discover and develop robust, as well as economic, manufacturing processes for new chemical entities (NCEs). The route used to synthesise the CD in drug discovery will have been designed to enable a high degree of functional group variability at certain sites. This can mean that the route is complex, inefficient and may work well on a small scale, but is impractical for larger scales. In developing the route the department is capable of producing large variable quantities of active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), from 200g to 2000kg, for use in formulation research, toxicology studies and clinical trials. From the production of this material important knowledge is then acquired. However, it would be an oversimplification to describe process chemistry as bucket chemistry, or to assume that it just involves scaling existing processes into larger vessels.
At AstraZeneca PR&D is divided into five sections: process chemistry (PC), process analysis (PA), development manufacture (DM), process engineering (PE), and process management (PM). Each section has an important role in the development of a NCE. PC focuses on the development of the chemical synthetic route to produce a final route for manufacture. The route must be robust, safe and predictable for manufacture, but ideally it should also be simple, inexpensive and environmentally benign, as well as high yielding with high quality. PA is responsible for developing analytical methods to assess the quality of the API and its intermediates. These methods can also be used to monitor the reactions to gain more information about the processes. PA and PC can use this information to set specifications for the API. DM is concerned with the running of the pilot plant to produce large quantities of API. It works closely with PC to ensure the route is compatible with the intended site of use. PE concentrates on plant compatibility and the resolution of scale issues. Issues can arise with agitation, heat or mass transfer and isolation when scaled larger, which are all key to manufacture. PM is the link between PR&D and the global projects team. It manages PR&D at a high level and also oversees interdepartmental interaction. Successful development of an NCE depends on all the sections working together, as well as with other departments.
In order to develop a route for manufacture optimisation of the route by PC must also take place. Optimisation involves generating large quantities of data, from which knowledge and understanding of the process is deduced. Thermodynamic and kinetic parameters, along with the heat of reaction are important as well as the quantity ranges for the reagents. The establishment of these parameters and ranges is increasingly becoming similar to combinatorial chemistry used in discovery chemistry. A computer program is used to create a set of experiments that change several variables simultaneously. These experiments are then carried out used automated equipment. The design of changing several variables at once creates a more detailed picture of what occurs in the reaction and which parameters are important to the performance of the reaction. This method is far more effective than changing one variable at a time, with much more data being produced from the former method in the same number of experiments.
The time constraints on PR&D are increasing due to the market pressures of patents on profitable drugs that will soon expire and no potentially profitable replacements in the pipeline 6. To decrease development time PR&D have started getting involved in drug discovery earlier in the process that CD nomination. This increases PR&D's capability of choosing the best route for manufacture, as it has more time to familiarise itself with the potential CDs and their chemistry. Also earlier involvement enables PR&D to influence the drug discovery process. This can involve showing medicinal chemists better synthetic routes, so less work is required in drug development. Also with manufacturing concerns considered at CD nomination, fewer CDs will be taken through to the drug development stage that could fail due to production issues. Therefore, effort is focussed on more promising CDs, which will increase the pipeline output.
One example of PR&D is the development of the synthesis of benzothiophene 3. The proposed route from drug discovery used lithiated 2-bromothiophenol 1 as a starting material.
However, 2-bromothiophenol is very expensive, at 12.70 per gram, and is only available in relatively small amounts. This makes it an unsuitable starting material, which should ideally be cheap and readily available in large quantities for manufacture. PR&D could have solved this problem by synthesising 2-bromothiophenol in-house, however this involved adding extra steps to the synthesis. Therefore, a complete route change was required to devise a synthetic route suitable for manufacture. The solution was found in lithiating thiophenol, which is much cheaper than 2-bromothiophenol, to form the dianion 4, which then underwent the same chemistry as 1. This simple change proved to be very efficient, providing a suitable manufacturing route from the drug discovery route.
Although the previous problem had a simple solution, often PR&D work extensively on all the stages of a synthetic route of a project. An example of this is the project AR-C123196 from AstraZeneca. AR-C123196 was a CD with anti-inflammatory and antihistamine properties, but unfortunately was not launched due to failed clinical trials. The key structural features of the molecule are the chiral hydroxyl pyridine and the functionalized biaryl ether, with only the (R) enantiomer required. The total synthesis of 7 also had a target of delivering >1000kg per annum at <2000 per kg.
Before the project was stopped, however, a great deal of development work was carried out on the synthetic route.
The synthesis of 7 could be approached in two ways, the linear or convergent approach. The linear approach involved five steps to link three fragments of the molecule together (Scheme 3). However, the most expensive compound in the whole synthesis is the chiral hydroxyl pyridine derivative starting material 13. This is not cost effective as any loss of yield will involve losing expensive starting material, making the whole synthesis expensive.
The convergent approach involves synthesising two fragments of the molecule separately and then coupling them together to form the final compound.
This approach has many advantages over the linear synthesis. For one the expensive intermediate 13 is used late in the synthesis, so any cost due to loss of yield is kept to a minimum. Parallel processing of the two fragments also means shorter processing times if both are synthesised at the same time in different reactors, compared to the linear process which would require performing each step in sequence. Also with two parallel syntheses outsourcing of one was an option, giving the in-house PR&D more time to concentrate on the other synthesis. With the linear synthesis this would not be possible unless the whole route was outsourced.
However, the convergent approach had some issues. The coupling reaction between the two fragments needed to be selective to attack of the carbonate by the oxygen on 15 over attack by the nitrogen, which has some nucleophilic character. This can be overcome by protecting the amide. Synthetic methods to form the fragments also needed to be assessed.
The biaryl fragment 15 was straightforward to synthesise using Suzuki chemistry to link the phenyl and thiophene fragments.
The formation of the boronic acid worked well, with a reasonable yield of 69%. The Suzuki reaction gave a high yield of 85% with respect to the thiophene sulphonamide 18, with purity >99% by HPLC. The amide in 15 is protected in 20 with a bulky tertiary butyl group, which sterically hinders any nucleophilic attack by the amide. A palladium scavenger was needed to remove any remaining palladium in the reaction mixture. The deloxan resin was an effective scavenger reducing the palladium content from 240ppm after the Suzuki coupling, to <2ppm after treatment. This prevented palladium carrying through to the API and affecting the patient. Therefore, the reasonable yields and high quality of the simple biaryl synthesis meant that it was suitable for manufacturing scale.
The chiral pyridine intermediate 13 was originally synthesised using the drug discovery route (Scheme 6). This had been scaled to produce multi kilogram batches of 13 as the oxalate salt, and time pressures for producing material for clinical trials meant that the route was suitable to use for the first campaign. This route involves six steps, with the final steps producing the product at >99% purity by HPLC and >99% enantiomeric excess (ee).
The fragments 13 and 15 were then linked together using nucleophilic attack of the carbonate by 15. The intermediate 13 is insoluble as the oxalate salt, so the salt was removed to form the free base, which was then used in the reaction. Also a diol impurity from hydrolysis of the carbonate was formed. However, it was soluble in the reaction media and so was easily removed. The amide was then deprotected to give 7 as the hydrochloride salt, in a 54% yield (Scheme 7). The hydorchloride salt is unstable so the compound was transformed to the free base in a 62% recovery and 97.5% purity by HPLC. However, in the laboratory this recovery achieved yields of >90%, so it was clear that there were some problems with scaling up that particular methodology.
A total of 3.4kg of 7 were successfully produced in the campaign, although many problems were highlighted. Although a robust and economic supply of biaryl 15 had been developed as well as a simple and scaleable convergent synthesis of 7, synthesis of the chiral pyridine 13 was complicated and expensive. The synthesis of 13 uses gulonolactone 21 as its starting material. This compound is very expensive at 350 per kg, and only three carbons from the molecule are used in 13, also making the synthesis very atom inefficient. The formation of the aldehyde 23 also raised issues as it is base sensitive and was synthesised under basic reaction conditions. This caused enolate formation, which can then polymerise, so the product 23 needed cracking before it could be used. These problems meant that the total synthesis of 13 cost 16,000 per kg, eight times the target cost of the total synthesis of 7 of <2000 per kg.
Although the recovery of the free base of 7 was not performing well on a large scale, it was clear that the redevelopment of the synthesis of 13 was a priority for the project to meet its targets.
Initially a route that used enzyme resolution of the enantiomers was developed (Scheme 8). This involved forming the hydroxy ester pryridine 32 and then hydrolysing the ester to give the acid. The hydrolysis formed both enantiomers, but the enzyme selectively reduced the (S) enantiomer back to the ester so it could again by hydrolysed. This enzymatic cycle caused an excess of the desired (R) enantiomer. This route was used to produce 19kg of 13 as the oxalate salt, but was not considered as a viable alternative as it still did not meet the financial requirements of the project.
Many other methods of forming chiral diols were considered, which could than be transformed to the carbonate, but the Heck arylation of the carbonate and asymmetric reduction of the hydroxy ketone were considered to be the most viable options.
The asymmetric hydrogenation was a simple and effective route to form the chiral diol 27, using a chiral ruthenium catalyst (Scheme 9). This reaction gave a yield of 90% and an ee of >98% after the oxalate salt was formed.
The Heck reaction between the carbonate fragment and pyridyl bromide initially seemed to be a good option for the synthesis of 27.
However, many impurities were formed in the coupling reaction, with migrated alkene impurities 40 and 41 being the major products.
However, the impurity 40 is the enol form of the hydroxy ketone 35 needed for the asymmetric hydrogenation. Therefore the Heck reaction could be used to provide a robust synthesis of 35 using the diol analgue of the carbonate fragment 36.
Literature precedent demonstrated that the coupling was possible with a palladium catalyst, phosphine ligand and base. However, the reaction produced the alkenyl diol impurity in significant amounts, although this compound is water soluble and easily removed. Two sets of conditions were tried for the Heck coupling using different catalysts, ligands and bases to obtain the best ratio of product to impurity.
The first set of conditions gave the best product to impurity ratio, but the reaction was not robust on larger scales. The catalyst and base were also expensive, making the reaction conditions undesirable. The second set of conditions was better for large scales, with relatively cheap reagents and so was more desirable, even with the smaller product to impurity ratio. However, using an aqueous work-up dissolved the diol impurity and removed it to give a higher ratio of 18:1. Using these conditions a multi kg scale reaction was carried out to give a 60-65% yield and 94% purity.
Combining the Heck coupling and the asymmetric hydrogenation the chiral intermediate 13 was produced in only three steps with 98% ee, from relatively cheap achiral starting materials.
Although the overall yield was 35%, this could have been improved with optimisation.
With the developed synthetic route for the chiral pyridine intermediate 13 the PR&D team had a viable manufacturing route for the synthesis of AR-C123196 7. A convergent synthesis of 7 had been developed, with the longest linear sequence consisting of only six steps. This is mainly down to the full redevelopment of the synthesis of 13, which was reduced from six steps to only three. The replacement of the expensive reagents in the synthesis of 13 also meant that the project's target of a manufacturing cost of <2000 per kg was realised.
Unfortunately, as previously mentioned, the project was terminated at this point after the failure of Phase I clinical trials.
In summary the role of PR&D is to take complex, costly and undesirable route and use their knowledge of organic chemistry to transform the route into something simple, cheap and viable for manufacture. This is a vital role that the pharmaceutical industry could not run without, and its importance is being increasingly recognised over time.