This paper describes the synthesis of the core structure of salicylihalamide 1. Compound 1 is a member of the benzolactone enamide group of polyketides. Benzolactones have been shown to have potent antitumour activity, due to inhibition of vacuolar ATPase enzymes on the cell membrane. Salicylihalamide A is of particular interest as it can discriminate between nonmammalian and mammalian V-ATPases, and, therefore, is an important lead for drug development.
The synthesis of the core structure of 1 uses a diastereoselective hydroboration with a Suzuki cross-coupling and a Mitsunobu macrolactonisation as the main retrosynthetic transformations (Figure 1). This gave an aromatic vinyl iodide 4 and a diasteromeric alkenol 5 as the two components for the coupling reaction. The paper gives details of other methods of forming the macrolactone structure, including nucleophilic attack of an alkoxide on an acetal ester by the Rizzacasa group, and changing the order of the Suzuki and Mitsunobu steps. However, the most common method is a ring-closing metathesis reaction. The paper, however, does not give a reason to why this new methodology is needed or its relative performance to the previously described methods. This is a failing of the paper as it gives no scientific reasoning to why the research was carried out nor comparison with other methods to gauge its relative success.
The synthesis of the vinyl iodide was carried out as shown below (Figure 2), with the most stereochemically important step in this synthesis being the Takai reaction. The E-isomer 5 is the major product of this transformation. However, the assignment of the regiochemistry of this transformation is not reported, making it difficult for other research using this method.
The diastereomeric alkenol 5 was synthesised from the unsaturated aldehyde 10 as shown below (Figure 3). Although all the steps are high yielding this synthesis requires ten of them. This is not environmentally friendly as there would be a high level of waste from this number of steps. Also a synthesis of this number of steps would take a considerable amount of time. Therefore, this synthesis is not ideal and if it was required for larger production further development would be need to reduce its length.
The diastereomeric character of 21 was introduced by two asymmetric synthesis steps. The first is the chiral hydrogenation of 12 to give the chiral alcohol 13. This was achieved by using a chiral (R)-(+)-BINAP (2,2'-bis(diphenylphcphino)-l,l'-binaphthyl) ruthenium catalyst. BINAP does not have any enantiomeric stereoisomers, but the bulky diphenyl phosphine groups ortho the bond joining the naphthalene molecules create a high energy of rotation. This barrier is so high that BINAP exists as two enantiomeric rotational isomers.
The chiral nature of the BINAP ligands on the ruthenium catalyst creates a chiral environment for the hydrogenation, causing one enantiomer of the alcohol product to be more thermodynamically favourable than the other, in this case the (R) enantiomer. This transformation achieved a reasonably good yield of 84%, with >90% enantiomeric excess (ee), showing the high level of enantioselectivity and efficiency of the transformation. However, there is no report of how the stereochemistry of the product was determined. It can be assumed NMR was used, but details of the assignment would be useful when considering replicating the paper's results. There is also no model to predict the outcome of this reaction with other compounds, as an (R)-(+)-BINAP does not also produce (R) enantiomers. Again a model would be useful if this paper's findings were to be used in other research.
This step, however, is quite interesting as the reduction of a carbonyl is not usually accomplished by catalytic hydrogenation. This is because reductive hydrogenations with chiral catalysts are rarely enantioselective. However, ruthenium catalysts are more selective than the usual rhodium BINAP complexes, allowing for a greater range of substrates.
The other asymmetric step is the diastereoselective aldol reaction with 15 using the Evans chiral auxiliary derivative 16. The chiral auxiliary method works by attaching the starting material to a chiral molecule, giving the starting material chiral character. The chiral product is then formed by using a diastereoselective transformation, followed by cleavage of the auxiliary. This can be a useful strategy when no chiral reagents or starting materials are readily available for the desired reaction. A good chiral auxiliary must be enantiomerically pure, attached in high yield, allow for a high yielding diastereoselective transformation and then be removed in high yield. In this paper the auxiliary is attached and removed in yields >75%, which are reasonably good yields.
The interesting aspect of the use of this auxiliary is that the aldol reaction with starting material forms the diastereomeric alcohol desired without a further step, excluding the removal of the auxiliary. The aldol reaction uses sparteine as a base to form the enolate of the ketone in the auxiliary, with TiCl 4 as the lewis acid to stabilise the enolate. The cis-enolate preferentially forms due to steric hindrance from the ring. This c is-enolate then favours the formation of the syn aldol due to the chair-like transition state (Figure 4). The new alcohol group is also in the same plane as the protected alcohol because the aldehyde must approach the auxiliary from the 'bottom' face due to the steric hindrance from the bulky benzyl group on the 'top' face.
Again, however, the assignment of stereochemistry has been omitted from the paper for this compound. However, as model of the distereoselective aldol reaction is well known, which can be used to predict the stereochemistry. Also missing is the actual level of selectivity of the transformation, either as a diastereomeric excess (de) or diastereomeric ratio (dr). This can be misleading as readers could be lead to assume that 100% de was achieved. The selectivity of a diastereoselective reaction needs to be reported so the merit of the reaction can be ascertained.
The two fragments 5 and 21 were joined by a Suzuki coupling. However, this required a diastereoselective hydroboration of the alkene 21, using 9-BBN in THF. The stereochemistry of the hydroboration was assumed to follow the Houk model (Figure 5). This model uses the lowest energy conformation of chiral alkenes to predict the stereochemistry of their products. The lowest energy conformation of a chiral alkene is when the smallest substituent of the chiral -carbon eclipses the double bond. This model predicts that the the methyl group attached to the alkene is inverted from its original stereochemistry to become anti to the MOM protected alcohol.
Again the stereochemistry assignment and level of selectivity were not mentioned in the paper. The model is mentioned to predict the stereochemistry, but the reaction is only assumed to follow it. This suggests that either the stereochemistry for this molecule was not assigned and the Houk model was the best to predict the reaction's outcome, or that the stereochemistry was assigned and the model was found to match the data. Either way it is clear that further research is needed to determine the actual mechanism of the stereoselectivity of this step.
The rest of the synthetic route to the salicylihalamide core 28 is described below (Figure 6). The Suzuki coupling is of a moderate yield, but is quite good considering it is a two step telescope. However, the Mitsunobu macrolactonisation has quite a low yield of below 50%. Considering this is the last step in the entire synthesis it is quite poor. The synthesis of 28 is quite long relative to the starting material 10, and so can be thought of as costly in time and money. This final step then loses over half of this expensive starting material. It is not written whether the starting material that does not form product can be recovered, but even so the step can be considered inefficient.
This paper describes the asymmetric synthesis of the diastereomeric core of salicylihalamide. The total synthesis of this compound clearly of medicinal and academic interest due to number of papers published on it. However, the reason for this paper is unclear. Although it achieves its target the synthesis is long and convoluted, with the final step achieving a poor yield. The asymmetric steps used seem to have worked well, but the essential data is missing from the paper which is needed to enable external validation. Also as the synthesis of this molecule has already been achieved is a number of ways the origin of this research is unclear, as no attempt of comparison to other methods is made to show an improvement in methodology. Although this paper contains some interesting chemistry overall it is fundamentally flawed.