This article describes a living radical polymerisation using nitroxide mediated radical polymerisation (NMRP) and atom transfer radical polymerisation (ATRP) initiators simultaneously. From database searches in ISI Web of Science and SciFinder there are no previous papers published with any form of combination of NMRP and ATRP and therefore it can be considered original research. Living radical polymerisation is a popular topic in macromolecular chemistry, as well as chemistry in general due to its applications in the materials industry. The combination of NMRP and ATRP could lead to new and specific polymers with great industrial potential, meaning this research is of great importance to the general community as well as the chemistry one.
The article is well presented and follows the journal guidelines, with suitable citations. All scientific knowledge and reasoning is well written and flows logically, making it easy to follow even for those with limited knowledge in the field. Figures are used well, supplementing the information written in the article.
The experiments undertaken for this journal are of a suitable number and investigate all possibilities of mechanism described by the article. The data from these experiments and the control experiments are presented in a clear table, with suitable footnotes to give the full experimental detail, as well as a chromatogram. The chromatogram only displays the data from one experiment; however this experiment determines the likely mechanism of the polymerisation and therefore is the most relevant in terms of importance to the paper.
There is no experimental section to this paper; however, the experimental conditions are detailed in the main body of the article, negating the need for this section. All the characterisation details of the polymers synthesised for this article are given in previously mentioned table, also negating the need to present them elsewhere.
However, there are a couple of errors in the paper that need to be highlighted. The initialisation GPC (Gel Permeation Chromatography) is used without the full name being given. This would not be a problem in a specific polymer journal, as it is a common technique, but for general chemistry the initialisation should be expanded. Also the journal reference given for citation 1 (D. Benoit, V. Chaplinski, R. Braslau, and C. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 3904) is not the best reference that could have been used. The paper cited does have a very comprehensive introduction into both NMRP and ATRP, but the main body of the paper is dedicated to developing a new NMRP initiator. A general review would have been a better choice here.
To summarise this article is well written and meets all the criteria for Chemical Communications and so should be published, provided the few errors are resolved.
This paper reports the research undertaken in the simultaneous use of NMRP and ARTP initiators in the formation of polystyrene.
Although NMRP and ATRP initiators are mostly used separately, this research investigated whether the use of both types of initiator in a reaction would result with both being used as the end groups of a single polymer chain. This relied on whether the NMRP and ATRP end groups show crossover reactivity. If not then the initiators would initiate independently and grow polymer chains of different lengths, depending on the rate of propagation for each initiator. However, if crossover reactivity does occur then the polymers produced will depend on the rates of exchange as well as propagation.
Two initiators of each type were used in the paper to polymerise styrene (Figure 1). The polymerisation conditions satisfied both NMRP and ATRP functionality.
Control experiments and 3 combination experiments were carried out (Table 1).
Experiment PS-4 produced a monomodal polymer by gel permeation chromatography (GPC), which presented three mechanisms for the propagation; either 1 or 2 initiates and propagates, or both initiate but propagate independently, or end group crossover occurs rapidly relative to propagation. To determine if the first mechanistic scenario occurred and if the ATRP initiator forms polymer initiator 3 in PS-5 was UV-tagged, for 320nm. Again the experiment led to a unimodal polymer by GPC, with the traces at 254nm and 320nm being superimposable. This showed that the polymer produced contained ATRP initiator.
To determine if the NMRP initiator also formed polymer 0.5 eq. of difunctional initiator 4 was used with 1 eq. of UV-tagged 3 (350nm) in PS-6. This experiment had three potential outcomes. If only one of the initiators initiated and propagated, the polymer would be unimodal, but would only have a trace at 350nm for initiator 3. If both initiated, the polymer would be bimodal at 254nm, but unimodal at 320nm. However, if both initiated and the end groups exchanged more rapidly than propagation the polymer would have a similar GPC trace to the previous scenario, except hydrolysis of the polymer would produce a unimodal polymer at 254nm that is super-imposable with the trace at 320nm. The polymer produced fulfilled the last scenario, producing a polymer which was bimodal at 254nm, with peaks at ~30,000g mol -1 and ~15,000g mol -1, with the lower MW also absorbing at 350nm. On hydrolysis the polymer became unimodal at 254nm at ~15,000g mol -1, which overlapped the 350nm trace.
From the results of the experiments it is clear that either both types of initiator initiate and propagate independently, but with a similar rate of propagation, or the end groups of exchange rapidly relative to propagation causing a singular rate for propagation. However, the control experiments show that the reaction conditions affect the ATRP and NMRP processes. Therefore, it can be concluded that both types of initiator work through a common propagation mechanism. For this to occur the end groups must be exchanging at a faster rate than propagation.
Therefore, the final conclusion of the paper was that the NMRP and ATRP mechanisms do not operate independently due to end group crossover, which leads to polymers that grow at a common rate and have a low polydispersity index. However, these experiments were unable to determine whether ATRP, NMRP, or both mechanisms caused chain growth.