Since the discovery of Penicillin G 1 in 1928 by Fleming and Cephalosporin C 2 in 1941, -lactams have been considered to be one of the most effective classes of antibacterial agents. Both types of -lactam are natural products that are produced by bacteria and fungi.
Both penicillin and cephalosporin are biosynthesised from the amino acids cysteine and valine (Figure 1). Mass manufacture is achieved through fermentation. Full synthesis of penicillin in the laboratory was achieved in 1957 by Sheehan, but the synthesis was unsuitable for mass manufacture. In 1959 Batchelor et al. isolated the biosynthetic intermediate 6-aminopenicillanic acid (6-APA) 3 via fermentation which has been used to synthesise a large range of semi-synthetic penicillins.
Initially, cephalosporin analogues were not as easy to produce. The biosynthetic precursor 7-aminocephalosprorinic acid (7-ACA) 4 could not be isolated by fermentation or by enzymatic hydrolysis of 2. Eventually a chemical hydrolysis of the amide was developed by synthesising the imino chloride, which can then be hydrolysed to the amine (Scheme 1). Since the development of this chemical hydrolysis a range of semi-synthetic cephalosporins have been synthesised.
The -lactam mode of action is to inhibit the biosynthesis of the bacterial cell wall, which leaves the bacterial cell vulnerable to changes in osmotic pressure that cause lysis of the cell. The main targets of -lactams are the transpeptidase enzymes that catalyse the last step of bacterial cell wall biosynthesis. Bacterial cell walls are made from peptidoglycan, which is made from sugar and peptide units. The two types of sugar unit provide the backbone structure of the peptidoglycan: these are N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM) and N-acetylglucosamine (NAG). Pentapeptide chains are attached to the NAM sugars, which usually end in the sequence D-Ala-D-Ala. These pentapeptide chains are then cross linked by displacement of the terminal D-Ala residue (Figure 2). This final step is catalysed by transpeptidase enzymes. The structure of the peptide crosslink varies between species of bacteria. For example, Escherichia coli has diaminopimelic acid (DAP) as the third amino acid residue of the pentapeptide, which then links to the D-Ala of the next chain, whereas Staphylococcus aureus has L-lysine as its third amino acid residue, which bonds to a pentaglycine peptide chain. The pentaglycine chain then links to the D-Ala of another pentapeptide, creating a pentaglycine bridge.5
The mechanism of transpeptidation centres on the catalytic serine residue in the transpeptidase's active site. This attacks the carbonyl of the amide link to the terminal D-Ala group, which cleaves the amide bond. The tetrahedral covalently bound intermediate is then attacked by the peptide side chain of another pentapeptide, forming a new peptide bond and a cross-link between the two chains (Scheme 2).
There are two theories on how -lactams can inhibit the transpeptidase active site.3 One is that the catalytic serine residue directly attacks the -lactam ring to form a covalently bound acylated intermediate, similar to the intermediate for transpeptidation. The rest of the molecule blocks the active site from other possible substrates so the ester link is protected from transpeptidation or hydrolysis. Therefore, the serine residue remains acylated and cannot participate in any more catalytic activity, leaving the enzyme irreversibly inhibited (Scheme 3).
Inhibition due to direct acylation of serine, as proposed by Tipper and Strominger, occurs because -lactams imitate the structure of the D-Ala-D-Ala terminal sequence of the peptidoglycan pentapeptide structures. This causes it to be bound by non-covalent interactions to the enzyme's active site, where it can then acylate the serine residue. However, there are a few anomalies with this theory. One is that 6-methylpenicillin 5 should have a higher activity than penicillin as it is a better analogue to the D-Ala-D-Ala structure, but in practice its activity is lower. Therefore, the analogy to the peptide substrate is not the only interaction that causes -lactams to be such good inhibitors.
The alternative theory is that -lactams bind to a site near to the active site, blocking access to the active site. This is called the umbrella effect.3 If a nucleophilic group is in the binding site it can open the -lactam ring so the molecule becomes irreversibly bound to the enzyme, blocking the active site (Scheme 4).
Exploring the Tipper-Strominger theory further, it can be assumed that a -lactam with a side chain that mimicked the peptidoglycan substrate would have a higher activity than ordinary -lactams. This theory has been proven by Josephine, Kumar and Pratt. It had been previously proven that a synthetic mimetic peptide 6 was the best peptide substrate for a DD-peptidase, with a k cat/K m value of 8.7 x 10 6 s -1 M -1.
Both a penicillin 7 and cephalosporin 8 were synthesised with acyl side chains analogous to the peptide 6. The penicillin 7 was found to be an excellent inhibitor of streptomyces R61 DD-peptidase (k cat/K m = 1.5 x 10 7 s -1 M -1, k i = (1.0  0.2) x 10 7 s -1 M -1) with the largest rate constant reported for a DD-peptidase inhibitor. The cephalosporin 8 was not as effective an inhibitor as 7 (k i = (5.6  1.5) x 10 5 s -1 M -1), but R61 DD-peptidase is usually more susceptible to penicillins so this was not unexpected.
It is thought that the higher activity of both 7 and 8 compared to their predecessors 1 and 2 is due to the mimetic peptide side chain being involved in a higher level of non-covalent binding, by inhabiting the area of the active site that is normally occupied by the peptide chain of peptidoglycan. This has been shown to be the case through x-ray crystallography studies, which examined the electron densities of the -lactam molecules in the active site (Figure 4). It was noted that the electron densities of 7, 8 and 1 were much better defined than 2, showing that the cephalosporin 2 does not take advantage of the interactions within the enzyme's active site. The definition of 1 is from the benzyl side chain fitting into a hydrophobic pocket, compared to the specificity of 7 and 8. From these electron densities the non-covalent interactions were deduced (Figure 5).
Not only is the penicillin 7 a good inhibitor of DD-peptidases, but it is also a poor substrate for Enterobacter cloacae P99 -lactamase, which is structurally similar to R61 DD-peptidase (k cat/K m = 2.1 x 10 3 s -1 M -1). This is ideal as -lactamases are one of bacteria's main natural defences against -lactams, and are responsible for resistance in some species. It has been hypothesised that -lactams were first produced by bacteria as "chemical warfare agents" targeting each other's cell walls. The biosynthetic pathways responsible for the generation of -lactams were also taken up by fungi, ultimately leading to Fleming's discovery. However, bacterial resistance then evolved with the production of -lactamase enzymes by some species. These enzymes are similar in structure to DD-peptidase enzymes, and also have a catalytic serine residue in their active site. However, unlike DD-peptidases enzymes, when the serine become acylated the ester link is quickly hydrolysed and the deactivated ring-opened -lactam is released into the extracellular fluid. These enzymes are so efficient that they can hydrolyse up to 1000 -lactam molecules per second.3 This is obviously detrimental to the effectiveness of -lactam antibiotics, because even if the antibiotic is highly active against its transpeptidase target, it may be hydrolysed before it is able to make an effect.
However, although -lactamase enzymes are homologous to DD-peptidases they do not have any significant activity against peptidoglycan. It is thought that the active site of -lactamases has evolved from the DD-peptidases so that it excludes peptides and extended sections of peptidoglycan. A differently shaped active site could also explain the ability of -lactamase enzymes to hydrolyse -lactams so easily. The active site of DD-peptidases becomes blocked by the -lactam molecule so once it has acylated the enzyme the ester link is protected from nucleophilic attack. However, a differently shaped active site this would mean that the -lactam molecule may not block it efficiently, leaving room for water to access the ester link.
The inactivity of -lactamase enzymes towards peptides and peptidoglycan can be exploited in -lactam synthesis, as by Josephine et al.7 By increasing the affinity of the -lactams to their target of DD-peptidase enzymes by using mimetic peptide side chains, they have also reduced its affinity to -lactamase enzymes, doubling its effectiveness as an antibiotic.
The rate of inhibition of 7 and 8 was measured using competition experiments as the inhibitors reacted too quickly with the R61 enzyme to be accurately measured directly. This gives a k cat/K m of 1.05 x 10 7 s -1 M -1 and k i of (1.0  0.2) x 10 7 s -1 M -1 for 7, and a k i of (5.6  1.5) x 10 5 s -1 M -1 for 8. This was supported by fluorometric analysis of the direct reaction of 7 with the R61 enzyme, which gave a k i value of (2.0  0.4) x 10 7 s -1 M -1. It is claimed in the paper that the fluorometric analysis is in good agreement with the competition experiments;7 however, even with the errors taken into account there is still a significant disparity of 0.4 x 10 7 s -1 M -1. There is also no fluorometric analysis for the cephalosporin 8 or any data for the competition experiments for 8 shown directly in the paper, just in the supporting information. For completeness these should have been added. There is also a discrepancy in the k cat/K m values quoted for 7. Early on in the paper it gives a value of 1.5 x 10 7 s -1 M -1, but then describes how competition experiments gave a value of 1.05 x 10 7 s -1 M -1. This appears to be a typing error that should have been addressed before publishing, but it throws uncertainty over which is the actual value. These are only minor errors and the final results seem reliable, as attested by it being cited in other. However, if these -lactams are important as claimed by Josephine et al. there should ideally be a more thorough investigation into the inhibition rate constants using other methods, such as isothermal titration calorimetry, and also with other enzymes instead of just R61 DD-peptidase.
Although Josephine et al. have proven that mimetic -lactam side chains do increase the activity of the molecule, there have been other reports where mimetic peptides have shown low levels of inhibition against DD-peptidases, with the enzymes even showing a preference to other non-specific -lactams.,  Other -lactams with mimetic peptide side chains have also been synthesised, but they too had low activity against the majority of DD-peptidases, except R61 DD-peptidase and Actinomadura R39 DD-peptidase.,  Therefore, it could be considered that the data collected by Josephine et al. could be anomalous, except for the x-ray crystallographic information to support it. There are several possibilities why the other investigations did not achieve similar results. One explanation could be that each species of bacteria has a unique structure of peptidoglycan. Therefore it requires a unique DD-peptidase to perform the transpeptidation cross links. In trying to make the -lactams more specific, and therefore more active, the mimetic peptide side chains could be specific to some types of DD-peptidase active site, while others recognise a different peptide sequence. Another reason could be that DD-peptidase enzymes are usually bound to the cell membrane in vivo, but for use in vitro the enzymes must be soluble. Therefore, the membrane binding section of their protein sequences is removed to solubilise the enzymes.16 Removal of this section could cause alterations to the enzymes' tertiary structure, affecting the shape of the active site. This could mean that the enzymes are still inhibited by -lactams but lose the peptide recognition site, rendering mimetic peptide side chains useless. The enzymes streptomyces R61 DD-peptidase and Actinomadura R39 DD-peptidase are soluble enzymes and so do not have any alterations made to their protein sequences. This would explain their activity with the mimetic peptide -lactams as their active sites would have remained intact.
Overall, it has been shown that -lactams can be more effective against DD-peptidase enzymes if they contain a mimetic peptide side chain. This could lead to a new generation of -lactam antibiotics that are resistant to -lactamase enzymes, and so effective against a wide range of bacteria. However, if the transpeptidase enzymes have unique peptide recognition sites then it may be a case of tailoring a -lactam antibiotic to each species of bacteria, which would be costly and time consuming. Developing in vivo experiments would go a long way to solve this problem and also give an idea about whether these DD-peptidase inhibitors could be viable medicinal compounds.