It is well known that each individual has a unique DNA profile like a "fingerprint". The vast majority of nucleotides in human DNA that are inherited from parents are identical; however there are a few that are different which are called polymorphisms. These changes affect the length of the DNA fragments produced by restriction enzymes, these fragments are called restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP's). By electrophoresis the different lengths of DNA are separated out in order to determine the size of the RFLP's which are unique to each individual creating a DNA fingerprint. The technique of DNA fingerprinting was invented by Alec Jefferies in 1984, but before being able to fingerprint DNA certain processes have to be carried out first to prepare the DNA sample to be analysed. One of the techniques used in DNA fingerprinting is a method called the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). It was invented by Kary Mullis in 1985 and he was later awarded half a Noble Prize in Chemistry for his work in 1993. This technique involves taking a sample of DNA and amplifying it to make a larger sample which is an exact copy. One of the first sequences to be amplified by PCR was the human  - globin gene (Saikial. 1995; Mullisal. 1986; Mullis and Faloona 1987)3. Before looking at these two techniques background information on DNA, the basis of these methods needs to be discussed.
DNA is a polymer chain of nucleotides of which each nucleotide comprise of three parts; an inorganic phosphate group, a base and a sugar. The sugar present in nucleotides is always the same - deoxyribose, as is the phosphate group, but the bases can take one of four forms: adenine, thymine, cytosine or guanine (see figure 1). These bases form complementary pairs, in other words Thymine will only bond to Adenine and Cytosine will only bond to Guanine via hydrogen bonds. Adenine and Thymine are doubly bonded where as Cytosine and Guanine are triply bonded but the two pairs take essentially the same shape 6 (see figure 2). The nucleotides are bonded in a specific order to form a polymer chain; two of these chains are wrapped around each other in a spiral shape to form a 'double helix' (Watson and Crick, 1953) 6. The two polymer chains are bonded together via hydrogen bonds and can be separated in to two single strands via a process known as denaturation either by heating or by a chemical process. The two chains are complementary to each other: so if there were an adenine base on one strand then Thymine would appear on the other strand in the same position. The specific order of the nitrogenous bases forms what is known as the genetic code; the first letter of each base is taken as a label and a sequence is formed. These codes give instructions to cells and determine things like hair colour, eye colour and also instruction synthesis of proteins and other biological molecules. The main part of DNA is situated in the nucleus of a cell where it is organised in chromosomes.
Newton, C. A., Graham, A. (1997) PCR (Second Edition). BIOS Scientific Publishers. Oxford.
A DNA molecule is capable of self replication, which means it can make an exact copy of itself. This occurs just before cell division. The double helix unwinds to form two single strands, this is the parent template. A protein molecule called DNA polymerase, an enzyme bonds free nucleotides together to form a new strand which is complementary to the template. As a DNA molecule consists of two strands, two new strands are synthesized. The two new strands or daughter strands coil together with its complementary parent template to form a new double helix. At the end of replication two new double helixes are formed, both identical, each consisting of one parent template strand and one daughter strand, this is called semi conservative replication. When the cell divides in two, one of these double helical strands goes into one half of the cell so you end up with two identical cells containing the same genetic information.
The basis of genetic uniqueness is due to two main factors: inheritance and mutations. One genome is inherited from the father and one from the mother. The inheritance of these genes means that everyone is individual as no one will inherit the exact same genes, with the exception of identical twins. Mutations of the DNA sequence can also occur which can make cell genetic information individual, part of the sequence could be missing this is called deletion, or extra bases added in this is called insertion or part of the sequence could be in a different order this is a rearrangement. This means that every cell in your body is unique to you; they are 'host specific'.
The first step in fingerprinting a DNA sample is to extract and purify the sample required. Humans have nucleic DNA compacted with proteins into chromatin - the substance that forms chromosomes contained within cells. Separation is achieved by removing the unwanted components by enzyme action, agents to denature proteins, salts and organic solvents 1. The source of DNA has to contain nucleated cells for fingerprinting - this can be blood, semen, hair, bones, saliva or urine containing epithelial cells from the kidney. These sources will all give high molecular weight DNA which is required when analyzing the DNA fingerprint 1. The large molecules, which form chromosomal DNA, are relatively unstable and so are easily broken into smaller fragments this makes it easier for the sample to be increased in quantity, if it is needed. Isolation of different types of samples can be achieved by different methods depending upon what type of DNA sample it is, for example different methods of extraction from bloods sample are by organic extraction using phenol/chloroform, non - organic extraction or by a spin column procedure 7. Samples usually contain impurities which need to be removed as they can inhibit restriction enzymes. Purification of the extracted DNA is achieved by alcohol precipitation, ion exchange chromatography or filtration 7. The quality of the sample is important and may affect the accuracy of the DNA fingerprint, contamination may come from primers used in the method to increase the quantity of a sample as these primers are sometimes similar to those used for fingerprinting. Once the DNA is extracted there are methods available to help make the process of fingerprinting easier for example if the sample to be analysed is of limiting amount then a technique called the Polymerase Chain Reaction may need to be applied.
The Polymerase chain reaction, PCR, is an in vitro process where nucleic acids are synthesized to replicate a specific target segment of DNA 3,7 which is known as the template. Before amplification can occur, the specific section of DNA that is to be amplified must first be denatured, the double helix is then heated breaking the hydrogen bonds between the bases on each strands releasing two single strands of DNA, the template. The temperature required to break the hydrogen bonds is between 95 and 100 oC. After cooling, amplification of DNA is achieved by using oligonucleotide primers, or "amplifiers". Amplifiers are short, single-stranded DNA sequences which are complementary to the distinct ends, usually labeled 5 and 3 (see figure 2) of the template DNA molecule 4. The process of the primers binding to the template is called annealing. After binding to the single strand of DNA, the primers are extended by DNA polymerase, an enzyme which bonds deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) together to form a chain. Deoxynucleoside triphosphates have a similar structure to nucleotides, the components that make up DNA, but they contain three phosphate groups. These dNTPs are added in a sequence which complements the template strand of DNA, this is called extension. Extension is usually performed at 72 oC, the optimum temperature for DNA polymerase. This results in a new strand of DNA being synthesized which is complementary to the template strand and forms a double helix of DNA. This process is then repeated; the template and new strand are heated to break the bonds. The new strand is then used as a template for the next cyclic of amplification to form another new identical strand. PCR is a cyclic process so multiplication is quick and amplification can occur in a matter of hours 4. The method is extremely useful for producing small amounts of DNA even if degraded, the starting material may only consist of a single cell, and samples that were dried, mummified, embedded in amber and buried have been examined and amplified in this way. It is relatively easy for PCR to produce DNA molecules which are a few hundred base pairs long, however it is much more difficult when DNA molecule is larger which can be a problem. The reaction conditions are specific and changing a condition will affect the efficiency of the reaction.
Once the sample is large enough, a process called restriction analysis is carried out. This starts with an enzyme called restriction endonuclease, this cleaves the double strand of DNA at or near short recognition sequences. This can be used to detect DNA-based polymorphisms, these fragments are termed restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP). Usually, the required polymorphisms are those based on a variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) which are at fixed positions 7. The recognition sites on the VNTRs can be detected by restriction endonuclease and cleaved. These shorter sequences can then be separated by gel electrophoresis. The sample is placed on a gel and when a current is applied the negatively charged fragments of DNA move across the gel. The fragments of smaller molecular mass will move furthest down the field creating bands of DNA arranged in size order. The fragment length can be determined from the distance moved, measured from the starting point. This generates a specific pattern, in the form of bands, which is the fingerprint.
When the DNA fragments have been separated out it can then, be transferred from the gel plate to a solid membrane to be viewed. Developed in 1975 by Edwin Southern 1, the Southern Blotting procedure is a method of visualizing specific fragments of DNA. The test DNA is digested with one or more restriction enzymes, denatured to become single stranded and then transferred to a solid membrane for hybridization. Once the DNA is fixed to the membrane a label probe is added, this is a short DNA strand which detects the presence of complementary sequences. The probe maybe radioactively labeled. The probe binds to the complementary sequences on the test DNA. After incubation for several hours under controlled conditions, excess probe is washed off and an x-ray film is placed on the membrane to reveal the pattern of DNA fragments, which are homologous to the probe. The pattern appears as dark bands, this is a DNA fingerprint. This procedure provides two pieces of information, whether there is a particular DNA fragment present and the relative size. Dot blotting is a more straightforward technique for obtaining this information, if it simply the presences of a fragment and its relative size, is all that is required. An aliquot of denatured DNA is spotted onto a membrane and by means of successive hybridization, the formation of bases pairs between complementary sequences, with a sequence - specific probe, the required information is provided.
The techniques described above, are the methods that are required to generate a DNA fingerprint - consisting of a pattern of bands, once this is obtained the fingerprint can then be analysed. The individual loci can be analysed, the single locus approach, or several loci can be analysed at the same time. Which method is used depends on the application and the amount of detail needed to compare or identify the fingerprint.
DNA profiling has many applications, in forensic science to identify suspects, to establish relationships in kinship and in human IVF treatment 12. In forensic testing small samples of somatic cells are required, in kinship haploid genomes provide single gametes which is of concern. It is unusual at a crime scene to find a fingerprint of high quality; however it is likely that samples of hair, blood or semen are found. Only a microscopic sample is required as PCR can be used to amplify the sample. As evidence from crime scene, using a DNA fingerprint as identification isn't always straightforward and is never alone enough evidence as proof of guilt. A DNA fingerprint maybe used to identify a suspect for conviction, to exclude a suspect 8 or to identify a victim (see figure 5). In the case of using fingerprints to determine kinship, closely related genetic information is inherited since a child's fingerprint comes half from the mother and half from the father. Similarities in the fingerprints can be established to determine kinship much more successfully than other techniques such as blood testing. In IVF treatment, a fingerprint is used to detect abnormalities in chromosomes which can cause problems with development of the embryo and possibly termination.
Other applications in DNA fingerprinting are in disease diagnosis and understanding. Gastric cancer can be diagnosed by identifying damaged genomes 9 and by identification of the bacteria Helicobacter pylori, which causes the disease 11. DNA fingerprinting of Mycobacterium tuberculosis to gain an overall understanding of the diversity of M. tuberculosis strains10 also uses it in the prevention and control of Tuberculosis 10.
Krawczak, M., Schmidtke, J. (1998) DNA Fingerprinting. BIOS Scientific Publishers. Oxford.
There are many legal and ethical issues which need to be considered when obtaining this kind of detailed information about a person. If scientists are not careful this information maybe abused for personal, commercial, police or political use rather than medically to improve quality of life. Not only can a DNA fingerprint identify and place a suspect at a crime scene but it can also be evidence of a crime itself 1. There is also the question of taking a sample with or without consent at a crime scene from a victim, a suspect or others who maybe connected. The DNA fingerprint doesn't just identify a person but also contains information on genetic heritage. This can have huge implications for the future on how to deal with the information.