The role of process research and development department at AstraZeneca is to discover and develop robust, economic manufacturing processes for new chemical entities. The team also provides supplies of drug substances to fund development programmes and to provide chemical manufacturing controls documentation to satisfy external regulatory authorities. The equipment used in the scale up lab/plant is not that dissimilar to the type of vessel used in a discovery lab. However to describe process chemistry as bucket chemistry would be incorrect and to assume that it just involves scaling up existing process would also be an incorrect description.
The department is divided into five parts; process chemistry; process analysis; development manufacture (pilot plant and large scale lab); process engineering; and projects management. Each of these plays a key role during the chemical development of a new chemical entity and each of these areas employs chemists. The process chemistry area devises the final route of manufacture and optimises the chosen route into a viable manufacturing process. Process analysts develop appropriate analytical methodology to assess the purity of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) and the intermediates, specifications are set along the process chemists of intermediates and APIs, a methodology is developed to monitor reactions to help gain the maximum amount of information. Development manufacture are responsible for running the process in the pilot plant or kilo-lab, they work closely with process chemistry to ensure that the process being developed is compatible with the intended site of manufacture. Process engineering help with plant suitability and compatibility, help decide between isolation options for example crystallisation, resolution of specific scale up issues for example agitation and heat/mass transfer, and make sure engineering problems are not solved using chemistry. Project management is the link between the global project teams and process research and development; they coordinate pan-process research and development activities at a high level. The interface between process research and development and other departments for a particular project is overseen by project management along with various outsourcing activities.
Process research and development is a diverse area, there are many interactions with other departments in order to aid the overall production of a successful drug. These departments include discovery, regulatory, formulation, drug metabolism, manufacturing, safety assessment, patent and marketing. The process of producing a new drug is a lengthy and difficult process, from the point of lead identification if can take up to 3 years for the drug discovery team to develop a candidate for selection. The next stage is drug development, which is where process research and development fits in this can take up to 5 years. There are three phases within this, phase I is initial safety and clinical trials, phase II is clinical trials in patients and phase III is wide ranging trials for comparative efficiency and safety prior to marketing. When all this is completed the drug is marketed and launched. The whole process can take in the region of 15 years to complete. Each phase of drug development requires a differing quantity of the selected drug candidate and it is the job of process research and development to produce a route which is viable to synthesise the drug on these scales; phase I requires 5-10kg, phase II 30-100kg and phase III 100-500kg. Discovery support work alongside process research and development to reduce the time it takes to identify the final route, there are two ways to do this; scale up the discovery route (which generally is not the best way to approach this) or to improve the way in which the best route is selected by starting earlier. It is key for discovery and process to collaborate - it is this collaboration which speeds up the very lengthy process of discovery and development. The supply of the first 1-5kg is often a variant of the discovery route, however once 5kg has been produced the next step requires 30kg. Generally the discovery route is not viable for this larger scale production so in parallel to manufacturing the initial 5kg there needs to be development of an alternative route or the discovery route needs to be dropped all together in order to take the route all the way through the three phases. Statistics show that only an average of 18% of drug candidates survive from clinical phase 1 to registration 4. This means that the optimisation of a chemical process maybe wasted though this risk has to be accepted as generally the alternative processes in many cases deliver the required quantities faster and at much lower prices. The venture to early optimisation can often pay off later on.
The ideal process should be safe, ecologically sound, reproducible both on repetitive runs and on scale up, fit the plant physically, produce product of high quality that passes predetermined specification and be economical. However there is no ideal process and the best that can be done is to approach the ideal although compromises would still have to be made. Impurities are an important factor to consider in a process. If impurities exceed the limits of the specifications, the process chemist must reduce these by-products or eliminate them in an extra purification step. An unknown impurity in the final product needs to be investigated. Firstly, the by-product is isolated by prep high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), the structure is determined by NMR and mass spectroscopy, a mechanism is proposed for its formation, the synthetic step in which this forms is identified and finally the reaction conditions are altered to minimise the formation of undesirable by-product.
Even the most simple discovery routes can have issues making scale up difficult, an example of this is the synthesis of benzthiophene. The initial medicinal chemistry route is shown in figure 1, the starting material used (2-bromothiophenol) is very expensive and not readily available. This could be made in-house but that would mean going backwards and making the route longer which is not desirable, the solution would be to change the route. Lithiating thiophenol is a much cheaper option and then forming the dianion of thiophenol provides a simple and efficient solution.
Another example is the synthesis of Idoxifene, the synthetic route that was originally going to be used as shown in figure 2. The issues with this route are that reagent A iodophenyl lithium has a half-life of around 40 mins at -60C, at a 1000L scale butyl lithium would take at least 90 minutes to add as it is exothermic and the addition of the ketone would take over 2 hours, by this time the butyl lithium would have degraded.
The solution to this is to use the 1,4-diiodobenzene compound to form the intermediate (figure 3), the addition of butyl lithium could be around 10 hours without affecting the yield or quality and changing the solvent allowed the reaction to be carried out at much higher temperatures. There are many factors to consider when deciding on the most viable route. Normally the best route is the cheapest but there are other things to take in account such as safety, health and environment, patents (need to make sure no other patents are infringed), regulatory and operability factors.
In the optimisation of a synthetic route several factors need to be considered, firstly what goes above the arrow; reagents, solvent and work-up/isolation where purification and purity are controlled; the optimum conditions, including temperature and concentration - very concentrated reaction leads to a cheaper and quicker synthesis; the critical parameters and what their ranges are. In the future there will be an increased pressure to get a drug to market and it is hard to move quickly with this when the route is inefficient, there is also patent pressure as they only last 20 years. Less time to develop the process will push the selection earlier, this will blend the boundaries between process research and development and medicinal chemistry. New technology such as robots won't solve this problem alone, new reactions, better experimental design and more computer power will all have an impact on this.
When developing the manufacturing route to the key intermediate in the synthesis of ARC-123196, the process chemistry team at AZ came across several difficult steps and unfortunately this compound was terminated at validation. The key chiral compounds are shown in figure 4 along with the final compound to be synthesised ARC-123196.
This final compound was a candidate drug for inflammatory and allergic conditions; a key structural feature is the optically pure chiral hydroxyl pyridine. Two initial routes were considered both starting from the dihydroxy pyridine 4, one via the formation of an epoxide then forming intermediate 7 which could then go on to synthesise the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), or via an electrophilic cyclic carbonate to form the same intermediate 7. There were two problems encountered with this synthesis; firstly the starting material is a viscous liquid and therefore was difficult to handle especially on a large scale; secondly route 1 is not cis selective through tosylation and so route 2 is the preferred route to form intermediate 7.
The next stage in the process is to consider whether to perform a linear or convergent synthetic approach to complete the synthesis of the final compound. The retrosynthesis for the linear approach is shown in figure 6. One of the main problems with this approach is that there is a further five stages after the synthesis of the carbonate, this is a lengthy synthesis involving protecting and de-protecting groups and is not really ideal. The synthesis of compound 6 is also lengthy, a total of 6 steps which is not cost effective. Generally the linear approach is not used, as it is not time efficient.
The convergent approach uses parallel processing synthesising two intermediates at the same time. The process chemistry team can also outsource the production of one of these two intermediates which can make the synthesis more time efficient.
Using the convergent approach is more desirable than the linear however again several points need to be considered. The sulphonamide on compound 8 needs to be protected as attack of the oxygen vs. nitrogen at the carbonate requires control. There are also several synthetic methods to form the biaryl 8 which needed to be assessed utilizing metal-catalysed couplings; Stille, Negishi, Suzuki, Kumada, etc. The Stille reaction uses organo-tin reagents which are difficult to remove and toxic, the Suzuki reaction is utilized instead. The Suzuki reaction uses Pd 0 in the metal-catalysed coupling however as this is air sensitive so it is generated insitu. The mechanism is similar to the Sille coupling; oxidative addition of the aromatic halide to the palladium (0) complex generates a palladium (II) intermediate. This then under goes a transmetallation with the boronate species, from which the product is released by reductive eliminate. The palladium (0) catalyst is regenerated during this process. This is the route used in the synthesis of compound 8 with a yield of 85%. The compound produced is protected at the nitrogen; this bulky group sterically hinders any nucleophilic attack by the amide. A palladium scavenger was needed to remove remaining palladium. The deloxan resin was an effective scavenger reducing the palladium content from 240ppm to <2ppm after treatment with the resin.
The synthesis of the pyridine diol carbonate 6 was first carried out using the medicinal chemistry route producing multi kilo quantities. The oxalate salt is produced which gives a solid and makes handling easier. Although this is a lengthy route it gives high purity >99% and an ee of >99%. The dimethyl carbonate reagent used in the preparation of the carbonate is cheap and readily available and the methanol is distilled off as this causes the reverse reaction to occur.
The next stage in the synthesis of ARC-123196 was to combine the two main components (compounds 6 and 8) to produce the first multi-kilo batch. The first step was to make the free base of compound 6 via salt exchange then the protected compound 8 was added to form the intermediate 9. The optimal conditions for this reaction were found to be 1eq CsCO 3, 1eq biaryl, 1eq pyridyl carbonate in 16 volumes of N-methyl pyrrolidinone (NMP). The product was isolated as an ethyl acetate solution which is then ready for de-protection of the nitrogen.
De-protection of the nitrogen was carried out producing the HCl salt, as this can readily dissociate, it is unstable and therefore the free base needs to be obtained. The salt was obtained in a disappointing 54% yield however; the yield of the free base was moderately improved to 62% with purity in the region of 97%.
This synthetic route to form the product ARC-123196 is reasonable and was used to produce the product on a multi kilo scale. The route to forming the biaryl compound 8 uses cheap and readily available starting material and is economically viable. The overall convergent synthesis from the carbonate and biaryl is scalable and operationally simple. However as stated before the carbonate does not have an economic supply route. To make this synthesis more efficient and economically viable this needed to be developed further. The first route used (see figure 9) to produce the carbonate had expensive starting material, the intermediate aldehyde is prone to polymerisation and epimerisation, gulonolactone is very expensive and wasteful as only three carbons are used. This initial route was used to prepare 84g of the carbonate with the cost of the oxalate salt at 16K per Kg.
After careful consideration and several attempts by the process chemistry team - the developed route used to produce the carbonate utilises the Heck reaction. This couples together a halide and an alkene to form a new alkene. The mechanism involves oxidative addition of the halide, insertion of the olefin followed by elimination of the product by a  - hydride elimination process. The palladium (0) catalyst is then regenerated by a base.
Two products were produced 10 and 11 in this reaction. Using initial conditions from a published journal, the ratio of products was 13:1 (compounds 10: compound 11) however after changing the conditions slightly and performing an aqueous wash to eliminate the impurity the ratio was 18:1. The crude material was isolated in 60-65% yield with purity of 94%, the next step involved asymmetric hydrogenation using an enantioselective ruthenium bisphosphine catalyst and then final conversion to compound 6. This route was used successfully to prepare multi kilo scale in the large-scale lab.
This gave the carbonate in >35% yield but with >97% purity and >98% ee, the route was not fully optimised but is a viable route for scale up. The overall synthetic route that could have been used to synthesise ARC-123196 is shown below however after phase I the compound was abandoned. The route developed by the process chemistry team is commercially attractive and would have been used if the compound had been taken on further.
The process research and development department play an important role in the production of a new chemical entity. Their two major aims are to produce all the drug substance needed by various other departments throughout a 5-10 year period and the second is to develop a process which is more efficient and cost effective. The process must run under Good Management Practice (cGMP) guidelines. As in the example given not all lead compounds make it to the final stages, however it is important to optimise the process of an API early on as this may well pay off later on and decrease the time to production and eventual launch.