The first reports that microwave energy sources were suitable for accelerating organic synthesis reactions appeared in 1986-, and the first reliable device for generating fixed microwave radiation was designed by Randall and Booth at the University of Birmingham during the Second World War. Initially the risks associated with the flammability of organic solvents and the lack of available systems for temperature control were a major concern. However safe microwave equipment is now available on the market which enables both accurate temperature and pressure control as well as the means to monitor reactions effectively (see figure 1).
The microwave region of the electromagnetic spectrum corresponds to wavelengths of 1cm to 1m (frequencies of 300GHz to 300MHz). Microwave heating is due to an electrical field exerting a force on charged particles and dipoles. Molecules undergo rotational excitation as the material absorbs the microwave radiation and it is the increased kinetic energy of the molecules that is registered as a temperature increase. It is the electric field component of microwaves that is responsible for their heating effect through two major mechanisms: dipole polarisation and ionic conduction. Small molecules with permanent dipole moments interact with microwave energy in the gas phase. In the dipole polarisation mechanism the frequency of irradiation is such that the molecular dipoles respond by rotating to the alternating electric field. That is the molecules align their dipoles with the external field, and energy is lost by molecular friction and random collisions, generating dielectric heating. The ionic conduction mechanism is the movement of ions under the influence of the electric field, and the kinetic energy involved is released as heat through an increased in the collision rate (see figure 2). Microwave radiation has been used more widely in organic chemistry in recent years and has been reported to give significant reductions in reaction times and cleaner reactions, which are easier to work up than those from conventional heating techniques. Higher yields have also been reported in many cases.
Efficient internal heat-transfer (in situ heating), resulting in even heating through out the sample, is produced through microwave irradiation. The simplest method of microwave heating involves irradiation of reactants only in an open container. This is similar to classical reflux but with increased reaction rates. An alternative method, 'microwave-organic reaction enhancement' chemistry, was developed by Bose et al6. This method uses polar, high-boiling solvents in open vessels. A solvent is chosen with dielectric properties which is suitable for coupling microwave energy and rapid heating to temperatures which are about 20-30C below boiling point. However this technique is limited to high-boiling polar solvents and isolation of product from these solvents can be difficult. Superheating of solvents can be generated rapidly in a closed microwave vessel for reaction pressure 4. This occurs when a liquid is heated to a temperature higher than its standard boiling point, without actually boiling. Reaction rate enhancement maybe possible through superheating of solvents under microwave irradiation, for example a reaction that takes several hours under conventional heating maybe completed in minutes using microwave heating.
Microwave irradiation has several advantages compared to conventional thermal heating of reactants. Conventional thermal heating usually involves the use of a furnace or oil bath, which heats the walls of the reactor by convection or conduction. The core of the sample takes much longer to achieve the desired temperature and as a result the sample is not heated uniformly as with microwave heating. Energy is also wasted in heating the furnace or oil bath. The introduction of microwave energy into a chemical reaction which has at least one component which can couple with the microwaves can lead to much higher heating rates compared with conventional heating. As microwave energy is introduced into the sample remotely, there is no direct contact between the energy source and the sample. Microwave dielectric heating resembles a flash heating process where the energy is produced much more rapidly and the sample cools more rapidly at the end of the reaction. This leads to very different temperature-time profiles compared with conventional heating which may lead to significantly different products.
Several organic synthesis reactions have been reported in the literature to have increased reaction rates when subjected to microwave irradiation-, one of which is the synthesis of an 1-aryl-1H-indazole via a one-pot two-step copper mediated system (see figure 1). The reaction was carried out as a test to determine if using microwave irradiation would produce the product in sufficient yield and shorten the reaction time. This reaction involved heating an aldehyde (1) and a hydrazine (2) in a sealed reactor for 10 mins at 160C in the microwave. This forms an intermediate arylhydrazone (3) which after further heating at 160C for 10 mins facilitates the cyclisation to forms the desired 1-aryl-1H-indazole (4) upon addition of potassium carbonate, copper iodide and a ligand. The reported yields of similar reactions were approximately 85%11 however upon carrying out the reaction with aldehyde (1) and hydrazine (2) the yield obtained was a disappointing 22%. This may be due to the fact that different substrates were used and further work to optimise the microwave conditions could be carried out along with further comparisons with conventional heating in order to improve this yield. The poor yield could also be due to purification issues of the product which could also be optimised in order to improve the yield. The reaction time was decreased however, as using conventional heating the reaction could be up to several hours compared with 20 mins heating in the microwave.
Unfortunately using microwave heating in this case did not produce the product in sufficient yield. However as mentioned before many other reactions have been reported as having faster reaction rates and higher yielding reactions due to microwave heating and these maybe be exploited successfully, thus decreasing reaction times of other organic syntheses. The reactions performed in the microwave may also produce less side reactions and so making purification of compounds easier. Provided that the conditions are optimised using microwave irradiation in organic synthesis it could significantly shorten reaction times and improve yields, which is essential to the drug discovery process when synthesising a large number of compounds.