The FlashMaster II (see figure 1) by Biotage (originally developed by Argonaut) has been successfully used to purify numerous compounds in organic synthesis by the use of flash column chromatography. The flash column chromatography system can automatically purify more compounds in less time compared with a manual approach, due to its PC linked system, 10 column capability, and four solvent lines. This method of purification has become common practice in industry, particularly at GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), and has aided the purification of organic compounds by speeding up the process.
The FlashMaster II system uses a column chromatography separation technique which exploits the difference in partitioning behaviour between a mobile phase (an elutent) and a stationary phase (generally silica gel) to separate components in a mixture. The mixture components may interact with the stationary phase based on charge, relative solubility or adsorption. The retention time of a compound is a measure of the speed at which a substance moves in a chromatographic system. In an interrupted system, like TLC (thin layer chromatography) the retention time is measured as the retention factor, R f; the run length of the compound divided by the run length of the elutent.
Column chromatography utilises a column filled with a solid support, usually silica gel with the sample to be separated loaded on top of the support (see figure 3). The rest of the column is filled with a solvent or solvent mix which under the influence of gravity moves the sample through the column. The various components of the loaded sample will move through the column at differing rates and so will have different exit times at the bottom of the column. The flash column technique is very similar to this but involves the use of positive pressure to drive the solvent through the column, allowing quicker separation times. Modern flash chromatography systems like the FlashMaster II have pre-packed plastic cartridges filled with silica and the solvent is pumped through the cartridge. Systems are linked with detectors and fraction collectors, providing automation. The FlashMaster II also introduced a gradient pump which results in quicker separations and less solvent usage. The system automates gradient solvent mixing, flow control, peak detection and peak fraction collection. The pre-packed columns come in a variety of sizes i.e. the amount of silica packed in the column, and so allow purification of samples in the range of 4mg-5g. The size of the column and amount of crude material loaded depends partly on how easy/difficult the separation is between components. The more difficult the separation the larger the column will be with a smaller quantity of crude mixture. A general guide has been drawn up by Argonaut to help choose the size of the column required for a particular separation. It determines loading capacities for each column size and states that the sample loaded on to a column should be 5-10% of the column bed mass. Ten columns can be loaded on to the machine and it has the capacity for four solvent lines. This allows for numerous purifications of different compounds with different eluting systems and gradients. The detection system is via UV, so provided the desired compound possesses a UV chromophore, a peak will appear on the UV trace when a UV detected compound is eluted from the column.
The FlashMaster II was used successfully on many occasions during my research project at GSK to purify synthesised compounds. A suitable solvent mix and gradient was established using the small scale separation technique thin layer chromatography (TLC) achieving separation of the components of the reaction mixture on silica gel plates. This solvent system and gradient could then be transferred over to the FlashMaster II computer linked system to automatically isolate the desired product. For example, in the purification of sulphonamide (3) (see figure 4), after the reaction was complete, the crude product contained a mixture of components, the desired product (3), some amine starting material (3) (used in excess) and an unknown side product of the reaction as viewed by TLC. Using the small scale separation technique, TLC, several systems (including ethyl acetate/cyclohexane in ratios of 50:50 and 70:30, methanol/dichloromethane in a ratio of 50:50) were tried to achieve separation of the mixture. The most suitable was found to be ethyl acetate/cyclohexane on a 1:1 mixture of solvents on the TLC plate which translates to a gradient of 0-50% of ethyl acetate 2 on the FlashMaster. The crude (~460mg) mixture was then loaded on to a 100g pre-packed silica column. The solvents, gradient and run length of 60 mins were selected on the software-controlled system linked to the FlashMaster II. Once the column was loaded the system automatically ran the sample. The UV trace for the reaction showed two major peaks, one of which was the desired product. The fractions relating to the relevant peak were collected and successful purification was observed via LC-MS, liquid chromatography - mass spectroscopy and NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance); two commonly used analytical techniques.
On several occasions compounds which needed to be purified did not posses a UV chromaphore. However purification by the FlashMaster II was still possible. This is due to the fact that there is an option to collect all rather than UV triggered collection. If selected this option will separate out all components and collect all fractions rather than just the UV triggered components. While this is useful, further TLC analysis of all fractions must be carried out to determine which fractions contain the desired product which can increase the time for purification.
There are limitations of the FlashMaster II. For difficult separations a combination of the standard four solvents may not give a suitable separation. In this case the FlashMaster Solo would be used where any solvent mix and gradient can be in-put manually into the software, which will then automatically run the system, this allows for the use of an isocratic gradient as well. Using TLC as a test before putting a sample onto the FlashMaster II serves as a good guide. However it doesn't always transfer across as successfully on the larger scale.
The FlashMaster II purification system has greatly increased the productivity of compounds in drug discovery by decreasing purification times. It also exceeds the purification capabilities of many medicinal labs and is generally a much more effective method of purification. As the system is automatic, the column can be running while other chemistry can be carried out, which again increases the productivity of compounds. The pre-packed silica columns provide a safer and more efficient way of producing the stationary phase columns, eliminating the need for manual silica packing and the possibility of breathing in silica powder which is obviously very dangerous.