Communication is very important by definition communication is a two way process - an interaction. Communication consists of transmitting information from one person to another usually via language. There are many forms of communication verbal, written, telecommunication, electronic to name a few. Given the important of communication it is expected that the majority people should have knowledge and expertise in communication skills, this can be verbal face to face communication, written communication or things like telecommunication (e.g. computer networking).
Meetings are an effective form of verbal communication, information can be put across to a group of people which can then be discussed if necessary 2, important decisions can be made and any further action can be decided. In addition to coming together face to face, it is now possible due to new technology to have discussions between people at different locations through conference calls or an e-meeting. Characteristics of effective meeting communication are:
The meeting follows an agenda
The atmosphere is informal, comfortable and relaxed
Everyone understands the and accepts the task or objective of the group
The members listen to each other
Different view points get a fair hearing
Criticism is constructive
When action items are identified, clear assignments are made and accepted
The leader of the group does not dominate the meeting, but keeps them on track and on time
Presenting at meetings is not just about giving the information but about delivering it in such a way that people understand and take something away from it 1. When presenting it is import to prepare; know your audience, rehearse the presentation and decide how you are going to present the information i.e. via PowerPoint slides or project/OHP slides. The contents of the presentation should describe the purpose of the talk and key areas, then the delivery of the main content and finally a summary. Repetition may occur however this may aid understanding and learning from the presentation 1. Putting the talk in context will also aid understanding and using clear and simple visual aids to reinforce the information.
Chemistry meetings with which I was involved are held every fortnight at GSK. These meeting are relatively informal and everyone has an equal role to play in the meeting. The aim of the meeting is to inform the team leader and each other about the chemistry carried out over the two weeks. Meetings are effective ways of doing this as the team leader only has to have one session with everyone present rather than have to talk to each member individually which takes a lot more time and effort. It also means he can get the full picture of what is going in the team and see if any changes need to be made. One member of the team leads the meeting, generally this is not the team leader, this person follows the agenda and decides the order in which the rest of the team presents their material. Every member of the team presents the work they have been doing either through a hand out or through power-point slides. The handouts or slides contain brief detail of a reaction, the target molecule, yields of the reaction, any purification techniques used and any innovative measures. If a reaction failed possible reasons are given and any further worked to be done i.e. repeat the reaction or try a different route. Any issues with reactions can be brought up and discussed within the group to try and find possible solutions. The meetings are also an opportunity to learn about the chemistry other people in the team are doing as quite often there is a large range of chemistry going on within the lab.
During the year the chemistry meetings held were very useful to my project, any issues that came up could be discussed with more experienced chemists and advice on any action to take was given. Not only did I learn more about the chemistry I was doing but also about other chemistry going on with in the group, some of the aspects of which I could apply to my own chemistry. Other aspects such as purification techniques were also discussed early on with more experienced chemists. New pieces of equipment were also talked about at the meetings when a member of the team had used it for example when the H-cube first arrived in the lab it was used by one member in a hydrogenation reaction, this piece of equipment greatly improved this type of reaction and as a result it is becoming common practice to use the H-cube for hydrogenation reactions.
An example of an issue with a chemical reaction is in the amide series of my project. Initially the amide bond was formed by reacting an acid with an amine using the coupling reagent HATU (O-(7-azabenzotrizol-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-tetra-methyluronium hexafluorophosphate) however several reports from within the team showed that these reactions were lower yielding than expected, this was discussed at the chemistry meeting and it was decided that use an acid chloride and an amine to form the amide bond might be a better option and produced higher yields. After implementing this action, in the majority of case improved yields were seen and this meant further progression for this series as the desired amide compounds could be synthesised quickly and in sufficient yields.
The fortnightly chemistry meetings are a very efficient and effective way of communicating the chemistry performed within the team on a regular basis not only to the team leader but also to other members of the team. The chemistry can be discussed and any issue to do with yields or purification can be solved during these meetings. As a result the team can competently work through the chemical reactions required to produce the desired compound. Having these meetings regularly means that any problems are solved almost as soon as they arise so that the programme progresses and suitable compounds are produced as quickly and efficiently as possible.