This article describes the stereoselective synthesis of 5-hydroxymethyl azabicyclic ring via novel methodology epoxide-initiated cationic cyclisation of azides. The authors report a study on epoxide-initiated cationic cyclisation of azides and the synthesis of stereo- and enantioselective total synthesis of natural and unnatural indolizidine alkaloids 167B and 209D.
Azabicyclic rings are present in many biologically active natural compounds. Within this indolizidines alkaloids are the one of the most important classes known for their numerous pharmaceutical applications, and because of this they are desirable. The stereoselective synthesis of the 5-hydromethyl azabicyclic ring is important as it is a potential precursor to the total synthesis of two indolizidine alkaloids - 167B and 209D (Figure 1).
One of the main steps to forming 5-hydroxymethyl azabicyclic compound is centred around work by Aube and Peason on intramolecular Schmidt reaction of alkyl azides. By treating the 5-membered epoxyazide 7 with a lewis acid, the 5-hydroxymethyl azabicyclic compound 8 was formed (scheme 1) from an aminodiazonion intermediate followed by intramolecular Schmidt reaction to form the iminium ion intermediate (scheme 2). These type of reactions were derived from alkenes and alcohols and have proved to be facile in both intra- and intermolecular examples. For the formation of 7, the stereospecific reagent mCPBA is used and give a separable mixture of cis and trans where trans is the major isomer (51% compared with 17% for cis), however it doesn't report how the stereoisomers were confirmed at this point.
The formation of key intermediate 6 was in good yield, 98% overall. The known ketoester 3, was treated with modified, relatively neutral titanium carbene reagent developed by Takai, olefinester 4 was isolated in 61% yield. This method was used as initial trials using Wittig olefination were poor yielding. The alcohol 5 was then formed via the addition of lithium aluminium hydride. The corresponding azidoolefin 6 was formed by treatment of 5 with CH 3SO 2Cl/Et 3N followed by NaH 3 in DMF.
The key cyclisation step was investigated to compare a variety of lewis acid used and it was found that EtAlCl 2 gave the highest yield of 63%, however this was not the only parameter they varied in this investigation which could put some doubt on which factors are involved in the increase of the yield. Possible reasons for the increased yield with this particular lewis acid however, are given. The stereochemistry of compound 8 was confirmed by NMR when using TfOH as the lewis acid and was found to be a single diastereoisomer, though low yielding with this particular lewis acid (25%). Further experiments were carried out to confirm the relative stereochemistry of the cyclised product 8, a NOE experiment was carried out on the corresponding acetate along with single crystal X-ray analysis, both confirming the stereochemistry.
An investigation into the general use of this method is done by varying ring size in compound 7 (scheme 3). When n=2, 3 the yield in the formation of 7b and  7c is lower (41% and 12%) compared with when n=1. These larger rings were obtained in an inseparable mixture of cis- and trans-isomers, however no reasoning was given for this. In the cyclisation step to form 8, single diastereoisomers were formed when n=1, 2, 3 this is due to the fact that the cis-isomers fail to give any cyclised product when using EtAlCl 2 as the lewis acid, however again no reasoning is given for this occurring. The relative stereochemistry of 8b and 8c were assigned by NOE experiments.
The key step in the stereoselective synthesis of indolizidines 167B and 209D is comparable to that in the synthesis of 5-hydroxymethyl azabicyclic compound 8. The relative stereochemistry is similar and therefore 8 can be used as a precursor to the synthesis of () indolizidine alkaloids 167B and 209D. Taking 5-hydroxymethyl indolizidine 8 and performing a functional group manipulation of the hydroxyl side chain, indolizidine 167B was synthesised in a yield of 62% and 209D was synthesis in a yield of 67% (Scheme 4). To determine the relative stereochemistry of these compounds, the spectroscopic data was compared to that of the same compounds previously synthesised but via a different route.
The main step in the enantioselective synthesis of (+)- and (-)-Indolizidines 167B and 209D is the Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, ADH (scheme 5). The synthesis of optically active epoxyazide 7 is produced via the Sharpless ADH of racemic azidoolefin 6 using a catalytic amount of osmium tetroxide and a chiral ligand (DHQD)2PHAL. Although this ligand is not enantiomeric it acts as though it were in the dehydoxylation step, attacking the alkene from the top face. The formation of 10 affords an inseparable mixture of diasteroisomers in good yield (95%), where the ratio of cis:trans is 1:1.3 calculated from NMR data. Selective mesylation of the primary hydroxyl group is then followed by the formation of epoxyazide 7 as a separable mixture of cis-(+) and trans-(-) in 1:1.5 ratio. The corresponding enantiomers synthesised are determined via measuring the optical rotation and quoted as a []D value determining whether it is S or R enantiomer. The major trans-(-) isomer was then cyclised using the standard conditions as previously described, followed by functional group manipulation to afford the S enantiomers (measure by optical rotation) of 167B and 209D in 68%, 78%ee and 74%, 75%ee respectively. The spectral data was compared to that of the natural (-)-(5R, 9R)-Indolizidines and found that the only difference was in rotation therefore the synthesis produces the unnatural (+)-(5S,9S)-Indolizidine 167B and 209D. The journal does not quote a reference as to where this spectral data comes from for the natural enantiomers at this point. The ee of compound 9 was fairly moderate (77%ee) due to the poor selectivity of the ADH step and no explanation was made as to why they used this method considering its poor selectivity.
The enantioselctive synthesis of the natural (-)-(5R, 9R)-Indolizidines 167B and 209D was readily available via using the chiral ligand (DHQ)2PHAL in the Sharpless ADH attacking from the opposite face (scheme 6). Taking the trans product 7- (+) and following a similar synthesis as for the unnatural compound, the natural (-)-(5R, 9R)-Indolizidines 167B and 209D were successfully synthesised in 68%, 78%ee and 74%, 75%ee respectively. Again the corresponding enantiomers were assigned by measuring the optical rotation and quoted as []D values.
In summary this manuscript describes a reasonable route to the synthesis of stereo- and enantioselective synthesis of indolizidines 167B and 209D; however, it is lacking in some important information. In the introduction to this article the authors describe previous methods to forming azabicyclic ring systems containing a nitrogen atom via cation-induced inter- and intramolecular electrophilic cyclisation reaction. However there is no comparison between the method described and a previous synthesis and therefore the value of this work can not be ascertained. When describing the total synthesis of indolizidines 167B and 209D there are references made to various other methods of stereo- and enantioselective syntheses however again the authors make no comparison between their own work and the work previously carried out. There is no clear scientific reason as to why this new methodology was carried out and although the target compounds are synthesised in reasonable yields and ee, it is unclear as to whether this is an improvement on previous synthetic routes; this is a failing of the paper.