This essay will analyse the extent to which current Western understandings of Asia are informed by Orientalist assumptions. In order to address the question appropriately, it is, of course, necessary first to define the term Orientalism and therefore give a brief description of the expression and its origins. William D. Hart summarizes Orientalism as 'a Western style of domination and authority, through which the Orient is restructured'. A noticeable change in Orientalism is from where ideas have tended to generate. Initially, France and Britain were at the forefront of the movement but since World War II, America has led the way. However, perceptions are still based on Oriental assumptions. Films, television and modern media have reinforced Oriental ideas, while there are very few literary references to Orientals leading to a dehumanized perception of Orientals. Finally, the influence of American culture may have even intensified Orientalism. One could even argue that the Orient is Orientalizing itself! The essay will, therefore, come to the conclusion that popular Western understandings of Asia are still almost exclusively framed within the narrow parameters of the ideas of Orientalism.
An Orientalist was the term designed by Edward Said to describe someone with a scholarly knowledge of the Orient. The Orient was a European invention and covered an area including the Middle East and Asia. The fact that this vast geographical mass was lumped together under one broad title shows the racism inherent in the term itself. Orientalism originated in India and the Orientalists came from a conservative tradition spanning from the 1770s to the 1820s. Orientalism was used by Said to explain the Western understanding of the East. It was 'a way of coming to terms with the Orient that is based on the Orient's special place in European Western experience'. In general, according to Said, the Western scholars wrote about the Orient in negative terms. He outlines the Western scholars' perspective: 'There are Westerners, and there are Orientals. The former dominate; the latter must be dominated, which usually means having their land occupied, their internal affairs rigidly controlled'.
There was a general feeling of intellectual authority over the Orient within Western culture. A feature of European-Oriental relations was that Europe always seemed to be in a position of strength. For Said, 'Western domination of the non-Western world [was] not some arbitrary phenomenon but a conscious and purposive process governed by the will and intention of individuals as well as by institutional imperatives." The Orientals themselves were also portrayed in a negative light. They were seen as irrational, depraved, childlike, and 'different' and the European as rational, virtuous, mature, 'normal'. Embedded in the understanding of Orientalism was a definite sense of the 'Self' and the 'Other': 'For Orientalism was ultimately a political vision of reality whose structure promoted the difference between the familiar (Europe, the West, "us") and the strange (the Orient, the East, "them")." Hart argues that Orientalism is 'the quintessential Western representation of otherness, the constitutive other of the West, that without which there would be no West'. The Orient was seen as undeveloped and inferior compared to the superior, rational and developed West. To summarize, therefore, in Said's own words, 'Orientalism is the generic term that I have been employing to describe the Western approach to the Orient; Orientalism is the discipline by which the Orient was (and is) approached systematically, as a topic of learning, discovery and practice." However, this discipline was inherently racist and portrayed the Orient as backward and consequently in need of civilisation whilst also justifying the West's domination over the East.
Now that the expression Orientalism has been defined, it is thus possible to examine the extent to which Western understandings of Asia are still informed by Orientalist assumptions. One of the major changes in the West's portrayal of the East is from where the assumptions are generated. Previously, Orientalism was dominated by French and British perceptions of the East due to their sprawling global Empires. However, since World War II, America has gained in significance on the world geopolitical stage and has therefore taken the lead in developing Orientalism: 'France and Britain no longer occupy center stage in world politics; the American imperium has displaced them." A consequence of this has been a shift away from Orientals in India and China towards a greater focus on the Arabs of the Middle East. Indeed, 'Since World War II, and more noticeably after each of the Arab-Israeli wars, the Arab Muslim has become a figure in American popular culture." Said even states that the Arab has been transformed from a faintly outlined stereotype to an accepted caricature. This is extremely relevant considering the recent Danish cartoons depicting Arabs as suicide bombers.
Another difference with American Orientalism was that the Arabs were depicted as 'Semitic'. They were presented as having sharply hooked noses with evil leers on their faces. There was a transfer of anti-Semitism from the Jew onto the Arab. This was done smoothly since the figure was essentially the same. The Arab was seen as an obstacle to Israel's creation in 1948.
The change in focus of depiction, however, does not affect the fact that the perception of the Arabs is still based on Oriental assumptions: 'These contemporary Orientalist attitudes flood the press and the popular mind. Arabs, for example, are thought of as camel-riding, terroristic, hook-nosed, venal lechers whose undeserved wealth is an affront to real civilisation." This can be seen with the current issue regarding the increased oil and gas prices. 'Always there lurks the assumption that although the Western consumer belongs to a numerical minority, he is entitled to own or expend... the majority of the world resources. Why? Because he, unlike the Oriental, is a true human being." The West feels impotent in relation to the price increases that the Arab states have implemented which it feels are completely unnecessary. In fact, in this particular case, the Arab states are merely following Western ideology: capitalism. A shortage, or perceived shortage, of oil and gas has led to a greater demand, which in turn has led to higher prices. The West cannot bear the thought of Orientals making huge profits at their expense, which they see as unjustified. The idea of the greedy Arab milking the West was first born after the 1973 war where Arabs were depicted 'standing behind a gasoline pump turned up consistently.'
Generally, 'there has been a popular reinforcement of the stereotypes by which the Orient is viewed. Television, the films and all the media's resources have forced information into more and more standardized molds'. Films and television present the Arab as 'sadistic, treacherous, low. Slave trader, camel driver, moneychanger, colourful scoundrel: these are some of the traditional Arab roles in the cinema." Orientals are commonly presented as more sinister in modern times rather than just helpless as was the case in the past. In newsreels or newspapers Arabs are always shown in large numbers. There is little individuality and few personal characteristics or experiences are shown. Most of the pictures depict mass rage or misery. 'Lurking behind all of these images is the menace of jihad. Consequence: a fear that Muslims (or Arabs) will take over the world." Numerous Hollywood depictions of the East are still informed by Orientalist assumptions. The American hero is usually depicted as virtuous and wholesome, while the 'Other' is often Oriental. In the Disney film Aladdin, despite the protagonist being Egyptian, he displays many American characteristics, while Jafar, his enemy, is depicted as the stereotypical Oriental despotic figure with the aforementioned hooked nose and leering face. The internet has also given rise to many prejudices. There is a general idea that the white man is at the apex of civilisation. Orientals are seen as tremendously fanatical.
In the West's attention to the Orient there are also very few literary references to Arabs. Instead, 'facts' seem to be of far greater importance keeping the region 'emasculated, reduced to "attitudes," "trends," statistics: in short, dehumanized'. Indeed, Said argues that The Cambridge History of Islam is largely a 'chronology of battles, reigns, and deaths, rises and heydays, comings and passings, written for the most part in a ghastly monotone." Overall, there is a general popular anti-Arab and anti-Islamic prejudice in the West, which is reflected in Orientalism. 'There are good Arabs (the ones who do as they are told) and bad Arabs (who do not, and are therefore terrorists)." There has also been an almost total absence of any cultural position making it impossible either to identify with or dispassionately to discuss the Arabs or Islam. The Middle East has been 'identified with Great Power politics, oil economics, and the simple-minded dichotomy of freedom-loving, democratic Israel and evil, totalitarian, and terroristic Arabs'.
Said argues that Orientalism is set to continue because the tendencies of culture in the Middle East are guided by European and American models. 'There is a vast standardization of taste in the region, symbolized not only by transistors, blue jeans, and Coca-Cola but also by cultural images of the Orient supplied by mass media and consumed unthinkingly by the mass television audience." Overall, the modern Orient perpetuates its own Orientalizing. 'We hear much talk these days about the emergence of a new world order... [However,] in large measure, global unification seems to be propelled by the dictates of the global market or world economy, a market that, in turn, is governed by the interests of leading industrial or postindustrial nations." That is, the so-called new world order is just another form of Orientalism. The West expects the East to develop along similar lines to itself indicating that the West believes its economic development to be the supreme model, indicating claims to superiority on the part of Western modernity. Conversely, the West seems to fear rapid Eastern economic expansion, particularly the growth of China. It expects the Orient to develop along Western lines but at a rate dictated by the West. For example, within the last year there have been a number of high profile instances of Chinese companies seeking to buy American firms. However, they have been rejected despite bidding higher amounts than the American companies which ultimately bought the companies in question. This was due to opposition from American politicians who have sought to prevent Chinese companies from gaining a foothold in the American market. America seems, therefore, to have no qualms with meddling in other countries' international economies but when the situation is reversed, it is another matter entirely.
Therefore, in conclusion, Western understandings of Asia continue to be dominated by Orientalist assumptions. Despite a change in focus on the Orientals themselves, due to American Orientalism replacing British and French forms of the discourse, the ideas are still underpinned by Orientalist assumptions. Television, films and modern media have all helped to reinforce Orientalism: the Orientals are depicted as dehumanized since they are presented in large numbers often in scenes of despair and misery. The influence of American culture has even meant that to a certain degree the Orient is Orientalizing itself. In summary, 'despite its failures, its lamentable jargon, its scarcely concealed racism, its paper-thin intellectual apparatus, Orientalism flourishes today'. Even though Said wrote this almost 30 years ago, this sentence, and much of 'Orientalism' in general, is still definitely applicable today.