This article describes an investigation into the self-assembly of R- and S-dendron rodcoils to form helical ribbon like mirror image nanostructures. From searches using SciFinder and ISI Web of Knowledge no previous published work was found in this area. The authors had previously shown coil segments in dendron rodcoil molecules imparting solubility to high aspect ratio, self-assembling nanostructures but only for achiral and racemic coil segments as quote in the text. Therefore this manuscript can be considered an original piece of work.
The article is concise and easy to follow even for those with minimal knowledge in this area, the scientific content and reasoning appears to be sound. In the introduction there is a paragraph introducing the main concepts and it is well presented following the guidelines set out by JACS for submission. The article is clearly set out and conforms to the template required for communications to be published in JACS.
The diagrams used are relevant to illustrate points which appear in the text, they are clearly labelled and are referenced within the article. The article does not contain any experimental detail or supporting data however, as referenced at the end of the document, full experimental data is included in the supporting information and this is in enough detail to be able to recreate this work if necessary.
This communication is generally well written however there are a few issues with inconsistencies in the format of certain parts and these few minor changes may need to be considered before publication. In the supporting information section its states that "each DRC was obtained in 15 steps total, 7 of which were described". To be able to reproduce this work all 15 steps should have been described in total so that there would be enough information. An abbreviation is used, Atomic Force Microscopy - AFM with out clarifying its meaning in the communication at any point however all other abbreviations used have been clarified when they are first mentioned in the manuscript. In the supporting information there are inconsistencies in how to write weight percent, in full (weight percent) or abbreviated (wt %).
This manuscript could be suitable for a broad audience as is contains introductory information to the area rather than assuming the reader is knowledgeable. Most of the specialised terms are defined which again makes it suitable for a wider audience however, it seems like a more specific area rather than of general interested and may be better suited to a more specialised journal.
Mirror Image Nanostructure, Benjamin W. Messmore, Preeto A, Sukerkar, and Samunel I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 2005, 127, 7992-7993
This article describes the formation of left and right handed helical ribbon like nanostructures from R- and S-dendron rodcoil (DRC) molecules. Previously the authors had developed these dendron rodcoil molecules and found that they self assemble to form ribbonlike nanostructures in organic solvents. The self assembly of this type is driven by the hydrogen bonding interactions of the dendritic sections and the  -  stacking interactions of the rodlike sections. It was also shown that the coil sections in these molecules related to the solubility to these self assembling nanostructures however this had only been investigated for achiral and racemic molecules.
The synthesis of R-, S- and racemic DRC molecules is describe briefly as full detail is found in the Supporting Information, the synthesis is similar to that previously described by the authors. An indication of the self assembly of these molecules was by viewed by the increase in solution viscosity which then leads to gelation, this is due to the formation of the ribbonlike nanostructures and the interconnected network that forms. It was found that the gelation of these DRC molecules was solvent dependent, gelation occurred in acetonirile but not in tetrahydrofuran (THF). In deuterated actenitrile aliphatic peaks were broadened whereas aromatic peaks were unresolved compared with THF where all peaks were well resolved. As previously described this is consistent with the ribbonlike formation of the DRC nanostructures.
The handedness of the self assembled nanostructures was examined by Circular Dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. Gels were preformed and diffused in acetonitrile. Both R- and S-DRC molecules showed a change in the circular dichroism in the region of an absorption band, known as the Cotton effect, in the biphenyl group absorbance. This is due to exicton of the chromophore, showing the importance of the chiral coil sections on the handedness of the  -  stacking rod sections. As expected there is no exciton coupling when similar samples were prepared in THF therefore linking the importance of the chiral coil sections formed in the self assembly to the observed handedness. It was also shown that racemic DRC does not possess a CD spectra even though it has the ability to form a gel.
The nanostructures of R- and S-DRC were observed by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and clearly show that they are mirror images of each other forming left and right handed helices repsectively. The AFM of racemic DRC shows similar features with left and right handed helical ribbonlike structures where no flat ribbons occur. It was concluded that the observations described from the CD spectra and AFM images of racemic DRC could indicate that R- and S-DRC self sort, through homochiral recognition during self assembly, into the observed R and S nanostructures.