The experience of the mathematical and the dynamic sublimes are both occasioned by the revelation of the inferiority of the imagination to that of reason. Kant believes that in considering how our faculties deal with instances of the massively extended and the massively powerful we can see how reason can exceed the capabilities of imagination; the ideas of reason and the force of our moral freedom exceed what can be presented in nature. This excessive capability of reason is linked to our moral nature. In the case of the mathematically sublime the rule that reason subjects our thinking to is analogous to the moral law and hence strengthens the prioritising of the common source of both - reason. In the case of the dynamic sublime, the link to morality is direct. It is our free moral choice which the experience of the massively powerful draws our attention to.
In section 25 Kant considers how we measure extension. He distinguishes between the mathematical and the aesthetic methods. The question is how we can gain a foundation for our measurements. How do we get an 'absolute' concept of magnitude - how do I get a concept of magnitude that isn't related to other measures in an infinite regress? The problem arises if we try to define the length of a centimetre. We can do so by relating it to other measures: for example, it is one hundredth of a metre, or ten times the length of a millimetre. But then, of course, the question arises as to the definition of this further measure, and any used to answer that question. Kant's solution is to resort to the aesthetic method: we measure an object in comparison to some other constituent of experience. I measure the pyramids in terms of their building blocks, for example, or I measure my sister in comparison to my brother. We can thereby come to some concrete end to our search for definitions which allows us to use mathematical measures practically. If we were not able to relate the length 1cm to some such experience as 'the length of a house fly' we would not be able to use the measure in any but pure mathematical contexts. What is this intended to show?
Kant's concern is with what can be experienced sensibly. By considering the aesthetic method we can see the limits of the measurement we can carry out in sensible experience.
The aesthetic measurement of magnitude proceeds on two stages Kant calls 'apprehension' and 'comprehension'. The former amounts to the synthesising of parts. In the case of measuring my brother I need to synthesise the part of my brother equal to the height of my sister and the remainder. In the case of measuring a mansion I may have to synthesis twelve parts of the size of the car sitting in front of it. 'Comprehension' refers to that act of the mind that grasps the totality. It is important to recognize that these are not temporally distinct moments. Comprehension refers to the holding together of all the synthesised parts, apprehension to the act of synthesising. To comprehend the magnitude I need to be able to hold in synthesis all the parts of the object. A mountain disappearing into the mists above me therefore does not meet this requirement, because all the parts are not available to me to synthesise. The point at which I can no longer hold together the synthesised representations - the point when I begin to lose representations as I apprehend new ones - shows the limit of imagination in thinking magnitude.
It is as well to emphasise that Kant's concern here is with aesthetic measurements of magnitude. For mathematical measurements, "understanding is as well served and as satisfied whether imagination selects for the unit a magnitude which can be taken in at a glance, e.g. a foot, or a perch, or else a German mile, or even the earth's diameter." In aesthetic measurements of magnitude we select a measurement - a person, a building block - and size up what we are presented with in experience. But there is a limit to what can be presented this way. If we attempt to represent the magnitude of a vast object - an object that exceeds my ability to comprehend all its representations - we are led to try to find a measure for it. But this we can not do, for no matter how large the measure it cannot allow us to grasp the magnitude of the object. For Kant, this is where reason supplies the idea of the infinite: my imagination is inadequate to cognising a vast object, and as a result the idea of infinity is supplied by the faculty of reason.
Kant's claim may seem to be that the measure we are driven to attempt to use is infinite because the object itself is infinite. This comes up against the simple objection that we are not presented with infinite objects in experience. The infinity of an object is what I add to it's representation in thought. The fact that the night sky is fathomless to my perception does not mean my perception is of it as infinite: I may not be able to grasp its depths in my perception but that is merely to say that it exceeds my perceptive capacities. However, infinity for Kant is only properly predicated of the state of our faculties. Just as beauty is the pleasurable sensation of the free play of the faculties, infinity is the idea evoked by the immensely large in nature. In other words, the failure of the imagination to grasp an object of immense magnitude does not rely on the infinity of that object, merely that it exceeds the ability of our imagination. "True sublimity must be sought only in the mind of the one who judges, not in the object in nature." If we read Kant this way we can agree that infinity is added by thought to an immensely large object. "That is sublime which even to be able to think of demonstrates a faculty of the mind that surpasses every measure of the senses." In the light of this it is no objection to Kant that he claims that what is sublime is absolutely great. To say that something is great is to say that it is so, "grounded in a subjective purposiveness of the representation in relation to the power of judgement." In other words, the concept of magnitude implies a relation of the object to the power of judgement of the subject. In the case of aesthetic judgements the measure can be selected by the subject - always implying the relation of the object to the subject as determinative of what can be said of its magnitude (whether it is great or small etc.) up to a certain magnitude. Beyond that magnitude the subject supplies infinity automatically as the sublime. The object is absolutely great means 'I can not grasp an aesthetic measure for this object, it exceeds the capacity of imagination for presenting the world to me'. In fact, from this formulation we can see that the infinite can not be in the world. If that was so our idea of the infinite would be a concept to fit a synthesis of representations of the imagination. It would thus be a product of the understanding, not reason.
The negative moment of the mathematical sublime occurs when the imagination is revealed as inadequate to grasping the magnitude of vast objects. The positive moment is the supplying of the idea of infinity by reason. Thus reason shows itself to exceed the ability of imagination for estimating magnitudes. Through reason we can think more than the world can ever present us with. I shall postpone further critical discussion to look at the dynamic sublime.
The dynamic sublime concerns the judgement of nature as having no dominion over us despite the immensity of its power. When confronted with examples of nature's might - storms perhaps - I am confronted with my physical inability to defend myself (the negative moment). However, Kant believes that this leads me to reflect on the inadequacy of the power of nature to damage my moral free choice (the positive moment) which results in a feeling of pleasure. Despite my physical impotence in the face of nature, my moral nature is not subject to its might. In such cases we consider nature to be dynamically sublime.
Budd finds a problem with how the imagination enters into the dynamic sublime. Is Kant saying that we attempt to think a measure of the power of nature as in the mathematically sublime? However, I think Budd is just confusing our customary notion of the imagination with Kant's. The imagination enters just in presenting us with representations of the object of nature. There is no need to talk of us 'imagining' a measure or 'imagining' ourselves being at the mercy of the storm - this fear is indeed there, but this is not the central Kantian meaning of the imagination. The imagination is that faculty which brings sensibility to concepts - or at least attempts to. The imagination presents us with the powerful object of nature. However, our adherence to the moral law within us through the rational faculty is shown to be more powerful by reflection. There is no need for more of a role for imagination than that: we are made aware of the superior power of the rational faculty to anything that could be presented to us through imagination. This realisation does not come about by the comparison of the might of reason with the most might we can imagine nature presenting us with; rather, we realise that as of a different order, our rational free will is untouchable by nature.
Crowther's similar objection can be countered in the same way. He too suggests the crucial role of the imagination lies in the production of the thought of the unreal presence of the awesome power. After discarding this possibility he too claims that subsequently, "there is nothing ... to stretch imagination to its limits." The problem seems to be in getting the notion of infinity into the story and thereby explaining the notion of the limits of the imagination. This is what motivates Crowther and Budd to claim that Kant may be claiming that I attempt to form a measure of the power of nature - and therefore end up on the rocks of infinity as in the mathematical sublime. There is no need for the infinite to enter into the discussion and no need for us to suppose the production of a measure on analogy with the mathematical sublime. The dynamical sublime for Kant is, "Nature considered in aesthetic judgement as a power that has no dominion over us." When Kant says, "Nature is thus sublime in those of its appearances the intuition of which brings with them the idea of its infinity," the context makes clear that he is only considering the mathematically sublime (i.e. there is no missing 'only' as the second word of the sentence). Consider the immediately subsequent sentence: "the latter can not happen except through the inadequacy of even the greatest effort of our imagination in the estimation of the magnitude of an object." 'Magnitude' is a matter for the mathematical sublime. The limits of the imagination in the dynamic sublime are shown by the reflection that no matter how great the power of nature the rational, free part of our nature is greater. Nothing more powerful could be represented in imagination. There is no question of the power of nature and the power of free will being compared on the scale of a calculus; they are not comparable. That is why the superiority of the power of free will does not require any idea of an infinite power or any intermediary idea of a greatest possible might of nature.
Budd provides another objection to the mathematical sublime: given that I am trying to estimate aesthetically an immense object, why does this lead me to produce the idea of infinity? However, we can respond to this objection by asking 'rather than the idea of what'? The point is that there is no representation possible of objects which exceed a certain magnitude. Hence there is nothing for the subject to resort to when the limits of the imagination are exceeded than the idea of the infinite. It makes no sense to talk of the alternative of the subject forming the idea of a given object's infinity rather than infinity itself which Budd does. Budd takes Kant to be saying that we have the ability to, "comprehend the infinite in the world of sense completely under a concept." This would make a complete nonsense of Kant's ascription of the idea of infinity to the faculty of reason: he would then be holding it to be a concept of the understanding. Again it seems the mistake is to not take Kant seriously when he says that infinity can only be predicated of the subject. On the previous page to that page that Budd cites Kant says, "even being able to think of it as a whole [infinity] indicates a faculty of mind which surpasses every standard of sense." Consequently the idea of the infinite is produced in the mind of the subject. There is no question of an infinite x being thought instead as there can be no content to the idea. If there could, there would be a synthesis of representations represented as infinite. The whole point of Kant's argument is to show this is impossible. As we said before (p.2) there is no question of an object being represented as infinite: the idea of infinity is what the subject throws up when the imagination fails to comprehend the totality of an object.
I have attempted to outline and briefly defend the Kantian sublime in the preceding; now I wish to show the significance of the sublime's privileging of reason.
In the case of the mathematical sublime we saw that reason could surpass the imagination's capacity for representing magnitude. In the case of the dynamic sublime we saw that our free will was shown to be more powerful than anything that could be presented to us by the imagination. How does this relate to morality?
In the case of the dynamic sublime things are fairly straightforward. We are led to recognise the fact that our free will cannot be impinged upon by the sensible world. This means that the rational part of our nature is more powerful than the sensible. The rational part of our nature is the source of our moral nature for Kant. Consequently the source of our moral nature is superior in power to our sensible nature. In the case of the mathematical sublime reason is shown to be able to think further than the imagination when it comes to estimating magnitude. Again, the implication is that the source of morality is superior.
Whether the argument in the dynamic sublime really shows the superiority of reason or its independence is an interesting question. There is not really a sense in which the power of free will can be compared to the power of nature: the one is physical power the other is rational will and commitment. The result is really that no magnitude of physical power in nature can alter the fact that our free will reveals, "a self-preservation of quite another kind than that which can be threatened and endangered by nature outside us." This is not to say that one 'self-preservation' should be valued over the other. This question can also be raised in the case of the mathematically sublime. Reason is capable of thinking infinity, which can not be presented to us in experience. In what sense is this superior? What is the source of the valuation here? Why is it a boon to be able to think an idea which can not be presented in experience?
We can consider here as analogous issues the antinomies of the first critique, where the ideas of reason lead us into error. As in the case of those antinomies however, the key to the arguments for the valuation Kant gives to the experience of the sublime is to be found in his system of transcendental idealism. Independently he will argue that the distinction between noumenon and phenomenon when thought through shows the reasonableness of supposing freedom to be sourced from outside of empirical causality. Independently Kant will argue for morality as sourced from reason. The arguments of the analytic of the sublime can therefore only fully be completed and the conclusion of the superiority of reason justified in the light of further work by Kant outside the analytic.
However, I think that Kant is committed to claiming more. He believes that the experience of the sublime is universal and necessary to all those subjects who have been educated to recognise their moral natures. Hence Kant wishes to claim that the feeling itself reveals reason's superiority: just as the pleasure felt in the experience of the beautiful is necessarily communicable and hence indicative of a universally shared propensity of the faculties, so must the pleasure felt in the sublime be. The difference is of course that only those with a sufficient moral education will experience the awesome extent or power of nature as sublime and as consequently showing the superiority of their rational natures. The nature and quality of the feeling itself - the feeling of the superiority of our rational natures - is its own deduction. Hence one who does not recognise this feeling or does not ascribe it the significance Kant does must fall back on one of two options: either accept the above claim that the justification of the claim of the superiority of reason lies outside the analytic; or conclude their moral education was poor.