Dualism is traditionally taken to refer to the philosophical position that mind and body are two distinct ontological categories. There is then commonly seen to be difficulties in relating the two: what mechanism could connect two such radically different entities? How could it bridge the gap if it was of the nature of one of the entities? If there was something of graded or 'in-between' ontological status are we then proposing a tripartite ontology, or an even more complex one? The resolution of this duality into a monism has been seen as highly desirable in the twentieth century and beyond. On the face of it, as a phenomenological ontologist Sartre is not able to answer this question: his concern is with the being of beings as they appear, where that question is seen as distinct from the question of what beings are in themselves. However, dualism is largely motivated by the conflicting nature of our experience of the world. On the one hand, I am presented in immediate experience with a world that seems entirely subjective - related to me as the centre and ground of it. On the other hand, I experience the world as that which exceeds my experience and control. We can illustrate this by considering patients shown televisual images of their brains during surgery. The act of sight and the subject itself are not perceptible in such pictures. The brain-as-object possesses no perceptible subjectivity. Yet subjectivity is somehow crucially related to the brain-as-object, as anyone who has taken a blow to the head can attest. Dualism is then a fundamental concern for the phenomenological ontologist. How are we to understand the relation of our subjectivity to our physical, objectively observable nature? We shall see how Sartre answers this question before asking to what extent his phenomenological concerns qualify his results regarding the mind/body issue.
Typically the distinction is drawn between a physical body composed of nerves, cells and organs and a mind composed of emotions, thoughts and desires. The body is understood as a part of the material realm like any other - barring the mysterious emergence of a subjectivity from it. Knowledge of the body and knowledge of the mind are each sui generis: in the case of the mind an immediate intuition is granted us which is not so of the objective world. Knowledge of the objective world is a matter of analysis and inference, of the discovery of regularities that persist despite the changing attention or mode of the subjectivity of each one of us. Sartre claims that drawing this division at the start of the questioning lames the inquiry. If I begin by contrasting my subjectivity to my body considered as a physical object among others I have not grasped my body for myself, only my body as it is for others. Sartre is not claiming it is false or illegitimate to grasp my body in such a way, but that such a way of grasping it does not exhaust its significance. Indeed, the original meaning of my body - what my body must be in order to be considered the body of a consciousness at all - is to be found in the relation of the world to consciousness. We shall expand on this distinction.
The body for others is the body as an object, as equally accessible to me or to another person. When I look at my eyes in a mirror I see what is accessible to any other sighted person. What cannot be seen in the mirror is the act of seeing. Sartre insists on the radical distinction between seeing, "revealing an aspect of the world," and being seen, between touch and being touched.
We have here, of course, an assertion of the irreducibility of the categories of subject and object. As Schopenhauer before him and Wittgenstein contemporaneously, Sartre insists that the subject does not enter into the world as an object among others. Furthermore, there can be no objects without a subject; that is to say that objects are revealed as such to a consciousness. However, this consciousness is not to be grasped as something over and above its relation to objects. For Sartre, subjectivity is a matter of being in relation to the world: "The for-itself is a relation to the world." Taken together with the statement that the for-itself is wholly body and wholly consciousness we can synopsise Sartre's conception of the body-for-itself: the body-for-itself is a relation to the world.
The statement that the for-itself is wholly body and wholly consciousness implies that this consciousness is nothing over and above the for-itself, consciousness that chooses its relation to the world. But there seems to be another demand on this consciousness due to Sartre's ascription of bodily nature to it. My body often appears to me as an obstacle for my intentions and actions. I want to climb a certain cliff but my arms are not strong enough to reach the top. I want to write but hunger is distracting me. I want to stop smoking but I feel a persistent craving. Any understanding of the body must take account of this unfreedom of ours in relation to it. Sartre describes this unfreedom as our 'facticity' - being beings situated in a particular location and space in time which restricts and determines our possibilities. Yet it seems that he cannot extend his notion of facticity - unfreedom - to cover the aforementioned cases of bodily obstruction. The for-itself is defined as self-choosing and transparent to itself. Although I can make myself believe my freedom is restricted by choosing myself as a certain type of person who must perform certain actions, that is always a choice I remain aware of in bad faith and is always only an apparent restriction. In reality, I have the freedom to drop my commitment to being a certain type of person at any time. Of course, our everyday use of the word freedom typically refers to something we would understand as existing within a 'factical' situation. I am free to get out of the chair if there are no physical or legal impediments. Sartre would merely wish to claim that in the presence of such external impediments I am free to choose an attitude to them. However, it appears that Sartre cannot give an account of the facticity of my body which is in accord with his theory of our radical freedom. For Sartre claims that the for-itself is the body. My body is not an instrument of my free choice, it is it itself. This is to say that there is no ontological gap between decision and acting along the lines of mental and physical. A decision is not taken in the mental realm that then causes a physical change in my body and a resulting action. Mind and body are united in this theory. But to say that the for-itself is free self-choosing and the for-itself is the body implies that the body is self-choosing. The radical freedom of the for-itself must be applied to the body as relation to the world. The body must be radically free to choose its relation to the world. But as we have seen, there are occasions in which my body is an impediment to my choices in ways that cannot be explained away as bad faith. My inability to hold on to the cliff is not a matter of choice, not a matter of my own constitution, it is determined by the strength of my muscles relative to my body weight, by a physical fact which restricts the scope of my freedom. Sartre's conception of the body thereby seems to overlook one of the critical aspects of the former's nature. For Sartre, my body as the source of my desire to smoke must in fact be my body as it is for others. This ignores the sense of ownership that we have over such desires. For Sartre my desire to smoke is as much my body - or as much not my body - as the views of my body taken by others. In fact, my body for others is taken by Sartre to have the same ontological status as other people's bodies for me. My body for others is an instrument among instruments as are others bodies for me.
There is a more fundamental problem highlighted by this identification of the for-itself with the body. One of the problems of dualism is how to account for the connection between the two substances. Sartre's theses attempt to unite the two substances by never separating them at the source of a chain of actions: the decision to act is not a mental event linked to a physical consequence. However, he appears to be subject to a criticism along analogous lines. If the body is taken as purely for-itself, the question then arises how it relates to the in-itself. We appear to be left with a dualism of for-itself and in-itself in which the former is possessed by a consciousness and the latter by an external world. The critical difference is that the concept of consciousness has been augmented by the absorption of the concept of body, taken as directionality. The concept of body for Sartre must be that of consciousness' directionality; no further substance can be given to it without attributing to it the nature of an object. Then the traditional distinction between a conscious subject whose body is object (in-itself in Sartre's analogous terminology) for it as another part of the material realm would be reasserted. But then on Sartre's conception the in-itself of the body - its unresponsiveness to us, its exceeding of our control as the ground of our concrete possibilities - remains adrift from its consciousness just as Cartesian dualism leaves the mental realm adrift from its foundation in the physical. In other words, by restricting the concept of the body to consciousness' directionality, Sartre has made a radical distinction between my body as an object for me (my body as it is for others) and my body as my directionality, which leaves the two as distinct as the traditional two substances. And as we have seen, this reconstituted notion of body has alienated consciousness from its own bodily conditions. My real, physical body remains the alienated source of obstacles to a radically free consciousness.
In defence of Sartre, one might attempt to cast doubt on whether he is really offering an answer to the traditional philosophical questions surrounding dualism. Sartre's concern is with phenomenological ontology, the study of the being of beings as they appear. However, if we restrict our expectations so that we only wish for an elucidation of the relation of mind and body insofar as it is phenomenologically significant Sartre's theory fails. It is precisely the character of the body as both impediment and instrument that needs elucidating by such a phenomenological theory. Sartre alienates the two categories in a way that is profoundly out of sync with the phenomenology. I do not experience my desire to smoke as something exclusively alienated from myself, nor as something that I have always chosen. The desire is something I can identify with or not. There is some truth to the idea that our desires can appear as encumbrances simply as desires - witness the strong tradition in religious mysticism of making ones desires objectified and refusing to accept them as ones own. However, this appears to be something that Sartre wishes to say is inauthentic. His theory is intended to avoid this alienation of the subject from the body. But as the body he unites with consciousness is reduced to position he cannot capture all the phenomena indicated by the concept body (phenomenologically speaking). Thus he cannot account for the ambiguity of the desire to smoke and the phenomenology of our ambiguous relations to our bodies.
In summation: Sartre argues that the body is not an instrument for a consciousness. He also wishes to claim that the body and consciousness are unified and that bodily existence is essential to consciousness to allow it to act in the world: for Sartre, a consciousness that cannot act is not a consciousness. However, the alienation from my body as object which I can achieve when considering my body as impediment is always directed at the same physical object as the apprehension of my body as a means to act. If my hand is crushed by a rock I am aware that the crushing of that physical object has limited my range of projects. This necessitates the possibility of me taking the possibilities of my action as intrinsically related to a certain physical object. Otherwise I would not be able to choose my actions so as to avoid the limiting of my possibilities in such a brute way. Thus the question still remains how we are to relate this free consciousness to a physical object. Phenomenologically, Sartre must claim that when I am acting with my body and when my body is acted on constitute two fundamentally different types of phenomena. But then when I consciously and deliberately perform some difficult action - such as sewing on a button - which requires me to become unusually aware of my bodily movements Sartre cannot account for the phenomenology of attempting to move my hand in intricate patterns. My hand resists my choice, but it is also my relation to the sewing materials. It displays the phenomenology of a trowel, a scalpel and other instruments.
We have said that Sartre seems to fall into an ontological distinction with the same problems as that of the traditional distinction and that even if we take his theory as merely phenomenological, problems analogous to those of the traditional distinction arise. It remains to consider what may be the cause of the shortcomings in Sartre's account which I shall do through two concepts: 'instrument' and 'desire'.
An instrument is an object used by an agent to perform an action. A desire is an attitude to an object by a subject. The problems come when one takes this grammatical form to be ontologically or phenomenologically illuminating. Sartre's philosophy takes the subject to be the unit of significance, and desires to be ways of the discrete subject relating to discrete objects, among which are instruments. Sartre insists that the body is not an instrument in order to remove it from the class of objects. He takes desires as ways of relating to objects that are in principle capable of being removed from the subject. They are extrinsic properties of the substance 'subject'. Intrinsic properties of the subject for Sartre are positionality, freedom and self-transparency (awareness of self and its constitution). We can see that Sartre has only augmented the traditional characteristics of consciousness by adding positionality; hence he is open to the traditional objections, as we have seen. How could we better this? Sartre insists upon the distinction between consciousness and object. Desires and instruments are all capable of becoming objects for consciousness hence must be ontologically distinct from consciousness. This is what we must question. To see consciousness as unified with the object world it is necessary to question the principle of the radical distinction between subject and object. The force of this distinction comes from the insistence that phenomenologically there is a clear distinction between the perceiver and the object perceived or the agent and the thing acted upon (or with). But this is the result of reflection; this is not a fact we are presented with in experience. By giving consciousness a constitution over and above its relation to objects - a self-relation - Sartre has performed the mischievous distinction. Sartre's concept of freedom really amounts to a relation of consciousness to its forming relations with the world. Although he would of course agree that this relation is not chronologically prior (the infant does not choose to enter a world - indeed this is incoherent on his account as the world is the ground of choice) he does insist that this relation to a relation is to be taken as critically important. To question this would be to ask whether this phenomenon of becoming aware of oneself as the ground of one's projects, as radically distinct from other objects as the source of meaning in the world, as in the experience of anxiety, is to be taken on face value. To what extent are we made aware of our desires as contingent and to what extent are we captured by another desire (mode of relation)? For all his desire to unify consciousness and body, Sartre still holds that in this relation of consciousness to itself there is some power over and above the powers in the world which enters into relation with the object world. An alternative would show how these relations, rather than being 'chosen', are what are necessary to our existence in the world, which themselves exceed our freedom, and how the relation to one's own actions is to be taken as another relation in the world of the same ontological order of such relations. Indeed, if we examine Sartre's theory of freedom it differs from our ordinary understanding of the word. Freedom is really the name of the relation to itself of subjectivity that allows the ascription of responsibility. For it is not the result of deliberation, being an act that is not consciously undertaken in most cases. To say we 'choose' our projects is not, for Sartre, to say that we consciously deliberate much of the time.
The foregoing is only a brief outline of the issues to be approached to attempt to rectify the shortcomings in Sartre's account. The following question needs to be asked: is this 'act' from without the deliberations of reason capable of being understood as the effect of the body and of desire? If so, Sartre could yet provide us with the materials to think beyond the traditional dualism that he can only repeat, despite his intentions.