Etymologically, autonomy can be traced back to the Greek 'autos' and 'nomos', 'self' and 'law'. The autonomous give the law to themselves, determine the principles by which they live. The question of autonomy is linked with that of freedom. One is autonomous, one may believe, if one's actions are determined by one's self rather than causes external to one's self. One may also wish to claim one is free on the same grounds. Clearly, one's conception of autonomy must rely upon one's conception of the self as well as on one's understanding of causality. The marked differences between Kant's and Nietzsche's understanding of the self and of causality are at the root of both philosopher's conceptions of autonomy and their different conclusions about freedom.
Kant's treatment of human freedom takes its root in his transcendental idealism. The latter holds that the world of experience is not a guide to the constitution of the world as it would be absent a subject. Kant's critical philosophy is designed to show the conditions of the possibility of our experience, 'to lime the limits of our world' in Quine's phrase, where those limits do not describe what exists but what exists in so far as it appears to us.
As reconstructed by Henry Allison, Kant's arguments show that human freedom is an idea with a regulative function. Kant shows (a) the feasibility, granted transcendental idealism, of there being two causal descriptions of the one event, one empirical description - in accordance with the principles of causality as they form a world for us - and one transcendental description - in which the event is seen as grounded in the world outside the conditions of the possibility of experience; and (b) that if we are to understand ourselves as rational agents we must think of ourselves as free - we must take the second of the two descriptions to be tenable. Although this reading is not universally accepted amongst commentators, I shall take it as the basis of my comparison on the grounds that it shows intriguing relations to Nietzsche's conception of autonomy, most specifically regarding the question of providing principles for one's own actions. As a regulative idea, our freedom conditions our actions: we act in such a way that takes it to be true, even though it is undecidable whether it is.
Kant affirms the validity of the principle of causality within experience. Our experience necessarily displays to us causal relations between representations. If the human agent is governed by the same category such a conception would typically be said to allow for no freedom. If a human being's actions are determined by causal connections between them and other states of the physical universe then, one might say, they cannot be free. The traditional conception of freedom, in contrast, would then hold that reason allows the human being to deliberate freely about his actions and to choose without determining compulsion. Here reason is seen as situated outside the causal network. A decision that is rational is not determined by other states of the causally determined world. Kant does not follow this picture in describing his idea of freedom, instead distinguishing between our empirical and intelligible characters which we shall now examine. However, Nietzsche feels able to level the same criticisms (and some new ones) against Kant that he does at the traditional picture.
For Kant, one's empirical character is defined by the types of actions one does. From a given individual's actions we can infer to a number of principles or maxims they live by. In other words, one's actions are explicable by one's psychological states linked by rational inferences. Such a picture is strongly reminiscent of the 'folk psychology' theories of recent decades. Such theories hold that one can explain actions by beliefs, desires and other such states linked by reasoning to actions. Such principles apply on these theories: 'if I believe that a will produce F then I will do a unless a' will produce F and also G, which I also take to be desirable'. What is distinctive about Kant's theory is the character of the 'oughts' that are taken to play such an important role. A 'folk psychologist' might gloss all 'oughts' as desires - a procedure Nietzsche would be inclined to as we shall later see - whereas for Kant it is the specific nature of the oughts that allows for the efficacy of the intelligible character. For Kant a desire is not sufficient to produce a reason for acting. A spontaneous adoption of a rule or principle of action is needed. The reasoning is as follows: Kant holds that to think of ourselves as rational requires that we accept the spontaneity of thought that is necessitated for our taking a certain reason as a reason for an action. In other words, the choice of a certain reason requires a spontaneous act of thought. However, one can only choose a reason as a reason if one holds to an ought. I desire food, but I will only have a reason for acting if I also hold that I ought to eat (perhaps in order to survive). If I decide I am too fat, I may hold that I ought not to eat.
We can talk of our empirical character in terms of causality. The idea of intelligible character is that of a different type of 'causality', which can be thought but not experienced. That 'causality' is required to think of us as rational, as grasping and incorporating principles. This theory is dependent upon transcendental idealism to the extent that it requires the space behind the phenomenal world that the doctrine describes to ground the possibility of the independence of our actions from the empirical world of causality.
According to Nietzsche, both free will and causal determinism are models for thinking about autonomy that are to be rejected. We need to replace such a classification with one based on the strength of wills: "In real life it is only a matter of strong and weak wills." What does Nietzsche mean by this claim?
Nietzsche derives the models for free will and determinism psychologically. The deterministic world-view takes the regularities we are presented with in experience too seriously. Causality is a useful fiction; thinking of the world as casually determined phenomena presents us with a world we can more easily manipulate and communicate about. "Cause and effect: such a duality probably never exists; in truth we are confronted with a continuum out of which we isolate a couple of pieces." One can understand this claim through considerations also important to Wittgenstein: if the world did not present regularities to our senses language would not get off the ground, and thus nor would human culture in any recognisable sense. Nietzsche adds to this transcendental claim a genealogical account of how the senses developed in order to present these regularities. The senses grasp what is regular about nature to facilitate the development of the organism, biologically, politically and culturally.
The notion of free will is derived twofold. Firstly there is the pragmatic-psychological determination, then the political-psychological. The latter (the political) takes its root in the desire of the priestly cast to gain power over the weak by convincing them of their responsibility for their actions and thus their desert for punishment. The concept of free will is, "the most infamous of all the arts for making mankind 'accountable' in his [the priest's] sense of the world, that is to say for making mankind dependent on him." The will to think free will is thus on the part of the priestly type indicative of a strong will, a will to dominate; on the part of the slavish type it is indicative of a weak will, a will to be dominated.
The notion of free will can only gain its hold in an animal which has already committed an earlier error and developed the idea of a soul distinct from its actions. This pragmatic derivation arises when we mistakenly interpret inner facts. We mistake the feeling of willing for the cause, we mistakenly believe that the causes of an act of willing are to be found in consciousness, and we assume that a thought is caused at all. The notion of the soul distinct from its actions comes from the impression of power that the act of willing in part consists in. The will is, "above all an emotion, and in fact the emotion of command. What is called freedom of the will is essentially the emotion of superiority felt towards the one who must obey." From this emotion we derive the idea of an effective force compelling an object distinct from it. This notion of distinct objects compelling one another is then projected outwards onto the world: "The thing itself, to say it again, the concept 'thing' is merely a reflection of the belief in the ego as cause." The mystification is complete when we take the causes of that causally effective state to be motives available in consciousness before the act and we thus construct stories of deliberation as rationalisations of our actions.
Nietzsche proposes we think of wills as relatively strong or weak as a replacement to talk of free and unfree wills. I shall consider two questions before making the comparison with Kant. (1) What is the status of this claim - is it ontological or phenomenological? (2) How is a will determined as either strong or weak?
(1) This question cuts to the heart of a number of the most important questions in Nietzsche interpretation, in particular questions about his method and about the threat of relativism in his perspectivism. For our purpose the question is how Nietzsche's understanding of the notion of truth, and of Kant's understanding of truth, qualifies his statements about the 'will'. Nietzsche holds that Kant's distinction between the apparent world and the world of the in-itself is a prejudice born of a long-standing tendency towards the devaluation of the world of our senses in the name of an unearthly ideal world. For Nietzsche, the Kantian distinction between the world as it appears and the world as it really is must be done away with. The world as it is presented to me is indeed presented to me under certain conditions dictated by the constitution of the self - as Kant held - but Nietzsche rejects the sense of a reality that doesn't share in such conditions. All truth is perspectival and therefore relative to a subject. The notion of a truth about the world inaccessible to us has a sense for Nietzsche, but only as the reality determined by the conditions of experience of another type of subject - including a type of subject we might develop into, and thus similarly qualified as truth from a certain perspective.
The question then is how to take Nietzsche's claim about wills dividing into the strong and the weak. Nietzsche's perspectivism qualifies Nietzsche's statements. From the perspective of the scientist/psychologist (Nietzsche, and those who follow his method) who investigates such matters, the phenomenology leads us down the route we described earlier - the feeling of power is seen to be the determining feature of an act of willing. The truths he is presenting are not to be taken as the final word on the subject or as fully characterising the nature of what we call willing, they are rather the result of following the scientific method thoroughly. Further, Nietzsche justifies the distinction between strong and weak wills in terms of its effects. Nietzsche's theory, by rejecting the idea that one's actions are not one's responsibility - by rejecting determinism - and by rejecting the moral nature of one's responsibility, increases the feeling of power in those wills that can accept it. Incorporating the idea that one's strength of will is tested when one acts strengthens strong wills. Perspectivism tells us that we have no need to take this perspective as anything other than a potential perspective for the human following the intellectual conscience; as this perspective will strengthen the strong, it is justified from a perspective other than that of truth.
(2) We saw earlier that Nietzsche analysed willing as the emotion of command. A certain force in the individual compels recalcitrant forces into a certain action. A certain force dominates and determines the following state of the organism. The distinction between strong and weak wills is not drawn only at the level of individuals. The subject is a nexus of forces, for Nietzsche. This brings to light the extent to which being a strong-willed person is an achievement of the few. "Only very few people can be independent [i.e. act according to their decision]: it is a prerogative of the strong." It is also something that can be gained. Freedom is, "something one has and does not have, something one wants, something one conquers." To conclude we will expand these notions through attempting to understand the Nietzschean self and bringing it into comparison with the Kantian conception.
Nietzsche sets up his conception of the moral self with explicit reference to the idea of the categorical imperative. For Kant, as rational creatures we are compelled to recognize the latter maxim as proper for determining our actions. The claim is thus set up on a certain valuation of reason. Nietzsche wishes to retain this idea of imperatives, principles, taken by agents as governing their actions but do away with the notions of universality, rationality and any normativity that is grounded outside the individual. The fundamental error in taking reason too seriously is that reason determines the world as constituted by discrete static objects. For Nietzsche, it thus falsifies the true nature of the world which is that of becoming. In relation to the self, it is allied to the distinction between selves and actions as determinate ontological units. But Nietzsche does talk of us needing to develop our own categorical imperatives and of developing a will to responsibility. "We, however, want to become those we are - human beings who are new, unique, incomparable, who give themselves laws, who create themselves." The difference is that for Nietzsche the principles we choose to live by must be free of mystificatory moral elements. We are confluences of forces in relations of domination and submission to one another. Becoming what one is means refusing to falsify this picture with the doctrines of determinism and free will and thus the false conceptions of the determination of one's actions. One can then attain to a greater degree of autonomy by adopting a different attitude to one's instincts. Nietzsche criticises the denial of the instincts as a means of self control: "Those moralists who command man first of all and above all to gain control of himself thus afflict him with a peculiar disease; namely, a constant irritability in the face of all natural stirrings and inclinations." Rather, one needs to identify oneself with one's instincts, recognising that conscious activity is dangerous when not taken as an instinct itself: "the task of incorporating knowledge and making it instinctive is only beginning to dawn on the human race."
Nietzsche's thinking here points to the doctrines of a higher innocence and the overman which need not detain us here. The process which leads to the overman is one of the incorporation of instincts into conscious acceptance and the moulding of such instincts into 'empirical characters' that have a self-given coherence. A certain responsiveness to what is there with a certain cunning to mould forces is what is necessary for this process. Through this, one attains to autonomy in the sense we began with: giving the law to oneself. For Nietzsche the capacity to give the law to oneself, whether that be the categorical imperative or our own imperative is an act of power and self-mastery. However, the categorical imperative itself denies the instincts and the picture of the world as becoming which phenomenology leads us to. It is thus on the one hand reactive and inimical to life and on the other dishonest.