The concept of 'will' for Schopenhauer is intended to ground the phenomenal world and set a limit to the universe. It is a metaphysical principle that Schopenhauer believes we have access to directly, unmediated by the principle of sufficient reason. The two main problems in understanding the concept of will are the epistemological question - how does Schopenhauer believe we have knowledge of the will? - and the constitutive question - what can Schopenhauer legitimately say about the will's nature?
Kant's critical philosophy set out to set a limit to human knowledge; to delimit the conditions of our knowledge of the world and thereby that beyond which we can not legitimately think. For Kant, the empirical world is determined by our subjective faculties. That is to say that there are conditions set upon our experience of the world by our constitution as subjects. The world exceeds our faculties' ability to cognize however; the world as it exceeds our faculties' abilities is by definition unknowable: this Kant calls the thing-in-itself.
Schopenhauer's philosophy represents an attempt to give content to this thing-in-itself; consequently at first glance it appears highly paradoxical. The world as mediated by the nature of the faculty of sensibility and the pure concepts of the understanding in Kant is refigured as the world of representation - the world under the fourfold principle of sufficient reason. Schopenhauer's claim is that we can have direct knowledge of something that is not subject to the conditions of representation through our experience of our own bodies.
Within the world as representation, as mediated by the subject, all things are related to a ground: the intellect relates material things to their causes and effects; it grounds abstract concepts using the laws of logic; mathematical and geometric matters are grounded in numbers and spaces; psychological questions of motivation are related to intentions as their ground. In Kant's philosophy, the limits of reason are revealed by antinomies that are reached when one attempts to think through the different principles that determine our cognising of the world (the categories). The third antinomy results in showing that in attempting to think a ground of the empirical universe the mind reaches a paradox: it must both postulate a first cause and the infinite regression of causes. Kant draws the conclusion that we have the right to the possibility of another form of grounding proceeding from the thing-in-itself. Schopenhauer provides that ground with a name: the will.
The will grounds the world as representation: the world as representation is objectified will. The will has no ground outside itself, it is self-grounding; consequently it allows Schopenhauer to provide an answer to the perennial problem of the prime mover. More than this, in the idea that the world as representation is objectified will Schopenhauer thinks the unity of the multiplicity that we are presented with in experience. In striking out from Kantian scepticism to the thing-in-itself Schopenhauer's main step is to conceive the will as one. The will is the world conceived as unified. For the representing subject, the world appears divided into discrete objects and individuals, his own body as one object among many. But the world as will is without individuation. Considered as will, as what I am undiffracted by the conditions of representation, I am not distinguished from the rest of the world. Metaphysically, my individuality is an illusion. Schopenhauer's ethics is based on the realisation of this illusion and my kinship with all things.
How does Schopenhauer reach this vision of the world as unity? Schopenhauer believes that the source of this knowledge is through my awareness of my bodily nature. I experience myself under two aspects: as an object among others, an element of the world as representation; and as a desiring subject. Regarding the first aspect, I can reason about myself as I do about other people or things. I can relate my actions to my intentions as their ground and can relate physical happenings on and from me to their ground in causality. What is not captured by this way of considering me is the actual lived experience of inhabiting a body. I can as equally relate another's actions to their intentions, but the actual experience of willing and desiring is mine and mine alone.
The most striking move in Schopenhauer's philosophy occurs here: from the experience of my willing, bodily nature I achieve knowledge of the world as will; I break through the veil of Maya to the underlying metaphysical truth about the universe.
Two related questions occur: (1) in what sense is experience of willing not subject to the conditions of representation; and (2) what leads us from experience of the will to the knowledge of the unity of will?
(1) If I feel a desire for a glass of water, we would be inclined to think of such a desire as individuated from the rest of my desiring by its single end and its duration in time. But individuation only takes place for Schopenhauer in the world as representation. Thus we must abstract our notion of the will from its ends and its specific duration to gain an idea of it as unified.
(2) Then the knowledge of the unity of will occurs by an act of thought. I must suppress consciously any ends my desire craves to gain knowledge of the ultimate unity of willing.
This has the interesting consequence that in coming to recognise the world as will I suppress the influence that the will to life - willing as it follows the directions it takes in me qua living creature, as directed towards specific ends. This is entirely in keeping with Schopenhauer's thesis that knowledge is opposed to willing as release from it.
We have not done enough to free ourselves of the suspicion that our experience of willing is subject to the conditions of representation. In his earliest work Schopenhauer had assimilated reasoning about intentions to the world of representation: intentions are grounds with the world as representation. This highlights the peculiarity of Schopenhauer's thinking. The felt experience he wishes to draw our attention to is more primary than any experience of desiring that I begin to make coherent to myself by consciously positing objects for it or reasoning about it. It is difficult not to assimilate this purported experience of self back to the deeply felt unity of all things which Simmel charges is Schopenhauer's motivation. Schopenhauer is himself ambiguous - at least - about the knowledge we have of the will. If it is mediated by the world as representation then it has to be taken as inferential knowledge. Obviously, this knowledge would then be achieved according to the fourfold principle mentioned above and thus would not represent a different method of knowing. Let's examine the argument on this account.
If we take Schopenhauer's move inferentially, he believes that we can move from the premise that individuation occurs in the world as representation to the conclusion that outside the world of individuation there is no individuation. This is clearly warranted only on the assumption that conditions of individuation within the world as representation are the only possible conditions of individuation, which is not logically required. We may not be able to make sense of such a type of individuation, but beyond the conditions of the possibility of our experience there may be such an individuation. Logically then, Schopenhauer's inference is unsound.
Schopenhauer also talks of our knowledge of the will as unmediated - direct. We can discriminate between two questions: what is the ground of any individual act of willing - why am I willing x at t? - and what is the ground of all my willing - why do I will at all? The former can admit of an answer on the level of representation, the latter requires a different ground. The situation is the same regarding gravity: any falling object can be referred to gravity as its ground, but gravity itself cannot be so grounded. Here is the key to the intuition at the heart of the concept of the will: it is movement. What is left when one has abstracted ends from willing? Movement. What is to be explained when gravity is referred to its ground? Movement.
The intuition Schopenhauer believes that we can grasp from our experience of ourselves as embodied subjects is an intuition of movement within a multiplicituos unity, a differentiating unity; there is a process of individuation immanent to the will. However, we must be careful; the will does not cause its objectification into individuals, but the objectification comes from its own nature.
Mankind's understanding is objectified will. The subject/object split is objectified will. That is to say that there is nothing in the world which is not will, including the mechanism by which one comes to take the world as representation. This is a necessary consequence of Schopenhauer's adaptation of Kant: the thing-in-itself grounds the subject in Kant. The subject finds its own spontaneity springing from the thing-in-itself. The thing-in-itself is will for Schopenhauer, thus it has to ground the subject.
On the account that I have given, the problem then arises: how can one renounce will? If the subject is to be taken as immanent to the will, as an objectification of it, any act of renunciation would ipso facto be an act of will. The alternative would be to leave the subject unexplained as the ground of the world - a form of idealism Schopenhauer must escape from, for if the subject grounds the world, the will cannot. One has to make a choice here: reassert dualism - there are mental, world-constituting acts and facts that are not of the nature of the will-objectification monist axis; or reconfigure Schopenhuaer's ethical philosophy so that renunciation is seen as an act of will (certainly a far from insignificant change which fundamentally alters Schopenhauer's ethics).
We have seen that regarding the epistemological problem, Schopenhauer believes that we have knowledge through the body of movement towards an end, will. We have questioned whether his account is coherent: if Schopenhauer believes we have inferential knowledge of a unified will his inference is invalid. If he believes we have direct knowledge of unindividuated will he is surely mistaken; furthermore he seems to be expressing an intuition about the world which one may accept or reject according to temperament.
The best possible way of taking Schopenhauer's argument may be to take him as saying that the best possible explanation of empirical acts of willing is to postulate a metaphysical unity of the will. However, we have seen - regarding the constitutive question - that the move to the unity of the will is invalid.
In conclusion, it is hard not to agree with Simmel that Schopenhauer's metaphysics of the will is a result of a deeply felt intuition of the world as unified. This oneness, expressed through the concept of the will, is not supported by the evidence he gives. Although it may be possible to make sense of the notion of a unity differentiating itself through movement, in Schopenhauer's philosophy we are not persuaded of the need for such a notion.