The Hunger Strikes in 1981 represented a 'watershed' in the both Republican history and that of Northern Ireland. In many ways it was not the strike itself that generated developments but the media frenzy surrounding the episode. The publicity and widespread sympathy among republicans for those on hunger strike in Long Kesh/Maze prison shook Sinn Fein leadership into taking a more political stance. The episode the threatened political stability of the entire country and urgently required both the British and Republicans to identify their objectives. As a result Sinn Fein realised the potential of a political strategy and made the significant decision to participate in elections.
A major impact of the hunger strike was the sizable increase in electoral support which Sinn Fein and by association, the IRA gained. In what Tonge describes as the 'electorally barren' Irish Republic, sections of the Northern Irish population who had previously abstained from elections were politicised. Young militant activists from Republican ghettos in particular, were mobilised to vote for the first time. Internment and Bloody Sunday had started this process but the emotions, which accompanied the hunger strikes, the symbolic significance of Bobby Sands, in particular, demonstrated how voters were ready to express their armed struggle through the ballot box. For many nationalists the alternative option of supporting the British government was an impossible one, hence the surge in electoral support for the republicans and Sinn Fein. The 1982 elections revealed that approximately one-third of Catholics in the North supported Sinn Fein and, according to Tonge by logical conclusion, sympathised with the IRA's armed struggle. Results in 1983 followed a similar pattern when Sinn Fein reached their electoral peak at Westminster with 13.4% of the vote. The SDLP was not, however, successfully dislodged from its dominant position and it is unclear how many voters actually supported the entire Sinn Fein's programme. The party though, hereafter, had the luxury of not only a larger pool of recruits but also the satisfaction of political credibility.
The hunger strikes had a key influence on Sinn Fein's Republican agenda. Prior to the hunger strikes, Sinn Fein was a relatively meagre political force in comparison to the SDLP, which could boast support from the majority of republicans. The population was also tired of the IRA's excessive violence and had weakened its active backing. However, as early as 1975 Sinn Fein had made the declaration to 'build up the party, we need a voice, we need to be very clear about what are the demands and what are the aims and objectives of the struggle." The struggle in the prisons certainly set this objective in motion. As English has commented, 'It would be wrong to see 1981 as beginning the process of republican politicisation: it would more accurately be understood as an unintended accelerator of a process already favoured by the leaders of the movement.'
Whilst this change in Sinn Fein's agenda was in development, however, the main catalyst for action was the vacancy at Westminster following the sudden death of Frank Maguire MP. The subsequent manoeuvre by Sinn Fein to place Bobby Sands for MP revealed the level of grass roots support for the hunger strikers and their party representatives. Prior to this decision, the British government had a reasonable case to refuse the granting of political status to IRA prisoners. As Danny Morrison later reflected, the Republicans had a long suspicion of party politics - 'politics equals compromise." Ninety-two per cent of the British public supported the Government's policy. In Northern Ireland, however, it was clear that the mood was very different. By obtaining the seat in 1981, the political atmosphere had demonstrated the potential for republican politics if extended to a broader audience.
Rather than the hunger strike itself, therefore, it was the election of Bobby Sands to Westminster, which stood as the catalyst for change. Sands' victory shifted the Republican movement into the realm of party politics. Terrorist activities would no longer be the sole focus for Republican strategy; hereafter it was 'the bomb and ballot box.' To quote Sands the strikes 'broadened the battlefields' of the republican movement - Sinn Fein evolved as a substantial political force.
This increased Republican awareness in the potential of party politics is evident in both the rhetoric and actions of post-strike Sinn Fein. In 1983 Gerry Adams, who in these crucial years had risen to prominence, was elected president of Sinn Fein. He began talking of developing the movement's 'potential' and of the need 'to move into the mainstream of political relevancy,' break down self-isolation' and crack the 'compartmentalised attitudes' of many Republicans. According to Campbell, one of the hunger strikers, 'it afforded us room to manoeuvre, to recognise and to plan for further action in pursuit of our objectives." By 1985 Sinn Fein candidates took their seats at local councils and by 1986 the abstentionist stand in the Dublin parliament was dropped. This significant decision had been under consideration by H-Block prisoners during the strikes.
Whilst the political impact surrounding the hunger strikes represented a departure from traditional Republican policy, the technique of going on hunger strike had deep roots in Irish culture. 'To do yourself to death' had been a method of obtaining political recognition in 1916 and 1923 and more recently in 1972. The strikers were no doubt aware of the religious and cultural associations of their self-sacrifice. Sands et al. therefore effectively built on the prominent mythology of martyrdom in Irish political history. In this key way the hunger strikes stood to preserve rather than change aspects of Northern Ireland's politics. According to O'Malley and others, the strikers were 'victims of our myths." However, whilst the position of 'martyr-hero' was still sanctified, it remained a 'weapon of last resort.'
The strikes also influenced perceptions of IRA members, which had important consequences for the future of Northern Irish politics. The human faces of the strikers undoubtedly diluted the hard edge of IRA violence. This sympathy had implications for future elections - sympathy stretched much further than the just the 'hearts and minds' of a minority population. Even the British Army grudgingly admitted an admiration for the IRA's volunteers. In 1978 Brigadier J.M. Glover commented that 'our evidence of the calibre of rank and file terrorists does not support the view that they are merely mindless hooligans drawn from the unemployed and unemployable.'
This correlation between public sympathy and electoral success would have significant implications for the marketing of Northern Irish politics. In effect, the hunger strikes represented a 'propaganda battle' between the British government and the republican movement. In this dispute there can be little doubt as to the winner. As Dixon states, whilst the British 'won the contest of wills' with the prisoners over political status they 'lost the propaganda war, resuscitated an ailing IRA and politicised militant Republicanism." Publicity would have increasing significance in later years as the Republicans saw the potential to capitalise on an age of television and mass media. Both the British government and the Army isolated propaganda as the 'enemy's most powerful weapon; and the most difficult to counter." Unsurprisingly therefore Sands called for an 'army of propagandists to put their views across' in order to 'stir people's emotions, to arise...and activate them'-'we must create our own mass media." Given this new focus on propaganda, born in the success of the hunger strikes, Loyalist and Republican politics was now increasingly focused around public image.
The strike also had some negative effects. The IRA's relations with the Catholic Church in particular were damaged. The religious aspect of the conflict had always been strong but the decision to go on hunger strike alienated the Church who condemned such tactics as 'mortal sin." Further polarisation of the two communities within Northern Ireland was another grave consequence. Hunger strikes highlighted the fundamental cultural differences that existed between Protestants and Catholics. The 'psychological trauma' of the strike had 'reinforced their perennial distrust of each other' so that initiatives at accommodation was undermined 'before they could even get off the ground.'
The strike also distanced the British public further from empathising with the republican cause. Whilst abroad coverage improved understanding to some extent, the British press refused to comment in detail on the debate, which surrounded the incident. Focus instead concentrated on the government management of the situation and once the issue had been resolved, to praising Mrs. Thatcher. The Daily Mail described Thatcher's stance as 'magnificent obstinacy' and the News of the World said the collapse of the hunger strike was a 'humiliating defeat for the IRA at the hands of the Government." According to the Sunday Express, 'It has been a victory for commonsense and firm moral purpose, over the confused, tortured mentality of appeasement..." Even the Guardian, often supportive of Irish issues, said 'The Government has overcome the Hunger Strikers by a show of resolute determination not to be bullied.'
The Unionists suffered a severe blow as a consequence of the Hunger Strikes. In spite of the genuine claim that victims within their community received no publicity for their sacrifices, the reputation of unionists diminished; during the hunger strikes, the IRA murdered twenty-two UDR and RUC men. Unionists could also no longer argue that the IRA enjoyed no substantial Catholic support. Many Unionists were hereafter alienated by the political system and increasingly aligned themselves with more radical parties like the DUP. In May of 1981 Paisley's fundamentalist party narrowly outpolled the UUP by 26.6% to 26.5%.
Indirect, but by no means insignificantly, British politics was affected and thus the British political attitude to the 'Irish problem'. The British government had ultimately failed to normalise the conflict and criminalize the IRA whilst also tarnishing its international reputation. Lee's assessment that, 'The British handling of the whole H-block situation was inept to the point of criminality' may be too strong but there were certainly aspects, which played into the hands of republicans. The colonial exploitation, which the IRA had purported for decades, was effectively portrayed in the Hunger Strike episode. With Prime Minister Thatcher's uncompromising position against the prisoners, propaganda could effectively present the situation as British imperialist arrogance versus 'freedom fighters.'
The entire episode demonstrated now little control Britain had over Northern Ireland. The contradictory nature of Britain's foreign policy was also exposed with evidence that authorities maintained a steady dialogue with the IRA they publicly branded criminal 'godfathers,' terrorists, or even Marxists. The British argument that there existed a 'moderate majority' in favour of compromise and that the IRA only succeeded through intimidation suffered a severe blow when Sinn Fein entered the electoral process.
The Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 was a clear example of how politics had been affected. Following the political rise of Sinn Fein, both the Irish and British governments attempted to 'rescue' the SDLP from being overtaken as the primary political force. Fitzgerald has argued, 'The AIA is the result of the IRA's performance on the hunger strike." According to O'Malley many in Sinn Fein saw the Agreement as a victory on their part, despite British publicity to the contrary. As Gerry Adams noted, the Agreement was actually 'a compliment to Sinn Fein' since 'never before had the Dublin and London governments been forced to spend so much time deliberating on how best to destroy Republicanism." Sinn Fein's political clout could not be denied.
Individual politicians were also targeted as a result on the strikes. British Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher suffered considerable damage to her reputation on a very personal level. Disgust at her behaviour stretched so far as her becoming a 'republican hate-figure of Cromwellian proportions." Many Irish believed her to be anti-Irish, a conviction which O'Malley warrants 'a myth perhaps, but not entirely a misperception." Republicans held her personally responsible for the deaths of the hunger strikers, a belief which led to the assassination attempt on her life and that of the Cabinet at a Brighton Conference in 1984.
The Hunger strikes also internationalised the conflict in Northern Ireland. The Republican cause felt further sympathy as a result and Britain suffered greater repugnance from abroad. 'Britain was criminalized in the eyes of the world." Reporters abroad described the incident as 'un autre crime du colonialisme Britannique' and wrote articles on strikers who had been 'murdered by the British." Such publicity was not only embarrassing and damaging to Thatcher's government but the international sympathy galvanised significant financial support from Irish-Americans in the US.
In conclusion, the hunger strikes impacted Northern Irish politics by forcing a reassessment of the political situation on both the British government and Republicans. Whilst there are innate difficulties in assessing the topic due to its emotional content, the episode undoubtedly focused intense attention on the political conflict at both home and abroad. The strikes were not a planned event but within the context of late 1970s Northern Ireland and with the unexpected death of Frank Maguire, the election of Sands during his hunger strike represented a turning point in the conflict. The newly adopted political approach taken by Sinn Fein established the continuation of Northern Ireland's 'Long War' with Britain along less violent and more constitutional lines.