Since John Fairbank's publication of The Chinese World Order: Traditional China's Foreign Relations in 1968, Fairbank has been widely considered a leading scholar on Chinese history. His interpretation of the tribute system has been no exception. However, in recent decades alternative explanations have emerged which challenge many of Fairbank's fundamental arguments. Even his model of the 'Chinese world order' itself has come under criticism. Scholars like James L. Hevia have attributed much of the 'immortalisation' of Fairbank's assessment of the Chinese system to misinterpretation by others, but is keen to clarify what he sees as the reality of Chinese foreign relations. John Wills and Mark Mancall have supported this endeavour by condemning previous understanding as blatant 'oversimplification." Scholars of Chinese history have since stressed the limitations of Fairbank's model and offered new reflections to traditional theory.
The traditional perception of the Chinese tribute system, which Fairbank espoused, is of an administrative practice that survived from its inception in early Han China (206 BC to 220 AD) until the Opium Wars (1834-43 and 1856-60) to control vassals and demand tribute from foreign regions. An integral part of Confucian philosophy, the tribute system was considered a court ritual which placed subordinate states within an all-embracing Sino-centric cosmos. The tribute itself held little gain to the imperial court except as a diplomatic medium but since the emperor displayed such apparent 'benevolence,' foreigners were permitted to engage in carefully controlled trade for a limited number of days. When Westerners came into contact with this ceremonial and bureaucratic procedure, they labelled it the 'tribute system.'
In Wills estimation, recent research on Chinese history has made it virtually impossible to ignore the challenges to the 'master narrative' of China, which is 'mired in tradition and illusion." According to Wills, 'Between 1514-1662, the people and government of China were involved in, and affected by, the first stages of the development of a "modern world system"' that had significant consequences for their relations with foreigners. Following deeper study into the Qing dynasty, scholars have clearly identified how Qing rulers functioned in 'highly political, personal, ceremonious ways that owed little to the tribute system background in negotiating their own sway over an Inner Asian "multitude of lords."' From this new school of thought has emerged one of Fairbank's fiercest critics, James L. Hevia who as a post-modern historian has a fresh approach about the tribute system. By analysing the failed Macartney mission of 1793 he has distinguished the Qing regime (1644-1912) from the Ming (1368-1644) and challenging the traditional Sino-centric assessment, which attributes the failed mission to China's 'isolation' policy.
A major area of contention among historians has been the purpose of the tribute system.
T.F. Tsaing, another advocate for the tribute system theory of foreign relations writing prior to Fairbank in 1936, estimated that China's main objective was defending its borders. Within the common perception of the tribute system, was that in return for submitting to China's 'cultural superiority,' vassal states could depend on Chinese defence. According to recent research however, the system provided a security measure for the Chinese who were feeling increasingly vulnerable. As surrounding countries grew in strength and in particular when Japanese pirates threatened coastal areas, the Ming saw the tribute system as an effective means of limiting foreign contact. The Chinese court was also keen to defend the empire from cultural and political subversion by missionaries, and in another sense, defend the appearances of the ceremonial supremacy of the Son of Heaven. According to Wang Gung-wu, the system also allowed China to retain its myth of superiority and image as protector of the weak against the strong, when China itself did not want to resort to force.
Whilst the lavish gifts, which China gave tributaries, were more economical that sustaining a border army, the tribute system often resulted in financial loses for the Ming state. The trade, which accompanied the tribute, was never considered 'a source of public revenue." Other scholars have also acknowledged the lack of profitability in the tribute system. Fairbank has stated that 'it must not be assumed that the Chinese court made a profit of such tributes,' and that 'there was little benefit to the imperial treasury in anything that a tribute mission might bring." In addition, T.C. Lin has argued that 'Chinese statesmen, up to recent decades, hardly looked upon trade and tribute with the eye of an economist." Wang Yi-t'ung, like Lin, a supporter of the traditional interpretation, has even claimed that 'trade was an annoying aspect of the system.'
The extent to which trade was 'annoying' must, however, be questioned. Whilst the Chinese court may well have given the impression that trade was an unnecessary phase in the tributary exchange, recent research mentioned by Rossabi, demonstrates how some Chinese wanted and benefited from the trade in foreign goods. According to Rossabi, many products were 'essential, not frivolous exotica." In addition, for Wang tributary missions were 'commercial visits with no political significance,' an argument in stark contrast to official Chinese rhetoric. Fairbank has also claimed that 'tribute missions functioned chiefly as a vehicle for trade." Fairbank has also described the tributary arrangement as 'an ingenious vehicle for commerce', which defined the 'ground rules for a vigorous trade' over vast areas of East and Southeast Asia.
Economic gain, however, was at least officially, subordinate to other concerns within the tribute system. Fairbank has claimed that trade was 'officially regarded as a boon, granting to the barbarian the necessary means to his sharing in the bounty of China, and nothing more. Primarily the structure, which evolved over many centuries, encouraged minimal foreign relations whilst providing an instrument for imperial defence policy. The tribute system was never meant to support active international politics, nor was there the intention to establish trading contacts. Considering Hevia's work on the importance of ritual and public appearance in the tribute system, it is clear that other factors were at play.
Academics like Joanna Waley-Cohen have also emphasised China's 'highly pragmatic' approach to foreign relations. In contradiction to Fairbank's assertion that throughout the entirety of China's interaction with barbarians, the Chinese maintained their 'material and cultural superiority,' Waley-Cohen has argued that in spite of the 'theoretical underpinnings' and assertions of superiority in public, China 'simply adapted to reality." China did not maintain its required dominance to compel compliance throughout its history, especially when surrounding states became more stable. Indeed, since very early times China 'necessarily, and often, departed from that ideal." The Treaties of Nerchinsk (1689) and Kiakhta (1727), during the Qing period following wars with Russia, clearly indicated the Chinese willingness to depart from their restrictive foreign relations framework. Waley-Cohen admits that China continued to demand submission from Russia but the formal recognition of equality between nations, stated in the treaties fundamentally challenged the tribute system.
It is easy to understand why there is such disparity in understanding about the tribute system. The ability of the Chinese to maintain the illusion that the system worked has made the system extremely hard for scholars to examine. According to Wills. 'There are very few new precedents, very little information of any kind, on any aspect of the tribute system after 1550." Even Fairbank has appreciated the 'truism' that tribute was often not performed in the exact manner it was represented. The Chinese court effectively upheld the ancient characteristics of trade relations around isolationism, ceremonialism and a focus on appearances. Europeans could therefore, only be expected to believe that the restrictions of the tribute system were deeply entrenched in Chinese history. As Wills states, it is not difficult to see how the admittedly Sino-centric foreign policy seemed like a 'tribute system.'
Fairbank's implication that China's attitude towards non-Chinese governments followed an 'unchanging' pattern has fostered the greatest criticism. For Wills the concept of 'a millennial tribute system' ignores the many differences in China's extensive history. Wills concedes that 'every element' of the story 'is plausible for some periods and some relations' but rejects Fairbank's generalised model as being 'undermined by inadequate empirical knowledge." For example, the tribute system was 'quite irrelevant' in the ages of disunion (the Three Kingdoms and Northern and Southern Dynasties). Also during the period 960-1279 which Wills and Rossabi label an 'era of China among equals' there was much diplomacy among countries and 'cases when the parity or superiority of a non-Chinese one was acknowledged, although much resented.'
On the whole, academics consider the long century from 1425 to 1550, early in the Ming dynasty, to have been the 'high-point' of the tribute system. A generation before the Portuguese sailed around the Cape; China witnessed a surge in Neo-Confucian ideals and made a concerted effort to unify foreign relations under a tribute system matrix. The characteristics of foreign contact; defensiveness, ceremonial submission to the emperor and various regulations were brought under a systemised and bureaucratised format.
However, after about 1550, the tribute system became arguably a 'passive system' lacking many of its fundamental characteristics. Relations with the Jurchen, the Mongols, and even the Portuguese, referred minimally to the tribute system. As security concerns emerged once more, Ming China reverted to a more restrictive policy and effectively prohibited overseas voyages in 1567. Scholars have also identified increased casualness in Chinese administration regarding the monitoring of the tribute system. By the 1670s, under Qing rule Wills notices the embassy take 'a more modest place...in foreign affairs." He recognises a gradual decline in importance of the Ming system until the Dutch in the 1680s were convinced that the embassy was 'a completely useless institution." For Wills 'financial stringency, the routine of embassies of no particular political importance year after year...and of blatant commercial motivation for embassies may have all contributed to further reductions and simplifications in the embassy routine." Even when the tribute system appeared to have revived from about 1654-1684, Wills recognises how embassies were not central to the pattern of relations with the Dutch and Portuguese. The reunification of Japan in 1600 by Tokugawa shoguns, and subsequent insults suggesting that Qing governance was illegitimate and imposed by force, also made China's tribute system almost impossible.
Fairbank has also claimed that, 'Until a century ago, China's foreign relations were suzerain-vassal relations conducted through the ancient forms of the tributary system." He further argues that 'vestiges' of this ancient method 'today still form a considerable though latent portion of the heritage of Chinese diplomats." Whilst the majority of scholarship has since refutes such claims, it is true that it was only in the early nineteenth century that 'trading countries' traded without sending a tribute and indicated the official demise of the system.
Indeed, there were many instances when foreign relations existed beyond the institution of tribute. Wills has particularly identified the eighteenth century Canton system and relations with Jesuit missionaries. As the anthropologist Schwartz has recognised, there were many kinds of activities, which formed behaviour with foreigners in China. Critical of Western literature on early Sino-Western relations, Wills stresses how a sense of cultural and political superiority cannot alone distinguish the Chinese system from other high cultures, which arguably, also asserted their own supremacy.
Wang Gung-wu has hence argued for the reserve of the term 'tribute system' for the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries in the Ming dynasty. The 'less systematic and more varied diplomatic practices' of other times cannot be tightly associated with the system. Yet historians have struggled with how to define the 'Chinese diplomatic tradition'. John Wills is a particular example in Pepper, Guns and Parleys, where he explains the difficulty of describing the complex 'plethora of rules and regulations' which was to some degree associated with tribute embassies. He has since conceded that the concept of 'tribute system' provides a 'neat' way of pulling the Chinese trade story together over such a vast period.
Overall, scholarship contends that China sponsored a 'tribute system' in its genuine format for only a brief period of its history. Although practices, which were later included in the system like the receiving of embassies were evident in the T'ang and Sung dynasties, as Wills points out, these tendencies did not coalesce into 'a single pattern for the bureaucratic management of all foreign relations which we might call a tribute system. ' Whilst Wills' concession, to consider Chinese foreign relations under the umbrella term 'tribute system' may be too simplistic, one must understand the variety of forms China's 'diplomatic tradition' has taken. Fairbank's claim that 'all types of international intercourse...were fitted into the tributary system' however, generalises far too much. China's foreign policy was above all adaptable, which considering how long it was in existence, is plausible. Ritual and appearances were essential in maintaining the system, whilst also key to its demise as an obsession with image prevented greater alteration. Yet as Pomeranz rightly states, 'The tribute trade was no less commerce for being ritualised - and no less ritualised for being commerce." Fairbank provided an indispensable model from which to judge China's foreign relations but further study has usefully expanded and questioned Western understanding of this 'Great Chinese institution.'