Nowadays, teenage smoking is a common issue for most countries worldwide which draws upon a lot of concern. As tobacco use has been identified as a major preventable cause of premature death and illness. Each year about 440,000 people die in the United States from illnesses related to cigarette smoking and a great further number of deaths are attributable to second hand smoke. Smoking initiation usually occurs during adolescence, while the vast majority of smoking related deaths occur in middle aged and elderly people. Therefore prevention of smoking initiation among adolescents is a powerful strategy for keeping away much of the illness associated with tobacco use. To target for a right intervention control, it is important to understand primarily of the associated risk/protective factors in terms of influencing teenager's choice of smoking uptake towards to which also form the basis of this empirical research. Results showed that peer influence determines the strongest relationship for an adolescent to become a smoker.
Research on the factors associated with youth smoking has been based on the following areas:
1) Socio demographics (individual's gender, age, races, income and accessibility of tobaccos): Historically, prevalence of smoking was higher for male than female (Surgeon General 1994). However recent trends show there's an equal rate between the two genders as female smoking prevalence is increasing. Reasons probably include factors of increasing weight concern among females (French, 1994). Despite of gender indifference, Winkleby MA 1993 identifies high school students are more susceptible to smoking behavior than middle school students as it is usually associated with the critical age in a youth's development. It supported the statistics in USA that higher smoking rate among teenagers at/ above14 than teenagers than below this age and higher smoking prevalence was found among people of American Indian origin. Another variable has been found to correlate with adolescent smoking is related to their income, young people with more spending money showed higher levels of smokin (W.Schlenger, 2003). Towards easy accessibility of tobacco products will also increase the onset of smoking. (Difranza JR, 1996).
2) Environmental factors (peer influence, living people influence and parental attitude): Adolescents with close friends smoking may be more susceptible to smoking due to the direct pressure among their friends and a desire for approval among their social group (Kimberly, 2003). Having living members smoking at home may also increase individual risk (Shelli, 2003). Further study has investigated a number of related factors associated with parental attitudes showing that strongly parental disapproval of smoking was inversely correlated with adolescent smoking. (Biglan A, 1995)
3) Behavioral variables (academic performance and aspirations): Smoking status has been found to be consistently related to school performance, educational aspirations and commitment to school. Students who committed to schooling, doing well in academics are less likely to smoke than those who do not (Tyas S, Pederson L 1998)
4) Community factors (anti tobacco advertising/ discussion of dangers of tobacco use among in school): A research study done by Sherry Emery in 1999 shows that anti tobacco adverts on television which identifies consequences of tobacco use are associated with more favorable anti smoking attitudes. Also according to B S Flynn 1992, discussions of dangers of tobacco use in school can have a positive effect on increasing teenager resistance towards smoking behavior
Therefore after identifying the associated risk/protective factors towards affecting a teenage smoking uptake status, in the following section I will carry out an empirical regression analysis on investigating the significance of these explanatory factors. The data I've selected to use will be based on National Youth Tobacco Survey in USA 2004 conducted by the Cancer diseases centre since CDC is one of the 13 major operating centre of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) which is globally recognized for conducting health research and investigations. The survey consists of 27933 observations; the sample target is on US middle school (grade 6-8) and high school (grade 9-12) students who are basically from 4 ethnicity regions (white, Hispanic, Asian, African American). The reason why I have chosen to pick for year 2004 dataset to estimate as the research in that year was conducted in a larger sampling set and it only consisted of small amount of missing datas compared to some other datas of recent years. However it is not without limitation since this questionnaire was only available in English. So comprehension maybe limited to some ethical participants whose first language is not English. This may one of the main potential bias in the data result.
In this section, the dependant variable we are going to test is the likelihood of the adolescent whether or not he/she is going be a smoker. Explanatory variables include examining into how factors such as adolescent's gender, age, ethnicity, friends influence, parental attitude, living people influence, their interest in schooling, amount of income earned, effect of anti smoking advertisement and school discussion of danger of tobacco use will independently correlated with the dependant variable. The choice of these explanatory variables will allow us to compare the effect of how biological/genetics factors, social environment, individual characteristics, commodity price, control intervention each can increase or decrease the probability for a adolescent to take up smoking. The test of dependent variables will also be binary in nature. Therefore before turning to estimate the regression, it is necessary to generalize all the dependant and independent variables correctly into dummies variables from the raw dataset. Since both the dependent and independent variables are dummy variables, therefore OLS is not the best estimation methodology for a non linear regression. A better approach to estimate this regression is to run the binary choice and taking the probit regression approach.
Before trying to interpret the significance of the factors, it is necessary to check if there is multi-collinearity in the model as even though it will not affect the coefficient output, it will inflate the standard errors thus bias the z statistics.
Multi-collinearity problem existed between two variables living people smoke and parents influence. As the correlation shown in the table between them is 0.078890 which is bigger than the correlation shown between the independent and dependant variable when we looked into the relationship between parents influence and smoker which is only 0.03920. To solve the problem, I will choose to drop the variable of parental influence and estimate the model again.
The regression model:
(Smoke/Non Smoke)= Constant+ Age +Female+ American Indian + Peer smoke+ Living people smoke+ loss in interest in schooling + high income+ parental strict attitude + discussion of danger of tobacco use+ anti smoking advert+ Error term
For interpreting the results, firstly we will use F statistics to test for the overall significance of the joint dependant variables
Ho: 1=2=3=4=5=6=7=8=9=0
H1: 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 not equal to 0
LR statistics showed in the table referred to that all slope coefficients except the constant are zero which gives overall significance of the joint dependant variables in related to the independent variable and will be compared with the F critical value.
F critical value= no of restrictions, no of observations- no of parameters-1
F=9, 27933-9-1
In the F statistics table we set the 5% significance level. Number of degree freedom is  and number of parameters is 9, so the critical value we found in the F statistic table is 1.88. The LR statistics =5014.869
We can conclude that null hypothesis can be rejected. All or some of the parameters are significant towards the independent variable.
Afterwards we will try to use the table to interpret for each independent variable's relative significance towards the dependant variable.
Z statistics critical value will be based on 5% significance level in a normal distribution lying below-1.96 or above 1.96 for null hypothesis (H0) to be rejected and accept alternative hypothesis (H1) in which we have sufficient evidence to conclude that the explanatory variable is significant. Value lying within -1.96 to 1.96 suggested that we don't have enough evidence to reject null hypothesis, hence the variable is proved to be insignificant.
Critical P value must be less than 5% for the variable to be significant.
Below we will examine the magnitude for each of the significant variables
Overall, strongest influence which affects a teenage smoking uptake is among of friends influence. One close friend smoke will increase the risk of individual to become a smoker by 84%. Other results show that with one living people smoking at home will increase the individual susceptible to smoking risk by 39%. 3 other variables found for those whose age (between 14-21) or who are being considered as having a loss interested in schooling (missed school more than 5 days in a month) or who have a high income ( having more than 20 dollars a week) are each equally having about 34% chance of likely impact upon an individual to become a smoker. Weakly significant results found for two protective factors which are anti-smoking advert and school discussion of danger of tobacco use as it only tend to show of having about 14% and 6% respectively on reducing the probability of the teenage to be a smoker.
Hence after testing each of the significance of these variables, we are going to look into the predictive power of the model which is how well the modelling fit the actual data. The conventionally computed R^2 for measuring goodness of fit is of limited meaning in the dichotomous response models. As the independent variables can only be two binary numbers either Y is equal to 0 or 1. All the values of Y will all lie on X axis corresponds to 0 or on the Y axis corresponds to 1. It's meaningless to look for how well it will fit the model in regarding to what linear regression has used. Instead Eviews presented one better measure of goodness of fit for binary regression model which is the Mcfadden R^2 also ranges between 0 to 1. The more related to 1 the higher the accuracy of the model. In our model the Mcfadden R^2=0.255204 this maybe because generalizing raw data is normally hard to obtain high accuracy and there's some missing observations. However in binary regression models, goodness of fit is not of primary importance. What matters are the expected signs of the regression coefficients and their statistical and /or practical significance. We will decide to take an analysis into the expectation prediction test table.
To take a look into the upper table first, we will try to compare the estimated equation with the actual constant probability. We will set 0.5 as the success probability and probability lower than 0.5 will consider as a weak or unsuccessful probability. For the first two columns, Dep=0 refers to the teenager who is a non-smoker and Dep=1 refers to the teenager who is a smoker. 'Correct 'classification for a teenager being a non-smoker equals to the probability less than or equal C for dep=0 or the prediction for the teenager to be a smoker equals to the probability bigger than C for dep=1. In this model, we termed it as correctly predicted dep=0 as sensitively and correctly predicted dep=1 as specificity. Overall we found that the model correctly predicted number of non smokers as 20664 (accuracy rate is 97.75%) and number of smokers as 524 (accuracy rate is 15.14%). The move from the right hand side table of constant probability to the left of the estimated equation provides an overall predictability of the estimated model. In the constant probability it correctly predicts all the non smoking teenagers of dep=0 since it is 100% but incorrectly predicted all of dep=1 which is among teenagers who smoke. The total gain from the expected model improves the overall dep=1 by 15.14% while it worsens the predicted probability of dep=0 by 2.25%. Overall the estimated equation correctly predicts 5.02% better than the constant probability. The percent gain for the estimated equation is 1.42% better predict the outcome than the constant probability of 85.93%.
The half bottom part of the table will be the compute expected number of y=0 and y=1 observations in the sample. It shows that the expected number of teenagers who is likely to be non smokers is 18782.89 and the expected number of teenagers who is likely to be smokers is 1103.23. The total gain is about 5.02% and 20.75% gain over in the predictability than the constant probability model. We can conclude that the probit model is a better predicted estimated measured model.
Finally to add into additional monitoring of the effectiveness of this model we run the goodness of fit test by Andrews and Hosmer- Lemeshow.
We try to measure the H-L value, null hypothesis is that deviations between the expectations and actual observations are zero which means the model predicts perfectly. Rejection of the hypothesis referred that the models predicts poorly since the expectations and actual observations are actually derived.
Chi squared critical region=10-2, 5% significance level =8, 0.05 = 15.50731
H-L statistics from the table= 12.2649 <15.50731
P-value=0.1398>0.05
Andrew statistics=15.4119<15.50731
P-value= 0.1177>0.05
Since both of the statistics show that they are below the critical value and the p-value are both greater than 0.05, we can accept the null hypothesis which means that the expectations and actual observations will not derive, the model fits closely to the actual data at an acceptable level.
Towards the primary finding from our result, it turns out peer influence has the strongest risk impact on teenage smoking uptake. With living people who smoke is associated with the second most significant susceptible risk. Teenage who have a poorer academic orientation, do not process an interest in schooling are likely to be the third significant factor towards for smoking behaviour. Having a higher income is associated as the fourth potential risk. However the two protective factors anti tobacco smoking advert, discussion of dangers of tobacco use in schooling are only shown to be weakly significant and only have a small effect on reducing teenage smoking uptake.
As a result policy implications may suggest that control tobacco strategies should be simultaneously working along with each other in order to generate a larger effect. Comprehensive interventions should placed upon on school education programs included helping students to identify the dangers of tobacco use, teaching for self control and refusal skills against negative influences . However the positive effects of these programmes are most tend to be short run and it will only be sustained when it is coordinated with community efforts such as promoting a healthy living environment at home, reducing accessibility for teenage among tobacco use, enforcing a stricter parental attitude among their children. Together with broad based community efforts in which individual negative attitudes and behaviors are targeted for change, continue promoting media interventions to convey anti tobacco smoking messages to teenagers, increasing prices for tobaccos can then actually led to a more substantial long term success in reduce youth smoking.
From the result found, the target group should be mostly for high school than middle school students. Other than age, two other factors such as gender and races the teenage belong to are not significant towards to have a relationship with the probability of the teenager's smoking uptake. The former confound to what recent literatures have found whilst the latter is hard to conclude as statistics shown that American Indian have higher smoking rate than other races. Therefore we may suspect that there are factors other than genetics that affected this social group to associate with a higher smoking rate or it maybe associated with data errors that actually occurred to bias the result. Therefore improvement over the model towards future work should include to test for time series regression to check for the persistence significance/insignificance of the explanatory variables Since given limited amount of time for data collection, some of the variables have not been included, such as how the accessibility of tobacco correlates with individual smoking uptake, it is greatly recommended to be added into future research. It can be further enhanced if the reciprocal relationships between those significant risk/protective factors can be explored, all of which have important implications for policy researchers in developing for more effective youth tobacco intervention programmes in the future and tailoring to those who are most vulnerable to the risk.