Interrogation of suspects plays a vital role in the construction of cases, particularly when it results in a confession. For the police, a confession is a highly efficient and reliable piece of evidence, and is considered as the easiest way of securing a conviction. From a citizen's perspective, questioning by the police can be a stressful, intrusive and intimidating process. Prolonged detention and questioning of the innocent can tarnish the relationship between the police and society. Recent accusations in the media include that "the behaviour of the police [is becoming] more coercive and imbued with the idea that we are all bad hats until we prove otherwise". The disgust with which these ideas are reported suggests that society expects a level of fairness and protection within the criminal justice system. Society appears to expect elements of Herbert Packer's due process model to be part of the criminal process, including scrutiny, reliability, equality and the presumption of innocence. Sanders and Young have suggested that due process is closely linked with the controls and protections inherent in the rule of law, which underpins and legitimises the criminal justice system. Their analysis of due process focuses on the 'equality' and 'control' strands of the rule of law. The first part of this essay will use this approach to explore why society should embrace Packer's due process values.
An inherent danger of the adversarial system is that it poses the state against the individual, a relationship "marked by disparities and inequalities of power". Packer's due process is partly concerned with maintaining rights for the individual to counteract the state's power. Some, like Dworkin, argue that "[i]ndividual rights are trumps which prevail over practical and majoritarian considerations.". Thus, due process becomes the cornerstone of police interrogative procedures as a consequence of the value placed on individual rights. This is supported by Article 6 of the ECHR. In guaranteeing the right to a fair trial, the statute does not provide for limitations of the right in the public interest.
It is possible to go beyond blindly accepting rights as legal norms, and see respect for the individual's rights as a way of guaranteeing procedural fairness. With procedural fairness comes legitimacy, without which the criminal justice system is meaningless. I suggest that a legal system cannot be considered as just if those who chose to maintain the adversarial system are not prepared to test it by placing their opposition, the suspects, on an equal footing by guaranteeing basic rights. Bentham may dismiss promoting the rights of individuals as lacking rational foundation, and "appealing to emotions rather than logic", but this can be countered by emphasising that the argument here does not concern the utility of rights per se, but what the rights lead to: a logical and bilateral exchange of evidence.
Perhaps the most significant procedural safeguard is the right to legal advice, currently protected in s 58 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984. Recognised as a due process safeguard in its own right, it also offers a way of enforcing others. Legal advice ensures that suspects understand the legal process, making them able to actively participate in it should they chose to do so, and making them as equal to the prosecution as possible. To allow a suspect to stumble through a criminal justice system of which they have little or no knowledge is Kafkaesque. The presence of a solicitor during interrogation "protect[s] the innocent from making inadvertent admissions when under severe psychological stress", thus protecting the innocent while also fulfilling crime control goals of efficiency and rectitude. Those who are sceptical about adherence to due process safeguards feel that legal advice may help the guilty to 'cheat the system' by, for example, entering into plea bargains. This motive not to embrace due process safeguards can be refuted on the basis that the legal advice is facilitating participation, it is not determining the system. If the legal system permits plea bargaining, then the individual is entitled to be able to engage in this with the state.
According to Packer's model, "the police should not arrest unless information in their hands at that time seems likely, subject to the vicissitudes of the litigation process to provide a case that will result in a conviction... It is never proper for the police to hold a suspect for the purpose of interrogation or investigation". By requiring that a prima facie case against the suspect is established, due process safeguards can be seen as limiting the state and reducing any institutional advantage for the police. The suspect is thus enabled to focus his limited resources on refuting or mitigating the accusations, rather than second guessing the state. This equality contributes towards procedural fairness and the efficiency of exchanges between the police and the suspect during post-arrest questioning.
Overlapping with limiting the state in order to make it equal is the idea of control: "the basic idea of the rule of law is, of course, that the executive arm of the State is controlled by law and that its actions are not a product of whim, politics or prejudice". Miscarriages of justice in the late 1970s raised questions of safeguards as methods to protect suspects against "unfair and oppressive methods of interrogation and the abuse of suspects detained by the police". Media pressure to allocate blame, managerial performance targets and their commitment to the job are considered to have enabled the police to justify abusive and unfair behaviour as necessary to get a conviction for those who they determined guilty. Not only do due process safeguards offer protection against 'Dirty Harry justice', they go beyond individual suspects and legitimise the legal process as a whole: the "ideological effect of criminal justice...requires that punishment should be seen to be legitimate and deserved". Punishing innocent people does not serve the purposes of criminal law. In terms of crime control and efficiency, I suggest that it is more efficient to devote resources to punishing and rehabilitating the guilty: the additional costs that may be incurred in securing a conviction which is not founded on an unfairly obtained confession are far lower than the economic and social costs of unjustified imprisonment.
In this context, the privilege against self incrimination plays an important role. Morgan argues that "the right that individuals should not be required to incriminate themselves traditionally safeguarded citizens from coercive and arbitrary powers of the State". Under Packer's due process model, the suspect is entitled to answer questions after arrest, but is under no obligation to do so. Having already been required to establish a prima facie case before arrest, the police are heavily discouraged from using coercive means to secure a confession. This protects the suspect, increases the reliability of the evidence and speeds up the trial process as no questions of barring evidence need be raised. Additionally, he presence of a solicitor may deter the police from using oppressive, intimidating or unreliable interview techniques. In the case of Dunn
 the solicitor's clerk was held to have been of sufficient protection, such that evidence given in breach of Code of Practice C could be admitted at trial.
McConville et al have highlighted several arguments against using due process to control the police in the context of the right to silence. They argue that the controls prevent early intervention and therefore the possibility of averting social damage. It would be easy at this point to enter into a discussion requiring the balancing of suspects rights with social utility, but Dworkin suggests that "rights, by their very nature, cannot be 'weighed' against practical public benefits". Instead, we must see due process safeguards as securing rectitude over speed, thus legitimising police intervention.
It is argued that "silence is the first resort of the guilty". Studies have shown that there are numerous causes for silence, and forcing suspects to speak may only induce falsification. Even if suspects are tactically encouraged to speak, as under the current legal system, having due process as the cornerstone of the system prevents abusive and bullying behaviour. I contend that the most accurate confessions (and therefore those of most value at trial) come from those who have chosen to speak of their own free will. The resources of the legal system should allow it to pursue all lines of enquiry, rather than focussing on an easy option at the expense of the individual.
The suggestion that "different people should be treated differently on the basis of social danger, their known propensity to commit crimes, their responsiveness to social control mechanism..." poses a threat to due process, which requires that suspects are treated equally and that they are presumed innocent. An individual's guilt should be determined on the facts of the case. The Runciman Commission emphasised "the need to strike a balance between the interests of justice and the individual's right to fair and reasonable treatment to restore public confidence in the criminal justice system". While society respects the need for police to respond differently in varying circumstances, in order to have confidence in the criminal justice system, they must not fear that the police will abuse this and act arbitrarily. The due process controls thus work towards equality in the adversarial process, ensuring that both parties operate within a known and impartial framework.
Although McConville et al raise some valid concerns, there is nonetheless a strong argument that due process safeguards should be the cornerstone of the English legal system. By enforcing equality and controlling the state, due process safeguards legitimise state intervention and minimise the negative effects of interrogation on suspects.
The remaining issue to be explored is the extent to which the current legal system embraces due process safeguards. Any inclusion of due process values in the English legal system is heavily reliant on social and political perceptions: crime rates, human rights and security threats all shape the way in which the law develops. By analysing in which direction legal reforms have shifted the focus of the criminal process, it will be possible to determine the extent to which society offers protection to suspects.
The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) has been considered as imposing "the biggest changes to basic police practice since the foundation of the service in 1829", introducing procedural safeguards and embracing due process values. It was introduced following several high profile miscarriages of justice which brought incidences of flagrant police malpractice to the fore. Many argue that PACE has "fundamentally changed criminal investigation, shifting towards a supposedly American model of due process". They list the provisions of PACE, such as tape recording of interviews and the availability of legal advice, and make sweeping statements that the existence of these new rights has "undeniably improved" the position of suspects. Taken at face value, this is a fair assumption. The language used in the Codes of Practice reflects strict procedures rather than mere guidance, "all detainees must be informed..." and is rife with references to rights and obligations, "[i]t is the interviewer's responsibility...". In theory, PACE has given a due process structure to interrogation, ensuring that suspects are offered a reasonable standard of protection and are not treated as presumed criminals.
However, while PACE provides an impressive list of safeguards and limitations, it is important to consider the practical consequences of the measures. The first criticism is that the legislations itself is flawed. It governs interrogation, an inherently crime control power, requiring that interviews take place in the police station, regardless of the best interests of the suspect. While this appears to place the suspects in a controlled environment where they can be afforded due process safeguards, it leaves low profile policing comparatively unregulated. I suggest that this failure to take a holistic approach to guaranteeing sufficient enforcement of safeguards throughout the process leaves the possibility for arbitrary determination of a suspect's guilt by the police, thus treating them as criminals and undermining the criminal justice system. This is supported by Ashworth's argument that as officers respond to increasing performance and economic pressures, there is "consequently greater reliance on various covert methods of law enforcement", where the end may justify the means.
An additional weakness in the drafting of PACE is that the provisions "rely on the police informing suspects of a right which is designed to protect them against those very same police officers". This reflects a belief in the infallibility of police officers, relying on a perception of them as a reliable instrument of the state, not autonomous individuals. Bridges and Sanders argue that enforcement by the police is "irrational and doomed to failure" and gives rise to the possibility of rule bending. As such, the police are in a position to ensure that any safeguards offered to suspects receive minimal enforcement.
A specific example is the Custody Officer, who is expected to avail suspects of their rights on being brought to the police station, and to act as a protective barrier to improper questioning. Research from the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice published in 1993 shows that the responsibilities of the Custody Officer "were performed very unevenly between different individual, divisions and forces, for a variety of reasons". The Custody Officer exemplifies the possibility for rule bending: empirical research shows ploys used include "incomplete or incomprehensible reading of rights", and misleading suspects about what they are signing on the custody record. While self-regulation of the police may appear the most efficient form of enforcement, I suggest that PACE merely gives the appearance of suspects' rights, and allows for suspects to be treated as the police deem appropriate. While it would be unfair to assume that the examples cited are wholly representative of the way in which Custody Officers operate, the potential in human nature for judging suspects as criminals is of grave concern.
While many hoped that PACE would mark the beginning of an era of due process safeguards, there has been a gradual erosion of suspect's rights. The key idea behind this is a strict crime control model: no measure is too stringent if it protects the public. Michael Howard, speaking as Home Secretary in 1993 suggested that "[i]n the last thirty years, the balance of the criminal justice system has been tilted too far in favour of the criminal and against the protection of the public...the time has come to put that right". This is reflective of the "profoundly politicized and populist" nature of the policy-making process. Trying to satisfy public concern for crime rates, Howard fails to recognise the possibility of safe, effective prosecutions achieved through a balance of due process and crime control.
Reiner notes that "the shift in the parameters of political debate from concern with due process to crime control values is illustrated by a host of government initiatives and U-turns". The first step in undermining common law protections was the restriction of the right to silence. The CJPOA now permits drawing adverse inferences from silence, where suspects would have been expected to mention certain facts, explain the presence of marks or to explain their presence at a particular location. The Criminal Justice (Terrorism and Conspiracy) Act 1998 made additional provisions for inferences where the suspect has failed to mention a fact which is material to the offence of belonging to a proscribed organisation. Maguire argues that the CJPOA "rather than encouraging detectives to seek other forms of evidence... returns the focus to the interview room, with all the attendant dangers of oppressive questioning, false confessions, and so on". It demonstrates a policy decision to favour efficiency over the rights of the suspect, making every attempt to gather evidence from the suspect rather than from more wide ranging sources. It fails to acknowledge that suspects are fallible, and when under severe pressure may make decisions and statements which are not in their best interest. Statements that it was necessary to remove the due process safeguard because it "was being ruthlessly exploited by terrorists", groups suspects, suggesting it is not worth protecting them if it creates the possibility of abuse by a minority.
Some argue that the HRA, and a greater cultural awareness and concern for human rights have preserved due process safeguards for suspects. However, both Garland and Ashworth argue that at a policy level, suspects' rights are no longer a key concern. This may be due to the fact that "the risk of unrestrained state authorities, of arbitrary power and the violation of civil liberties seem no longer figure so prominently in public concern". While it is possible to argue that Article 6 ECHR exerts an influence over the English criminal justice system, its importance for individuals is limited to the extent that they themselves must bring any legal action regarding enforcement. At a national level, there are "failures to apply the rule of law to the police", with a failure to criminalise breach of PACE provisions. It has also been stated that the exclusion confessions obtained in breach of PACE or the Codes of Practice should not be used to discipline the police. This disregard for human rights and their enforcement impacts on due process, such that the safeguards afforded to suspects are minimal.
In conclusion, given that reliable evidence is one of the key aims of the criminal process, due process safeguards are clearly an essential feature of police interrogation. If the system and results it produces cannot be considered valid and just, it cannot be called a justice system. The threat of "the Zeitgeist which values managerial efficiency, effectiveness and economy above philosophical principle or the painstaking assessment of empirical evidence" has the potential to treat suspects as a product to be processed. The interrogative procedures of the police should not tolerate unfair, abusive and discriminatory practices: they should facilitate a rational determination of innocence or guilt.