The Chancery Division Reports are a comprehensive record of decisions of the Chancery Division Courts, and the judgements reported therein provide a chronology of legal developments. In this essay, the judgments will stimulate discussion of the courts in the regulation and creation of trusts law. With equity as a guiding concept, the Courts of Chancery have historically intervened in order to remedy defects in and compensate for the rigidity of the common law. The subject of disputes before the court fluctuates as binding precedents are established and new legislation introduced.
This essay will focus on the wealth of decisions from 1953 and contrast them with those of exactly 50 years later, decisions which in relation to trusts law are considerably fewer in number, but no less in value. Broadly speaking, there has been a shift in the emphasis of the matters brought before the court. Firstly, there are fewer decisions in 2003 which relate directly to trusts law, with a marked decrease in issues arising from the construction of trusts instruments when compared to the numerous requests for clarification of the scope of terms in 1953. The correlative to this is that there have been additional areas of law for the courts to consider. The breach of EU Council Regulations and potential violation of the Human Rights Act 1998 are beyond the scope of this essay, but demonstrate the evolutionary nature of the English legal system.
A theme which is echoed between the years is the way in which intervention of the Chancery Division is required to resolve issues arising from uncertainty or error in the execution of trusts instruments. It is possible to attribute an element of this uncertainty to attempts at the creative use of the trust, with legal concepts being "manipulated" to achieve beneficial fiscal outcomes. Re Downshire Settled Estates; Re Blackwell's Settlement Trusts; Re Chapman's Settlement Trust
 is one such situation, where the beneficiaries sought to extend the rules of variation of trusts in order to avoid taxation. With regard to error, the case law in 2003 offers an illustration of errors attributable to trustees and their decisions. The theme of tax avoidance reoccurs indirectly, on this occasion framed in terms of the extent to which the court can intervene to enable the avoidance of detrimental fiscal consequences of trustees' decisions.
It would trivialise the relationship between law and society to enter into speculation as to the extralegal causes and extent of change at this point, but it is important to note that the use of the trust is closely associated with social, political and economic change so as to maximise benefit for the beneficiaries of the trust. The analysis will focus on overarching themes within the context of trusts, such as judicial intervention, discretion and the awareness of the extralegal consequences of decisions. With these ideas as the framework, comment will be directed towards the consideration of tax avoidance. The structure will be based around the decisions of Re Chapman, Re Gestetner Settlement
, and Re Barr, adopting a comparative perspective between 1953 and 2003.
Having raised some of the key issues before the court in 1953, it is now possible to look at the extent of change when compared to 2003. In order to contextualise the case law in 2003, I first propose to briefly consider the intermediate developments which offer insight into judicial attitudes in this area of trusts law.
A comparison over fifty years in reference to a few select cases is an insufficient arena in which to examine the subtle nuances of change. What has become evident during discussions is that trusts law continues to embody key principles of judicial intervention, equity and to some extent, morality. Individual judges often take different approaches to these issues, but this is as likely to occur during one decision as it is over a 50 year period. Where attitudes do vary, it is frequently in response to a demand for change from dissatisfied subjects of trusts law. Taken as a whole, the judgements create a rich tapestry of judicial reasoning, where strict adherence to the rules runs alongside fanciful comment and brave expeditions into the unknown.