Leopold van Ranke has traditionally been seen as the 'father of scientific history' primarily due to the innovative way in which he conducted research and produced historical works - 'Practitioners of quite different fields acknowledged that Ranke's kind of history was something radically new." He was given the aforementioned title by Herbert Baxter Adams, one of the founders of American graduate training. This anointment was mainly due to his incessant footnoting, his fascination in dealing with archive materials and his use of appendices. However, this attitude has been challenged by a number of historians, who have suggested that Ranke's style of history was not as pioneering as first thought. It is also important to take into account not only whether Ranke's method was scientific but whether this term could also be applied to his historical outlook in general. This essay, therefore, will analyse whether it is possible to classify Ranke as the 'father of scientific history'. It will ultimately come to the conclusion that this title can probably be bestowed upon Ranke in relation to his historical method but that it certainly could not be applied to him in terms of his historical stance. Overall, therefore, it would be inaccurate to depict him as the 'father of scientific history'.
Anthony Giddens, in his introduction to Ranke's famous work The Secret of World History, argues that the nineteenth century was an era of great development in Western thought due to events such as the French Revolution. He states that 'In an age when thought and science became historical, history became scientific'. Giddens is of the opinion that at the very centre of this transformation stood Ranke. His method of using accurate sources replaced imagery as the test for excellence in historical writing. The famous English historian, Lord Acton, stated that Ranke taught history to be 'critical, to be colourless, and to be new'. That is, extremely scientific in nature. 'History was raised to a science, based solely on painstaking research, and cleansed of distorting personal interpretations." It is now important to examine more closely the individual aspects of Ranke's approach which earned him the reputation of 'father of scientific history' in the first place.
One of the defining features of Ranke's historical style was his obsession with source criticism. He stressed the need to authenticate the validity of sources by examining extracts and quotations from secondary materials and comparing them to the originals by searching through the various historical archives of Europe to see whether they corroborated with each other. This extremely precise method of research with its need to verify the basic facts helped to earn Ranke the reputation as being highly scientific in nature. Perhaps the best example of this was in Ranke's critique of the Italian historian, Francesco Guicciardini, and in particular his work History of Italy which was regarded as the best historical piece of the Renaissance era and a reliable source on the complicated politics of that period. Ranke systematically destroyed this notion through an intense study of the original sources. He discovered that the narrative was not chronological and it was filled with interruptions and irrelevant stories. He found Guicciardini's style difficult to comprehend - 'I do not believe that anyone can read this history without taking offense at the great scrambling of events." In describing the battle of Pavia, 'Guicciardini practically dismisses all sources, and copies a strange account - and one which is even incorrect!" Ranke criticizes the validity of some of the speeches that Guicciardini supposedly made and subsequently included in his book. He argues that some were never delivered, some were delivered in a different way to how he reported and only a few were entirely genuine. Through this investigation, he demonstrated clearly the impossibility of writing accurate history from contemporary historians and memoirists. Even Ranke's most ardent critics admitted that his 'contributions to the criticism of modern historians' were 'the best part of Mister Ranke's work; at least they reveal that he has compared the different extracts in may ways'. Although it would be unfair to attribute this method of archival research as being founded solely by Ranke it would still be reasonable to call him its 'father', as he took the process to an extreme level - 'Ranke was not the first to use the archives, but the first to use them well." Other historians were forced to follow his example and delve into the archives.
Ranke also left behind his own trail of corroborating evidence in the form of footnotes. Anthony Grafton makes a direct link between footnotes and a scientific approach to history. He argues that footnotes 'are the humanist's rough equivalent of the scientist's report on data: they offer the empirical support for stories told and arguments presented'. Again, although he was not the first historian to use footnotes, he was the person who made them more than merely an afterthought in terms of writing history - 'Scientific history rests on primary rather than secondary sources: Leopold von Ranke... was [the footnote's] first famous practitioner." Indeed, scholars have argued over the birth of the footnote varying its date from the twelfth to the nineteenth century. Ranke supplemented his footnotes with appendices containing criticism of the sources - 'Appendices in fact formed the more distinguished and distinctive part of Ranke's commentary on his own text. They called forth his best efforts as researcher and as writer." The footnotes and appendices explain what Ranke was arguing and became a symbol of authenticity. He frequently used archive material in his footnotes and appendices.
Ranke was also of the opinion that the sources alone would be able to tell the story without the need for the historian's own interpretation. This, also, is an extremely scientific method of writing history - avoiding the temptation to put across one's own opinion, which Ranke deemed to be superfluous. Subjective opinions were to be avoided at all costs and instead Ranke stressed the need for examining issues with a sense of detachment in an entirely objective manner. His opinion on this matter has been summed up by his phrase that history should be documented 'wie es eigentlich gewesen', roughly translated into English as 'how it really was'. He felt that when writing a historical piece, a historian should erase all prior knowledge of the subject and especially any feelings of passion in order to write an accurate and unbiased history. Ranke also stressed the need for historicism - understanding the past in its own terms and not by judging it in the context in which the historian was writing. He criticized the Enlightenment historians for doing just that. He argued 'History was to be scientific, impartial, liberated from dependence on contemporary politics or philosophical systems'. The idea that the past should not be judged within the parameters of the present is obviously, therefore, along with the obsession with archival research, an extremely scientific idea.
However, there has also been a great deal of historiographical debate over other aspects of Ranke's methods which historians have argued were not scientific at all. For example, Ranke sought to develop arguments and theories by intuition rather than by reason. This was a Romantic method of history rather than a scientific approach. However, it has also been argued that Ranke's extremely sound grasp of sources meant that his intuition was always very well informed. Yet, no matter how informed his intuition was, this approach could never be considered scientific.
Another aspect of Ranke's historical method which was not scientific was his steadfast idea that general historical laws simply did not exist - 'Each event was unique and had to be understood as a discrete phenomenon." This area is more related to his outlook rather than his approach but is still a highly important component in determining whether Ranke was the 'father of scientific history'. Ranke was of the belief that human activity is unpredictable, and therefore it is impossible to draw up general rules of history. He argued that cultures have their own moral codes and values which are not transferable meaning that it was unfeasible to set up universal laws for societies. Science looks for universal theories, so in this respect also, Ranke was clearly unscientific. He wanted to get away from the all-encompassing histories of the Enlightenment emphasizing progress and avoid narratives covering multiple countries. The Enlightenment was a time of great scientific progress and as Ranke stood in opposition to one of the crux's of its historical themes, it detracts from the notion that he could be depicted as the 'father of scientific history'.
Ranke also believed that historical writing should be more than the presentation of the results of research. Indeed, he was concerned with combining accuracy with art - he still wanted to use a literary style in his writing in order to make his works reliable, but also accessible. This indicated an approach which was far from totally scientific, which would have been akin to a simple presentation of results. Franz Schnabel even sees Ranke's approach to history in terms of the state being the most important aspect as unscientific - Ranke 'looked upon the state from the top downwards, while the patriots saw it as their task in politics and science to judge public affairs from below, upon the basis of the rights and requirements of the people.'
Having previously depicted Ranke as extremely scientific in methodology, Grafton also puts some doubt into the reader's mind in the second half of The Footnote: A Curious History. He claims that there is evidence that 'Ranke, the founding father of the modern historian's craft, practiced it with no more discipline than his professional grandchildren and great-grandchildren'. He argues that Ranke composed his text as a whole, but only afterwards did he search his books, notes, extracts and summaries for evidence to support it. Grafton also explicitly states that in his opinion Ranke was not the originator of the footnote and even 'that Ranke wrote footnotes reluctantly'. He also declares that there is a great deal of confusion in terms of how Ranke should be viewed by historians - 'modern scholars are not sure whether to treat him as the first scientific historian or the last Romantic'. It is more likely that he was neither, but rather one of many links between these two disciplines of historical style. Peter Gay even argues that historians before Ranke were more deserving of the title 'father of scientific history' - ' Probably it is the French Benedictine Jean Mabillon who has the best claim to be the father of the scientific study of documents; his De re diplomatica of 1681 has never been superseded.'
Therefore, in conclusion, on first inspection it would be easy to anoint Ranke as the 'father of scientific history'. This was due to his seemingly novel approach to writing history in the form of constant footnoting, the attachment of appendices to his works, his passion for source criticism and research in the archives, as well as a strong belief in objectivity. However, basing the assessment on these aspects alone would be a gross simplification of a deeply complex matter. Ranke's actual historical outlook was almost diametrically opposed to his methodology. His method of historical understanding was by intuition rather than by reason, he refused to believe that general laws could be applied to the historical discipline and he was determined to maintain a writing style which was as literary as possible. These all seem deeply unscientific principles by which to write history. Consequently, it would be fair to argue that Leopold von Ranke can be seen as largely scientific in method but deeply unscientific in outlook. Overall, therefore, he cannot be considered as the 'father of scientific history' because he did not fulfil both of the criteria that would have earned him this title. In addition to his completely unscientific historical outlook, the doubts that Grafton begins to create in the reader's minds in terms of his actual approach only help to further undermine Ranke's status as the 'father of scientific history'.