In order for David to gain a remedy for the loss of the photos, there are several arguments he can advance. This essay will examine these arguments and comment on the validity of each argument and the likely.
If David is able to prove that the limitation clause was not part of the contract Photoprint will be liable for his loss and he will be able to seek a remedy. To do this David will need to prove that neither the limitation clause displayed on the sign, nor his irregular signing of the receipt, nor the ticket he received, result in the incorporation of the clause in the contract.
Prima facie, the clause covers the act concerned; the limitation clause covers "any claim loss or damage" and the act in question was clearly negligent damage to the film. However, David may successfully argue that the clause is not permitted to limit liability for negligence.
Exclusion clauses, unless clearly stated, as held in White
, cannot limit liability for negligence. However, this strict rule was relaxed in Canada Steamship
, which held that if the ordinary meaning of the words covered negligence then it could be excluded. 
Ailsa Craig Fishing
 further relaxed the rules of construction with regard to limitation clauses. Nonetheless, this is a restrained relaxation of the rules and the "words [of the clause] must be given, if possible, their natural, plain meaning".
Shell Chemicals
 demonstrated that ordinary meaning is interpreted strictly, and the court held that a clause excluding "all claims and demands whatever" was not adequately clear. In the case of any doubt the contra proferentum
 rule, that the courts should construe each term narrowly against the party seeking to rely on it, should be applied.
Nevertheless, it is uncertain whether the courts would find Photoprint clause to be sufficiently precise to limit liability for negligence. The phrase in Shell Chemicals is very similar to the caveat, "howsoever caused", used in the current case. This would suggest that Photoprint would be unable to limit their liability for negligence.
Unfortunately for David, the relaxation of the rules with regard to limitation clauses, as well as the introduction of UCTA, has resulted in a less rigorous attitude displayed by the courts towards the substance of limitation clauses. It is likely that the courts will determine that the clause does satisfy the construction rules.
Invalidating the clause under the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982:
This is a contract of service and, therefore, the Supply of Goods and Services Act (SGSA) 1982 is applicable. David has a contract for supply of service with Photoprint and "there is an implied term that the supplier will carry out the service with reasonable care and skill". Where the incorrect solution was used there is arguably a breach of this implied term.
Once the implied term has been established under SGSA David can seek to apply UCTA, to have the limitation clause effectively invalidated. UCTA clearly applies, as Photoprint is a business which satisfies section 1(3)(a) of UCTA, and, assuming that his business is not photography, David falls within the definition of consumer. David could rely on either section 2(2), for negligence, or section 3, for breach, to have the limitation clause nullified. In this case it is immaterial which section David seeks to rely on, as both impose the reasonableness test and would result in the same outcome.
The only remedy available to David is damages. In Woodman 23 of 36 photos were ruined and damages of 75 for distress and disappointment were awarded against the photographic processors. In Warren 
50 was awarded for the loss of a photographic film, on appeal Judge Kingham did not alter the award, but expressed, obiter, that he held 150 to be a more appropriate sum.
It is difficult to advise David of the amount he would receive in damages. In this case David has not suffered any direct distress or disappointment other than failing to fulfil his promise to Sue. This will be a factor limiting the amount awarded. However, an aggravating factor is the loss of two complete films, double the loss in Warren. It is certain that he will be awarded more than the cost of two replacement films and a fair estimate based on the case law and the facts of David's case would be 300 to 400.