The Proceeds of Crime Act (POCA) was introduced in 2002 to reduce the profitability of crime and thereby minimise the "corrosive effect of the proceeds of crime on society and the economy". The POCA was intended to give effect to the European Union Directive requiring the extension of money laundering legislation, beyond simply drug trafficking, to all crimes and to bolster and consolidate statutory reforms from the 80s and 90s.
These earlier reforms were introduced by Parliament in realisation that "the profits made from [certain criminal activities] were so great that the deterrent effects of even lengthy terms of imprisonment were negligible". In many cases prior to 1986, the courts were powerless to strip criminals of their unlawfully obtained assets. This was illustrated in R v Cuthbertson by Lord Diplock, who stated that, existing legal powers could not serve as a "means of stripping ... drug-traffickers of the total profits of their unlawful enterprises".
Separating criminals from their wealth not only serves as a highly effective reprimand, it also fulfils several important functions for society. Prior to the POCA a criminal could "spend his sentence secure in the knowledge that his ill-gotten gains ... would be available ... on his release"; depriving criminals of these gains serves to "deter others ... and send out a clear message ... that nobody is beyond the reach of the law". Confiscated monies are paid directly to the Home Office and are reinvested into crime reduction programmes, thereby further reducing the adverse impact of crime on society. Similarly, the POCA provides for innocent victims to reclaim direct financial losses.
In cases of serious organised crime unlawfully earned wealth can become the working capital for future criminal endeavours. One of the functions of the POCA is to respond to this threat and to act as a crime prevention measure as well as a punitive measure. A further fundamental objective is "to ensure that the [terrorist] misuse of the financial system is detected and defeated". Terrorist organisations depend on their ability to successfully raise and conceal funds. In both terrorist and organised crime cases, illegal monies can be retrieved, using powers conferred under the POCA, through either confiscation in criminal proceedings or recovery in civil proceedings.
This essay will examine the effects of the POCA on solicitors, accountants and bankers (hereafter 'practitioners'), with a particular focus on the implications for those dealing with trustees. It will also discuss whether the disruption and difficulties presented to practitioners in the financial sector by the POCA outweigh the benefits of the Act.
As well as consolidating previous legislation the POCA created a new agency, the Assets Recovery Agency (ARA). The ARA has the responsibility of "disrupting organised criminal enterprises through the recovery of criminal assets". To facilitate the ARA's task the POCA introduced the confiscation of criminal assets through civil proceedings, without the need for a criminal conviction. The ARA also has powers under the POCA to enforce confiscation orders made by the courts against convicted criminals. Restraint orders, which prevent dealing with property obtained through unlawful conduct, are also available under the POCA.
The aim of these provisions is to detect and prevent money laundering. Anti-money laundering provisions are contained in part 7 of the POCA, which has the greatest impact on practitioners. Furthermore, trusts "can be used as money laundering vehicles" and therefore the legislation has a significant effect on, and targets to a certain extent, those dealing with trustees.
Money laundering is the process of converting monies derived from criminal activities into funds which appear to have a legitimate source. In 2003 HM Customs and Excise estimated that 25 billion of the proceeds of crime were being laundered, this equated to 2.6% of the UK's Gross Domestic Product.
Money laundering occurs in three stages. Criminal profits are first placed into a legitimate business or into the financial system. The funds are then layered and transformed by buying and selling currency, property or other assets domestically and abroad to disguise the audit trail. This is the stage where trusts are most likely to be used, and "discretionary trusts and complex offshore trusts are most vulnerable". Then the seemingly legitimate money is reintegrated and returned to the criminal. Drug traffickers, terrorist organisations and organised criminals rely on successfully laundered funds. Effective prevention of money laundering is, therefore, imperative to the "[stability of] the political system of a country".
As the majority of money laundering is "sophisticated [and] involves the creation of front companies, trusts, etc" it is very difficult for criminals to launder money without the help of practitioners. Prior to the introduction of the POCA it was felt that businesses and practitioners were not providing enough support to the authorities in the fight against 'dirty money'. Part of the justification for the POCA was that the application of pressure directly on businesses "would [reduce] financially motivated crime [as] the criminal [would no longer have] at his disposal the means of concealing the origin of the proceeds".
The POCA creates offences based on the practitioner's knowledge or suspicion
 that he has become aware of, or involved in dealing with criminal property. These suspicions must then be reported to the Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA) to avoid incurring legal sanctions.
In order to comply with money laundering legislation and avoid committing a POCA offence, practitioners dealing with trusts are expected to be alert to the signs of money laundering. Practitioners must consider whether the true purpose of a trust with which they are dealing is to conceal criminal property. In order to do this, the Law Society expects solicitors to use their knowledge of the nature, purpose and original source of the funding for the trust to assess the risk.
To guarantee compliance with the POCA, several practical steps are recommended for solicitors dealing with trustees. Solicitors should investigate the trustee's position by referring to the establishing document of the trust. The identity of the trustee or the trustee company should also be verified, and, where solicitors are acting for more than one trustee the identity of at least two trustees should be ascertained. Particular care must be paid when dealing with trusts in offshore locations with strict bank secrecy and confidentiality rules or where the money laundering procedures are significantly less stringent. In such cases, solicitors are advised to make fuller enquiries of the trustees to obtain details, such as full name and the business or home address of the settlor.
A practitioner may be guilty of a principal POCA offence if he has concealed, disguised, converted, transferred or removed criminal property from any part of the UK; if he has become concerned in an arrangement that facilitates the acquisition, retention, use or control of criminal property; or if he has acquired, used or had possession of criminal property. The POCA defines criminal property as being "[constitutive of] a person's benefit from criminal conduct or [representative of] such a benefit".
The POCA broadened the scope of money laundering to reflect the fact that laundering is not "just about [transactions] of physical currency". POCA specifies that any activity attracting criminal sanctions is constitutive of money laundering. This means that certain offences which might not normally be regarded as criminal, such as participation in a cartel, could give rise to money laundering. The POCA is neither concerned with the nature of the underlying offence nor the size of the proceeds.
There are numerous statutory and common law defences available to those dealing with trustees. These defences provide important reassurance to practitioners who face a prison sentence of up to 14 years and an unlimited fine. The defences also serve as an important limitation to the broad scope of the POCA.
Practitioners may escape liability for the principal offences by making a disclosure prior to the potentially criminal act being carried out, in accordance with section 338. Once a disclosure has been made the practitioner must await consent from the SOCA before continuing with the transaction. Further statutory defences are available as well as common law defences, such as legal professional privilege. The defences and the procedure for disclosure give rise to several practical and legal implications for practitioners.
Having reported a suspicion, in order to avoid liability, practitioners must await consent from the SOCA before continuing with the transaction. This consent may be either express or deemed. The nature of the consent, as well as the time limits involved, is of particular importance to practitioners. Deemed consent arises either where the SOCA does not give notice that consent is refused within seven working days or where consent is refused by the SOCA in the initial seven day period but a further 31 days have elapsed without the SOCA obtaining a restraint order.
A practitioner awaiting consent has to deal with the anxious situation "caused by the twin monsters of an enraged client ... railing against [the practitioner's] apparent failures to do [his] job ... and a silent, unconstenting SOCA". Commercial pressures to rapidly complete transactions are incompatible with the uncertainty caused by waiting for deemed consent time periods to elapse.
Institutions which often become suspicious and delay dealings whilst consent is furtively sought are likely to lose business to competitors who apply the POCA provisions less rigorously. However, lax application of the POCA is a risky tactic, and lack of compliance or delays in reporting can result in sizeable repercussions for businesses. In 2003, Abbey National was dealt a 2.3 million fine for failing to ensure "suspicious activity reports (SARs) were promptly considered and reported to the NCIS". Businesses and practitioners have to attain the difficult equilibrium of satisfying their POCA obligations, whilst maintaining client satisfaction.
Express consent is a more attractive alternative and in such cases the average response time is less than three days. Whilst this has been a vast improvement to former 'turn-around' times, the lack of resources at the SOCA is still widely known. The time involved in the process consent is still seen as excessive for practitioners forced into an unnerving position and under considerable commercial demands.
Practitioners are continuously seeking practical ways to reduce consent times. This can often be achieved by careful focus on the facts provided to the SOCA; "they must be sufficient to provide an overview of the situation and the circumstances behind the knowledge or suspicion, but should not simply be a dump of information and documents". This places an additional burden on practitioners, as time and resources are spent researching the details of trustees and sifting through complex transactions to provide useful and decipherable information for the authorities.
The all encompassing nature of the POCA as well as practitioners' worries of criminal repercussions means that the SOCA receives a considerable number of reports. Fears have been expressed that where professional advisers are obliged to report trivial cases of money laundering this places "unacceptable burdens on small businesses". In practical terms, the "benefits of anti money laundering compliance [are] seen as less than the costs for most small and medium-size banks".
In the long-term, there may a decline in apprehension of the legislation and fewer SARs will be submitted. This would result in reduced disclosure by overworked professionals who refuse to file SARs which appear to be of little value to most businesses. This would in turn undermine the effectiveness of the legislation, which relies on practitioners reporting their suspicions.
In 2005 nearly 95,000 SARs were submitted; almost double the number of reports from 2003. Therefore, it appears more likely that reporting will reflect the current trend and continue to increase. Increased reporting will require greater resources for the SOCA to deal with requests. Unless government funding increases to match the costs, there are likely to be further delays pending consent. It is extremely probable that practitioners and financial institutions will incur increased expenditure, as yet more time and resources will have to be devoted to compliance.
The POCA has created some confusion with regard to legal professional privilege (LPP) and disclosure. In Bowman v Fels the Court of Appeal overrode previous case law and held that section 328, "was not intended to cover or affect the ordinary conduct of litigation by legal professionals". It was also held that it could not have been the intention of Parliament that steps taken by lawyers to determine or secure legal rights and remedies for their client would involve them committing an offence of "becom[ing] concerned in an arrangement which ... facilitates the acquisition, retention, use or control of criminal property".
This ruling is helpful to lawyers as its "exclude[s] lawyers involved in litigation from having to consider whether to make a report to avoid liability". Following the Bowman ruling the number of suspicious activity reports filed by solicitors dropped from 19,000 in 2004 to 9,600 in 2005.
However, the Bowman ruling that the common law LPP is no longer overridden by the disclosure requirement, is arguably obiter. The Court had already decided the case on the basis that litigation did not constitute an 'arrangement' under section 328. This creates a legal complexity for lawyers, as they cannot be certain of the exact law relating to LPP.
Some clarification is offered by the Law Society guidelines on Bowman v Fels which adopt the view that LPP is not overridden by the POCA. However, even by following this guidance to the letter, lawyers can still not be confident that they will not be committing a POCA offence. Following guidelines is only a mitigating factor, "it is not per se a defence ... to show that the guidance was followed".
If a practitioner assumes that the Law Society guidelines and the dicta in Bowman are correct, then before a making a disclosure he "will have to decide whether the common law LPP applies". If LPP applies then "no disclosure can be made without a client waiver". It is reasonable to deduce that no client guilty of an offence would be willing to waive his LPP, which would render a request for such consent worthless. Furthermore, if a practitioner were to seek his client's consent to waive his LPP, the act of inquiring could itself alert the client to the practitioner's suspicion and might result in a tipping off offence.
The tipping off offence is committed where following a report to the SOCA someone "makes a disclosure which is likely to prejudice any investigation". It is therefore, difficult for practitioners to refuse consent for a transaction and then have to deal with an irate customer, to whom no explanation can be offered. A practical solution for practitioners is to apply for an order for the execution of a trust to be carried out under the direction of the court. Any action by the client requiring compliance with his instructions will thus be prevented. Furthermore, this will provide evidence of honesty should a third party subsequently bring an action for 'dishonest assistance' in breach of trust.
The introduction of the POCA also created disquiet for financial institutions regarding the competing obligations of performance of contractual mandate and the duty to disclose suspicious activity to the authorities. This conflict of interest was resolved in K Ltd v. National Westminster Bank plc. The Court of Appeal held that, "although intervention [in the contract of mandate] is a serious interference with the free flow of trade, nevertheless Parliament has considered that a limited interference is to be tolerated in preference to allowing the undoubted evil of money-laundering to run rife in the commercial community".
The extreme consequences of the legislation were clearly highlighted by the Court of Appeal in terms of prohibition to the "free flow of trade". However, in practical terms, the ruling was pivotal for professionals and institutions, providing reassurance that compliance with the POCA would not result in exposure to litigation from clients for breach of contract.
Practitioners must also be wary of committing secondary offences such as failure to disclose. Such an offence would be committed if "in the course of business in the regulated sector

 [a practitioner] knows or suspects (or has reasonable grounds to know or suspect) that another person is engaged in money laundering [and] does not make the required disclosure as soon as practicable".
The offence of failure to disclose has exacerbated the "dramatic increase in the quantity, but unfortunately not the quality, of the disclosures made". In many cases reporting tends to result from unusual rather than suspicious behaviour and has been driven out of fear of remaining compliant rather than concern that money laundering is actually occurring.
There is no statutory definition of suspicion in the POCA and it "remains uncertain as to the degree of suspicion necessary to justify a refusal to comply with a client's instructions". In R v Da Silva the Court of Appeal held that suspicion arose where a "defendant ... thought there was a possibility, which was more than fanciful, that the other person was or had been engaged in or had benefited from criminal conduct". R v Da Silva defined suspicion as applicable to the Criminal Justice Act 1988. However, when passing judgment, the Court of Appeal also mentioned suspicion under the POCA, and it could therefore be assumed that the same definition should apply.
The Court of Appeal went on to say, "vague feeling of unease was not sufficient [and] the suspicion had to be firmly grounded and targeted on specific facts". Furthermore, it was held that using "[the term] "fleeting thought" is liable to mislead". The scope of suspicion is of vital practical importance to both financial professionals and their clients.
It is essential that the level of caution protecting against money laundering is not so restrictive as to inhibit day to day financial transactions. Therefore, unlike the "draconian effect of [drug trafficking] legislation" the POCA requires more than just a 'fleeting' suspicion about the origin of the funds.
A practitioner will also be able to justify his inaction by showing that he "did entertain a suspicion ... but, on further thought, honestly dismissed it from his or her mind as being unworthy or as contrary to such evidence as existed or as being outweighed by other considerations". However, in practice, this defence will be of little comfort to practitioners, who will have to hope they have done enough to convince the jury that, suspicion was not of a settled nature.
The line between a 'fleeting thought' and a 'possibility' is so fine "as to be impractical to apply in compliance procedures". To avoid potentially committing a POCA offence practitioners would be best advised to simply disclose anything they remotely suspect, including 'fleeting thoughts' of suspicion.
Where practitioners protect themselves by disclosing any unusual activity, this will impact on clients' business transactions and have an adverse effect on the 'free flow of trade'. Clients are forced to rely on practitioners exercising their good judgment when applying the legislation and only making disclosures where they have a genuine suspicion.
The problem of practitioners overzealously reporting unusual behaviour is compounded by the objective test imposed under section 330. The requirement is that a practitioner must make a disclosure if he has "reasonable grounds to know or suspect". Therefore, even where a practitioner can prove that he did not suspect money laundering, if it can be shown that he should reasonably have suspected then he will be guilty of an offence.
Practitioners must take care to scrutinise every transaction. A "seamless period of good conduct by a customer [followed by] one important piece of new information" would be enough to cause suspicion to occur. Therefore, practitioners must remain vigilant, and continued transactions with a client who had not aroused suspicion in the past will not protect practitioners from a POCA offence. This could damage relations between contracting parties, as practitioners can never afford to automatically trust a client's intentions. Furthermore, the practitioner has to devote extra time and resources to analyse the actions of even the most trustworthy clients.
There also appears to be a difference between the combined (objective and subjective) test for dishonesty when 'knowingly assisting' in breach of trust and the objective test for disclosure under POCA. This presents a key practical issue for practitioners dealing with trustees. Practitioners must be sure that where there is reasonable suspicion sufficient to lead the practitioner to submit a report to the relevant authorities they can nevertheless assist in the transaction and avoid the risk of constructive trusteeship.
Where a practitioner is unsure whether or not there is a breach of trust he is only "required to act honestly" in regard of the circumstances known to him. The practitioner would only be a constructive trustee and liable for the breach of trust if "in all the circumstances an honest man, having [the same] knowledge, would not have [acted], either at all or without making further enquiry ... to satisfy himself that there was no breach of trust". The mere suspicion required when reporting under POCA falls significantly short of dishonesty and therefore "the risk of liability as a constructive trustee presents itself ... as wholly unrealistic".
"One of the complained of iniquitous effects of the POCA is [its] extraterritorial reach". This is a result of the POCA's definition of criminal conduct, as an act which "would constitute an offence in any part of the United Kingdom if it occurred there". This has criminalised conduct which might not be unlawful in the country in which it occurred.
A commonly cited problem caused by section 340 is that of the Spanish matador, who is a revered celebrity in his country, however, his proceeds would be regarded as criminal in England and Wales. As a result, a UK-based professional would be required to regard his earnings as criminal property and would not be allowed to deal with him.
The government sought to rectify this difficulty for legitimate businesses by introducing changes to the POCA through the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (SOCPA). A person now no longer commits an offence "if he knows, or believes on reasonable grounds, that the relevant criminal conduct occurred ... outside the United Kingdom, and was not ... unlawful under the criminal law then applying in that country".
Certainty that the act was not unlawful in the country and time in which it occurred would, therefore, constitute a defence. This in itself creates difficulties, in a practical context, it may be necessary to take legal advice from local lawyers to be certain that the act was not a crime in the jurisdiction during the period it occurred. This will necessarily incur increased costs to businesses handling overseas transactions.
Furthermore, this defence is subject to the further proviso that it "is not of a description prescribed by an order made by the Secretary of State". Included in this list are any crimes which would be punishable in the UK by imprisonment with a maximum term of more than 12 months. "This renders the provision meaningless in all except the most minor of cases."
UK practitioners therefore have to comply with two legal regimes. This increases costs to businesses and amplifies the amount of compliance checks to be undertaken. Practitioners might, justifiably, decide to avoid the expenditure of time and resources through making a disclosure to the SOCA regardless of the availability of this defence. It has already been argued that, "[through] compliance with the law, UK firms have lost foreign business as a result of clients' concerns that a report will be made to [the SOCA] in respect of their apparently legitimate property".
There are other aspects in which the POCA appears ill conceived and poorly implemented. Further amendments had to be made to the POCA to "cater for the real possibility that a person might only begin to have a relevant knowledge or suspicion when halfway through [an] act". The SOCPA introduced an addendum to section 338 which allows a practitioner to make a disclosure whilst he is still doing the act as long as he began to do the act without knowledge or suspicion of benefit from criminal conduct.
Prior to this a bona fide practitioner who entered into a commercial transaction with no cause for suspicion could have seen himself guilty of a POCA offence for not having reported the suspicion before entering into the transaction. The practitioner had no statutory protection if he reported the offence during the act. This might have lead a panicked practitioner to remain silent and continue the money laundering rather than risking bringing attention to himself for 'committing a crime'.
Litigation in this area exemplifies the uncertainties prior to the amendments to section 338. In Tayeb v HSBC Bank plc, HSBC's suspicions were aroused following the receipt of a large transfer of currency. HSBC responded by filing a report and transferring the money back to its origin. The transfer was completely innocent and Tayeb issued a claim against HSBC in debt. The court ruled in favour of Tayeb and held that "reports ... made after the carrying out ... of what would otherwise be an unlawful act of facilitating money laundering [would be sufficient to avoid liability] provided that the report is made on [the bank's] initiative and as soon as it is reasonable for [it] to make it".
The amendments to section 338 also pose practical questions regarding the actions of practitioners following 'mid-act' disclosure. Whilst there is a requirement under sections 327(2)(a), 328(2)(a) and 329(2)(a) for consent before continuing with the act, there is no requirement for consent when the disclosure is made during the act under section 338(2A). It is, therefore, in doubt whether consent is implicit or the practitioner must desist immediately to avoid committing an offence under the POCA. The decision in Tayeb suggests that consent might be implicit. Colman J states that the flexibility of allowing mid-act or post-act reports "has the dual effect of avoiding the suspecting party being placed in the position in which he interrupts a transaction which course may have the consequence of tipping off the other person concerned".
A further original problem with the POCA was that disclosure to NCIS was of very little use where neither the name of the alleged offender, nor the criminal property could be identified by the reporter. However, practitioners were still obliged to report in order to avoid committing an offence. To prevent useless disclosures being made the POCA has been amended so a practitioner will only commit an offence if he is able to "identify [or provide information that will or may assist in the identification of] the other person [engaged in money laundering] or the whereabouts of any of the laundered property".
This amendment once again appears to be of little utility. Section 330(3A)(b) now invites practitioners to consider what law enforcement agencies might be able to glean from seemingly innocent information. Without detailed knowledge of the resources and techniques of the authorities, the amended legislation cannot be envisaged to have a significant impact on disclosure. Practitioners will continue to disclose all information no matter how innocuous, for want of falling foul of section 330(3A)(b).
Compliance with the POCA and the Money Laundering Regulations 2003 is seen as a major difficulty for the financial sector and high costs call into question the benefits of the legislation. A 2003 KPMG study found that the regulated sector spent an estimated 90 million per year on compliance costs and 60 million per year on capital costs, such as installing computer systems, compared to an estimated 11.5 million recovered and 70 million restrained. In a survey of medium and small banks, the consensus was that the costs of compliance outweighed the benefits of anti-money laundering. This was reflected by the small number of disclosures made by small and medium banks. The danger where the cost of regulation exceeds the expected gains is that it "[will encourage] distortions or even avoidance by those agents who do not 'accept' th[e] system of rules".
Having analysed the impact of anti money laundering compliance on institutions, it seems clear that the costs accrued are in excess of the benefits. Financial institutions do not view themselves as "stakeholders in upholding the integrity of the financial system", but rather as its "unpaid policemen".
It can be argued that the POCA was badly conceived and poorly drafted. Only through effective limitations by the courts and subsequent amendments by the government has the act become more clear and manageable. However, practitioners still have many difficulties attempting to comply with the POCA and this is illustrated by the huge number of disclosures, only a fraction of which are investigated by the authorities.
Prima facie the statistics suggest either that the POCA is too broad or that practitioners are overly suspicious; of 9,500 consent requests filed in 2005, only 8% were refused. In many areas the POCA remains untested and the overzealousness of reporting reflects the lack of certainty in the scope of the anti money laundering provisions.
There have been considerable practical implications for practitioners dealing with trustees. It is now common for practitioners to make extensive investigations into trustees with whom they are dealing to ensure that there is no criminal property being laundered. Practitioners must comply with a harsh disclosure regime, which requires them to constantly assess their suspicions or the suspicions they ought to have. As a result, transactions have to be delayed, data compiled for the authorities and practitioners are forced to deal with irate clients to whom they can explain nothing for fear of tipping them off.
However, for all its shortcomings, the POCA is "a step in the right direction as the UK financial services industry has been paying lip service to money laundering prevention for far too long". Whilst the cost of compliance and the practical effects on practitioners in the financial markets is significant, "it would be a brave person who steps up to say that it is too high a price to pay for countering terrorism and serious crime".