Insider dealing is summarised by McVea as, "the use of material inside information on public stock exchange (securities) markets to make a profit or avoid a loss". The problem of individuals abusing privileged inside information is not a new one. As early as the seventeenth century there were official reports of insiders using their privileged information to dump over-valued securities on the market. A statistical survey in 1971 demonstrated the potential scope of insider dealing. When asked what they would do if they learnt of a merger with a company whose shares were certain to rise when news of the merger became public, 12.5% of company directors said they would purchase shares and 11.5% would give the information to a friend.
It is instructive to consider that misuse of privileged information was only first criminalised by the Companies Act 1980. Prior to criminalisation, there was no statutory prohibition of insider dealing and the common law did not make insider dealing actionable. The very limited statutory controls were contained in the Companies Act 1967.
The Criminal Justice Act (CJA) 1993 is the current regulatory legislation and defines inside information as information relating to specific securities, which, if it were made public, would be likely to have a significant effect on their value. The CJA also prohibits the knowing disclosure of insider information to another.
It is important to note that there is no "constraint ... on the use of privileged knowledge in dealings other than securities". It is part of everyday commercial practice to use privileged knowledge to make a profit. If in every contractual situation a party with superior knowledge was required to share the knowledge with the other party, there would be no incentive to gather such knowledge. In transactions involving "the disposal of property and the conduct of commerce, it is necessary to have the best information available and therefore the acquisition of information should not be discouraged, let alone penalised." However, the basis for insider liability has continued to be expanded and the CJA extended the definition of 'securities'
 as well as 'insider'
.
Insider dealing is not universally recognised as a problem and many commentators believe that it should neither be subject to regulation nor criminal sanctions. This essay will discuss, in part one, the principal reasons why securities receive extra legal protection and investigate whether the current regulatory system, especially whether or not the criminal offence of insider dealing, is either necessary or desirable. The second part of the essay will look at whether the current law has sufficiently broad powers to allow the regulatory bodies to prevent and punish insider dealing.
Having studied the economic and ethical arguments it seems clear that regulation is desirable and that insider dealing should entail criminal sanctions. It is now necessary to examine whether the law successfully deters and punishes insiders.
Notwithstanding the debate over the economic affects and regardless of the lack of empirical evidence; it seems clear, to protect investor confidence and the reputation of the UK markets, that insider dealing should remain a criminal offence. Criminal sanctions are a desirable preventative mechanism as they limit the incentive to abuse or manipulate the market for insider profits. However, criminal sanctions should only apply to those "whose conduct is 'plainly morally reprehensible' rather than [for] technical offences".
Civil remedies under the FSMA are the most valuable to regulate technical infringements. The legislature should consider increasing the powers of the FSA as well as allowing private actions to increase the success rate of detecting and punishing insiders. A similar system to the US 'consent decrees' should be adopted. The overall aim should be to lower the costs of pursuing "small fry" whilst ensuring the "big fish" no longer get away.