Good corporate practices are vital for the confidence of investors and employees and indispensable to "help ensure the longevity of the organisation". The centrality of corporations and corporate power in the modern world also profoundly influences the economy and society as a whole. In order to ensure that good corporate practices are implemented and maintained, it is vital to apply a steadfast system of corporate governance.
Definitions of corporate governance are not always consistent. Corporate governance is primarily understood to be the relationship within a company between the shareholders (owners) and the directors (managers). More specifically it involves the means of the financiers of businesses gaining assurance of a return on their investment. Problems can arise where there is a significant separation between owners and managers, as shareholders are not in a position to prevent managerial excess, whether such excess results from incompetence, self-dealing or fraud. Corporate governance problems affect small family companies and large public companies alike, although public companies with dispersed shareholding suffer the most serious difficulties and are the focal point of much of the debate.
There is continued discussion as to how good corporate governance should be achieved and enforced. It is generally agreed that no single mechanism can provide the solution to the issues presented by a separation in ownership and control. In the UK corporate governance reforms have focused on the board of directors, in particular, the non-executive director and also on institutional investors.
Shareholders are able to appoint all of the members of the board of directors. However, the system still relies on non-executives as a controlling element. The articles of a company normally allocate extensive managerial powers to executive members of the board. Non-executives do not have these management capabilities and their responsibilities lie with general policy and strategy as well as the monitoring of executive directors. Monitoring is not intended to be a mere passive observation of the executives. Non-executives are entitled, and encouraged, to "give executive directors a rigorous drilling" where appropriate.
The requirement to monitor executive management is reinforced by the Combined Code which requires non-executive directors to "scrutinise the performance of management in meeting agreed goals and objectives and monitor the reporting of performance". The Combined Code specifies that "at least half the board, excluding the chairman, should comprise of non-executive directors".
There is no legislation in the area of corporate governance. The objectives of three influential committees and resulting codes were to establish proposals which improve the relationship between owners and managers "without recourse to heavy handed government intervention". The Combined Code is, therefore, not legally binding and there are no sanctions resulting from non-compliance.
The Financial Service Authority Listing Rules require a public listed company to include details in its annual report and accounts statement of how it has applied the general principles of the Combined Code and state whether or not it has complied with the Code of Best Practice. In the case of non-compliance, an explanation must be provided. Listed companies are legally required to comply with the Listing Rules. However, the only sanction for non-compliance with the Combined Code itself is the reaction of the market. This reaction can range from indifference to a dramatic drop in share price. A significant influence on the market reaction is institutional investors, who play a key role in corporate governance.
Institutional investors are shareholders, mainly comprising of pension funds and insurance companies. These investors have significantly increased in numbers over the last half century. The combined share ownership of pension funds and insurance companies in the UK has more than doubled from 16% in 1963 to 33% in 2004. Institutional investors have a strong interest in closely observing the corporate governance of companies, especially in light of the "internationalisation of cross-boarder portfolios" and in the wake of several financial crises in many parts of the globe.
This paper will examine the current form of corporate governance in the United Kingdom as well as the efficacy of the current regulatory regime.
In spite of the importance of corporate governance, it has only relatively recently achieved prominence in the commercial sector. Various corporate collapses and financial scandals have provided the catalyst for this rise to prominence. Barings Bank illustrated the need for sufficient and effective internal controls; Enron underlined the importance of honest directors with integrity and the significance of retaining independent auditors; Royal Ahold demonstrated the dangers associated with limiting the involvement of shareholders in the running of a company; and Parmalat showed that a lack of independence of board members could have potentially disastrous effects on the company.
Following such high profile and catastrophic failings from company directors and internal systems, much of the recent development of corporate governance has been driven by the need to restore investor confidence in capital markets. In the current system in the UK non-executive directors play a critical role in assuring good corporate governance.
As well as monitoring the management, non-executives are required to be satisfied "on the integrity of financial information and that financial controls and systems of risk management are robust and defensible". Appropriate levels of remuneration for executive directors are determined by their non-executive counterparts and non-executives also have an important role in appointing and removing executive directors. The non-executive directors are intended to consider the position of shareholders, and not to be sympathetic to the desires of executive colleagues.
Many directors, both executive and non-executive, see the role of non-executives as strategic rather than investigatory. In the past the non-executives have been accused of doing little more than rubber stamping managerial decisions. The existence of non-executive members on the board of directors provides no guarantee of effective monitoring and control of the management.
The system of appointment requires that "a majority of the nomination committee should be independent non-executive directors". However, there is no concrete guarantee that familiar associates of executive directors, who are unable exercise the impartiality required to properly uphold shareholders' interests, will not be appointed. Management often favour chief executives who occupy a similar role in another company. As a result, these non-executives "will not monitor any more diligently than they feel they should be monitored in running their own companies and will rarely risk loosing their jobs by questioning management's decisions".
The degree of independence to be expected of a non-executive is a key issue. Appointments still mainly arise as a result of friendship or a previous business relationship with executive officers. Reservations have been expressed over the partiality of non-executive directors with existing personal ties. Non-executives can also hold several posts and it has been argued that, no matter how talented a director is, "[he] can't be a good watchdog if [he is] only on patrol three times a year".
Non-executives who are sympathetic to the views of management and are unlikely to challenge decisions are more prone to being selected and retained. The danger is that those selected will feel indebted to the executives for having chosen them and will be more inclined to accommodate management by unquestioningly accepting their actions.
Non-executives may find they lack the necessary information in order to correctly monitor the actions of managers. Often managers control the quality, timing and volume of information released to non-executives. As a result information reaching non-executives can be distorted, inaccurate or insufficient. The Combined Code attempts thwart this practice by providing that information should be released in a timely manner and be of such quality that non-executives are able to discharge their duties.
Resignation is a course of action often favoured by non-executives who oppose managerial decisions. The majority of non-executives have full time positions in other companies and therefore, would not be able to allocate the time necessary to oppose managerial decisions. Resignation seems to be a particularly inadequate method of exerting pressure on the management and is not a desirable means of ensuring good corporate governance.
Monitoring is expected to run throughout a non-executive's term of office and not just in times of crisis. Nonetheless, the courts have expressed a reticence to impose too stringent a requirement on non-executives. It is felt, inter alia, that too high an expectation would result in no well-advised individual possibly agreeing to become a non-executive director.
In theory impartial members of the board who examine the workings of the company from an insider's perspective are good enforcers of corporate governance. In reality non-executives are not always independent, have significant pressures on their time, are unlikely to be overly critical of the approach taken by management and lack the necessary influence to resist poor managerial decisions.
Due to the size of institutional investors they have the ability to influence the actions of companies and these investors are seen as crucial to realizing good corporate governance. Institutional investors are expected to scrutinise company management on behalf of themselves and smaller shareholders. The Institutional Shareholders' Committee (ISC) recommends that institutions monitor performance and satisfy themselves that the investee company's board is effective. Institutional investors will normally consult reports published by the industry as well as undertake their own research to be sure that companies are complying with good governance recommendations. The ISC's aim is to identify problems at an early stage to limit impact on shareholder value.
Institutional shareholders can show their dissatisfaction with management through an 'exit' or 'voice' framework. Normally institutional investors will seek to resolve any contentious issues with management through discussions. Abstention from voting on, or voting against, a particular issue is a further extension of the exercise of an institutional investor's 'voice'. The ISC recommends the use of dialogue, but does not preclude the sale of shares where this would be the most effective response to concerns. Institutional investors are also in a position to intervene where they feel that it is necessary to do so. Intervention can take several forms, including, public statements or calling extraordinary general meetings.
Asking institutional investors to monitor and control management on behalf of all shareholders in the firm can present fundamental problems. There are questions as to how willing or capable institutions are to actively govern corporations. It has been argued that "institutions, at least on an individual basis, [do not have the incentive] to devote resources to active monitoring". This could be as a result of the fact that institutional shareholders are offered protection by the liquidity of the markets and can largely afford to be "uninterested in all but the most substantial abuses".
Institutional shareholders invest money on behalf of their own clients. The interests of these clients do not necessarily run parallel to those of other shareholders or stakeholders in the business. Large institutional investors may actively seek preferential treatment over other shareholders. Where these investors own equity with superior voting rights they may seek to avoid paying out cash flows on a pro-rata basis and instead pay themselves special dividends.
Problems of expropriation of smaller shareholders could be compounded where the institution is a different type of investor. For example, if the institutional investor is an equity holder it could use its position to compel the firm to take on risk, "since [the institutional investor] shares in the upside while the other investors, who might be creditors, bear all the costs of failure". It can be argued that, "while this governance structure may control managers, it leaves potential minority investors unprotected and hence unwilling to invest".
Theory, as well as evidence, suggests that hostile takeovers are an effective means of ensuring a company is well managed. Firms which are taken over are normally undervalued, which often reflects poor performance. Following acquisition, the new owner will typically remove the poorly functioning management. Takeovers have, therefore, been argued to be a crucial corporate governance mechanism. However, the significant cost of a takeover means that only companies with major performance failures are likely to be involved.
Many commentators believe that "the current institutional restraints on managerial behaviour ... are simply inadequate to prevent corporate assets from being used in ways dictated by the managerial interest". One suggested reason for this is the lack of sanctions behind the provisions of the Combined Code. At present, the only result of non-compliance will be the response of institutional shareholders and the market itself. Only in the most serious cases of managerial ineptitude or self-interest is there likely to be a reaction.
Arguably any meaningful market test is only likely to apply to small firms. The cost to a 'free' market capitalist society of a large corporation going into administration is too great for the government to endure. The government loan which bailed out British Energy in 2002 provides a good example of certain companies being "too large to fail". Therefore, the only realistic restraint on the management in large firms is the threat of hostile takeover.
Takeovers, institutional investors and non-executive directors all appear to be mechanisms which will detect and react to cases of gross mismanagement but which do not look closely enough or are indifferent to less serious managerial excesses.
The scandals of the end of the twentieth century and the beginning of the twenty-first, provoked immediate demands for legal change. However, using the law to regulate the financial industry "is not always the panacea hoped for". Compromises built into the law, inadequate solutions or inadequate resources for policing may be factors preventing the law from exercising effective control. The fear is also that companies would be able to easily adapt to the law and use techniques such as creative accounting to circumvent new rules.
For this reason, principles, rather than specific rules, have been adopted as the most desirable means of regulating the ever adapting corporate sector. This will better serve to see the spirit of the law respected, rather than the use of techniques to thwart the actual letter of the law.
Corporate governance regulation is still in its infancy; however, there is no doubt that it "is an economic necessity, a political requirement and a moral imperative". The foundations of a reliable system have been laid and continued development of the roles of non-executives and institutional investors are the most desirable direction in which to proceed.
Internal regulation of the board through non-executives is a valuable objective. It is vital that non-executives exercise sufficient scrutiny and have sufficient independence to exert control over management. However, arguably, the most important restraint is that of institutional investors. There is an increased realisation and acceptance from institutional investors that the enforcement of good corporate practice is their role. Successful regulation in this area relies on institutional investors continuing to embrace this role and to supplement the work of non-executives through carefully monitoring, and, where necessary, applying pressure on management on behalf of all other shareholders.
Companies are increasingly acceptant of the Combined Code and the Code of Best Practice. This acceptance, coupled with the willingness of institutional investors to control management, means that there is no need for prescriptive and inflexible laws. As institutional investors continue to increasingly adapt to their role, monitoring and pressure on the board will increase, and better corporate governance practices will result.
It is vital to avoid the repetition of past damaging financial scandals. Should the current system fail to sufficiently regulate excessive managements, legal regulation should be considered. Meanwhile, the system should be subjected to continued review and institutional shareholders and the market itself should be encouraged to participate as much as possible.