This quote, as cited by David Friedman, encapsulates a dominant, traditional view of monopolised markets and industries. This negative perception stems from the productive, allocative and welfare inefficiencies associated with the monopoly 'price making' structure, whereby the quantity and price are set equal to marginal cost, (P=MC) resulting in artificially high prices, under production and the extraction by the monopolist of supernormal profits; overall, leading to economic inefficiency. However, there are some economists and theorists of today who disagree with the traditional conception of monopoly economic inefficiency. Using ideas drawn from neo-classical theory and the work of economists such as Joseph A Schumpeter, this essay aims to address the extent to which monopolies can actually induce economic efficiency. The factors of vertical integration, horizontal market contestability, technology, the role of advertising and market demand elasticity, as laid out above in the problematic, will be used as tools to structure this essay and hence analyse the extent to which monopoly can induce economic efficiency.
A firm which is involved in more than one successive stage of production is said to be 'vertically integrated'. According to European Union Competition policy vertical integration may result in the exploitation of further economies of scale, cost savings, lower prices and hence increased productive efficiency. (European Union Competition Policy. ) The implicit ambiguity contained in this statement leads onto the question of why a firm may jeopardise existing efficiency levels in order to vertically integrate. Jeffrey Perloff claims that "if a firm can perform most of the necessary stages of production at lower cost than it would incur buying from other firms, it would vertically integrate." (Perloff, J., 2001, p.530) Firms will take into account the increased costs associated with integration, such as management costs and legal fees, in addition to the extra costs of the increased production. If the benefits of integration, in the form of economies of scale cost savings for example, outweigh these costs, the firm will integrate, thereby increasing economic efficiency in the form of lower costs potentially higher outputs and possibly lower prices for consumers. Perloff identifies a number of further benefits firms accrue from integration. Firstly, vertical integration lowers 'Transaction costs'. These are the costs associated with trading with other firms, such as contractual costs and prices of goods. Asymmetric information, under non-integration, also keeps costs higher. For example, non-integrated firms may incur these costs in monitoring the quality control of the goods they are purchasing from sellers in order for production. However, integration can overcome these costs, through internal quality control management. Secondly, vertical integration increases stability for companies. Relying on upstream firms to maintain a steady supply and price of stock, can cause instability; there are no fixed guarantees that the required goods will be delivered on time and meet the required quality control standards. Vertical integration can overcome this problem.
* * *
These efficiencies described above, are directly associated with the process of vertical integration itself. However, vertical integration in certain market structures can increase efficiency further. For Neo-Classical economists, vertical integration is perceived as a response to inefficiencies associated with monopoly market power in both 'upstream' and 'downstream' markets, leading to what is known as 'double marginalisation'. From our knowledge of monopoly's, we know that they set P=MC in order to extract supernormal profits. Fig 1. demonstrates the pricing strategy of a monopoly. The shaded area between Average Cost (AC) and the price paid by consumers (D = P*) represents the supernormal profits obtained by the firm under this pricing strategy. Double marginalisation arises through the failure of the 'downstream' firm to take the 'marginal pricing strategy' of the 'upstream' firm into account and hence engage in a marginal pricing strategy of its own, resulting in unnaturally high consumer prices. Jean Tirole refers to this inefficiency as a 'Vertical Externality'. (Joskow, P., 2005, p.5) Aggregate profits are lower under double marginalisation than for the vertically integrated structure, which provides the incentive to firms to integrate and hence remove this negative externality. According to Joskow: "prices charged to consumers will fall and, as a result, consumers are made better off by vertical; integration." (Joskow, P., 2005, p.6)
* * *
Vertical integration can also improve efficiency in structures where the 'upstream firm' is a monopoly and downstream structure is characterised by competition. In this case, according to economists such as Graham and Vernon (1971) an upstream monopolist, attempting to extract supernormal profits by setting prices above marginal cost, will in fact cause the downstream, competitive firms to substitute away from the monopoly products, resulting in inefficient production at the next stage. (Cited in Schmalensee, R., 1973, p.442) Vertical integration internalizes marginal cost pricing, allowing the firm to overcome this inefficiency and "restore an efficient utilization of inputs used in the production of the downstream good or service". (Joskow, P., 2005, p.7) From the evidence laid out above, it appears that vertical integration in some cases can induce some level of economic efficiency. According to Tirole, the welfare and efficiency derived depends on the motivation behind vertical integration. (
) Similarly, Joskow advocates efficiency motivations for vertical integration in favour of foreclosure (anti-trust) motivations. Furthermore, the European Union Competition Policy states that: "when companies combine via merger, this generally has a positive impact on markets: firms usually become more efficient, competition intensifies and the final consumer will benefit from higher quality goods at fairer prices. (European Union Competition Policy. p.5)
The level of contestability within a market can also be an indicator of or even an incentive for monopoly's to induce higher levels of economic efficiency. William Baumol (1922) defines contestable markets as those "where an entrant has access to all production techniques available to all incumbents, is not prohibited from wooing the incumbents customers, and entry decisions can be reversed without cost." ( p.8) The logic behind the theory suggests that the more contestable the market, i.e. the easier to enter and exit, the more incentive there is for firms to 'enter' or 'exit' the market as freely as they wish. Markets where incumbent firms are making supernormal profits (Fig 2, The dotted rectangle, Q1, PM) create extremely high incentives for outsider firms to enter the market, under cutting the incumbents prices, extract supernormal profits and the incumbents' entire market share, before exiting the market without incurring any sunk costs (Fig 2, market share = shaded pink rectangle PN) . These are known as 'hit and run tactics'. Therefore, it follows that in a contestable market, even if the incumbent firm has monopolised the market, it may not exercise its power, i.e. through high prices and restricted output to gain high profits, in order to try and prevent 'outsiders' from entering. The rationale behind this being that the dominance of the market, but with normal profits is better than no profit or market share at all. To demonstrate this idea in terms of real life application, the Office of Fair Trading in the UK surveys the contestability of markets when analysing the potentiality of a firm to dominate through exertion of market power, thereby suggesting that if a market is contestable, even a firm operating as a monopoly poses little threat to operate in an economically inefficient manner. ( p.8) However, the extent to which a monopoly will refrain from operating at a profit maximising level, in order to deter entry into a market is heavily contested by some economists. For them, it would make more sense to maximise profits until new firms enter the market. It is only at this point that the incumbent monopoly should drop its prices, in order to squeeze the new entrants out of the market.
MCACD=ARMRQPFig 3. Monopoly and InnovationMC 1 Q QTIn an industry where there are increasing returns to scale, a monopoly can be more efficient than a number of firms competing. This is because smaller firms require more resources to produce a given amount than one single firm. Furthermore, these increased resources lead to higher costs, lower profits and hence, less resources to spend on technical innovation. By keeping two firms in existence, rather than allowing for monopoly, keeps the economy inside its production possibility frontier, and rendering the production within that market inefficient. These efficiency ideas were pioneered by Joseph Schumpeter who asserted that because monopoly receives supernormal profits, they have more resources to invest in technological innovation which will provide more efficient and cheaper modes of production. Monopoly will invest in ever increasingly efficient modes of production, even if this means disregarding previously used resources, because "competition from innovations is an ever-present threat that disciplines before it attacks." () Monopolists will invest in new machinery as long as doing so will lower costs. The shaded area in Fig 3. represents the PTPMamount that a monopoly is willing to spend on innovating its production techniques. The reduction in cost that the innovation produces is shown by the downwards shift in the Marginal cost curve. (from MC - MC1). It is clear from the diagram that this innovation is more efficient. After the innovation, a higher quantity is produced at a lower price.
MCMRD=ARPriceQmQuantityQcFig 4. Consumer surplus and deadweight welfare lossElastic demandInelastic demandAs the sole provider of a product, monopoly dominates the market for its products. To continue to enjoy this market share, monopoly firms need to make sure that their consumers remain loyal to them if another firm should enter the market. Neo-classical theorists view advertising as a source of information for consumers. Their 'advertising-as-information' hypothesis follows that consumers, armed with their greater knowledge of the product, are able exercise their rational judgement to distinguish their preferences regarding the product. Neo-classicalists advocate that knowledge is power, and advertising, through promoting knowledge, empowers consumers. Dr. Donghyun Park, in his paper "Advertising and the Meaning of Competition.", uses the analogy of voting behaviour to illustrate this point: "Just as informed voters are better able to place better qualified candidates in office, better informed consumers are better able to reward more efficient firms and punish less efficient firms" by either purchasing or not purchasing their goods. (Park, D., p.22) Therefore, monopoly firms have the incentive to operate efficiently, and produce quality products so as to maintain loyalty from their consumers in the event of another firm entering the market.
As monopoly faces a downward sloping demand curve, when performing under single pricing strategy, a net 'deadweight welfare loss' to society is created, that is the output that is lost in a market characterised by monopoly rather than perfect competition. This is demonstrated in fig 4. by the red triangle. The green triangle represents the consumer surplus, enjoyed by consumers under perfect competition, but which is lost through the marginal pricing strategy of monopoly. However, the remaining consumer surplus, represented by the blue triangle, can be gained by the monopolist if they engage in price discriminating policies. The effects of price discriminating policies are fairly ambiguous, but it has been argued that they can actually improve efficiency levels. The downward sloping demand curve implies that different consumers place differential values on a given good.
This willingness to pay different prices indicates elasticity's of demand. There are three concepts of price discrimination. First degree price discrimination, which is often refereed to as 'perfect' price discrimination, allows monopoly's to charge prices according to individual demand curves, yielding a fully efficient outcome in the sense of maximizing surpluses. However, first degree price discrimination is hard to achieve, because it is not possible to know the exact price each consumer is willing to pay. A more effective discriminatory pricing policy in accordance with differing elasticity's of demand, markets is third degree price discrimination which can have the effect of increasing welfare when it encourages a sufficiently large increase in output. It works by splitting consumers into groups associated with their demand elasticity and charging a price equal to the elasticity of the market: (where Pi and Pj are the prices charged to each market i and j , which have demand elasticity's Ei and Ej respectively,).
Eq 1
which is equal to:
Eq 2
If, for example, Ei = -2 and Ej =-3, equation. 2 shows that Pi/Pj = 1.3333 = 4/3, which means that prices will be one third higher in the less elastic market, (market i) or conversely, one third less in the inelastic market. In Fig 6, the inelastic market is characterised by a steeper sloping demand curve. From this it is clear to see that the change in quantity demanded in response to a change in price is relatively small when compared to the more elastic market, which is characterised by a flatter demand curve. The implication of this however, is that price discrimination, which is possible through monopoly, increases output in the elastic market segment compared to linear pricing models, where the overall price is higher. If third degree price discrimination increases overall output, allocative efficiency is synonymously improved. (Nicholson, W., 2005, p.400) Moreover, third-degree price discrimination can increase welfare in those niche markets that would not otherwise be served under a uniform pricing policy. In general, discriminatory pricing policies, engaged by monopolies in accordance with elasticity can have the effect of inducing higher efficiency through increased output and lower prices. This increase in output not only benefits the consumer, but may give rise to further economies of scale which lower costs for the producer and could in turn reflect lower prices for consumers. Furthermore, price discrimination eliminates the net-deadweight welfare loss associated with linear pricing. Because the monopoly is collecting the sum of the producer and consumer surplus, (the pink shaded area on Fig 5) it is satisfying both the first and second efficiency conditions; marginal pricing strategy and maximization of consumer and producer surpluses. ( Friedman, D., 1986)
The arguments laid out above in turn argue that monopoly can and does have the ability to induce economic efficiency, but the extent to which this efficiency is induced depends on the factors of vertical integration, horizontal market contestability, Technology, the role of advertising and market demand elasticity. However, because the nature of markets is unpredictable, the efficiency arguments for some of these factors are ambiguous and in many cases, the extent to which Monopoly induces efficiency from them depends directly on a number of individual market dynamics. However, from the arguments laid out above, it is clear that the five factors provide not only subjective arguments for induced efficiency under monopoly, but rational incentives and motivations for monopoly to generate increased efficiency levels, not only for societal benefit, but for sustained monopoly survival.