In 1958, a study published by Alan W Phillips aimed to establish a negative relation between inflation and unemployment. His examination of the major economies of the world revealed a clear 'trade-off' between inflation and unemployment, his findings coming to be known as the 'Phillips Curve'. The establishment of such a relationship became a topic of significant interest to scholars and politicians alike; if such a relationship did exist, it carried with it a number of significant policy implications; the idea that Governments could maintain low levels of unemployment, by tolerating higher inflation rates. However, during the 1970's, the relationship appeared to break down, thus inciting scholars from all economic schools of thought, to attach their own theoretical explanations as to why the relationship no longer appeared to hold. Firstly this essay will investigate the derivation of Phillips curve in its original context, before exploring the developments provided by main scholars from the Keynesian, Monetarist and Neo-Classical schools of thought following the breakdown of the relationship. Through the use of real life examples to support the economic theories, this essay aims to establish why scholars believe the Phillips relation no longer exists, or if indeed, it ever did.
* * *
Phillips's empirical research showed that there was a negative relation between unemployment and inflation. Fig. 1 which plots the inflation rate and unemployment levels of the United States during the 1960s. As the data shows, there is a clear negative relation between the two sets of data. Phillips used the nature of demand to explain his findings. Essentially, lower unemployment levels are perceived an indication of an excess demand for labour;
(or in national terms
Due to the characteristics of the supply/demand nature of the labour market, this excess demand leads to higher nominal wages. However, these higher wages are reflected in higher prices due to an increase in production costs. Once the higher price levels have been set, workers respond by requesting higher wages to maintain their living standards and hence the process is repeated in what Phillips referred to as a 'wage-Price' spiral. The excess demand relative to supply, which denotes low unemployment levels, consequently leads to higher wages, higher costs and prices, and hence can be said to be inversely related to the rate of inflation within an economy. Represented algebraically, the equation can be illustrated as follows:
The term 't', denotes current inflation. The level of inflation is equal to the parameters '', which denotes the mark-up, plus 'z', which is a 'catchall' variable expressing the factors which affect wage determination. The parameter '' represents the negative affect that the wage level has on the unemployment level, 'Ut'.
However, Phillip's acclaim was short lived. During the 1970s, many economies across the globe experienced periods of significant stagflation; high inflation and high unemployment, which signalled a breakdown of the Phillips relation. This is exemplified in Fig. 3.,which plots the unemployment and inflation rates in the United States between 1970 and 2000. These changing economic circumstances inspired economic scholars from many different schools to develop their own theoretical interpretation of Phillip's findings in order to help explain the economic reasons for the breakdown.
* * *
As a result of the stagflation witnessed throughout the 1970's, Keynesian economists, such as Lipsey, modified their theory of the Phillips relation. As previously, the Keynesians placed a heavy emphasis on Governmental use of demand management policies, to sustain desired unemployment levels. However, under the new modifications, significant further emphasis was placed on the importance of cost-push factors, an emphasis on equilibrium employment and an inclusion of the role of expectations on the Phillips relation. Keynesians maintained that the Phillips relation still held, but it had shifted to the right as a consequence
of three further factors, central to the modified Keynsian theory (see Fig. 4).
AWage /Price rateInflation %Unemployment %Fig. 4IIIP1P2P3U1U2BCFirstly, Governments, following traditional Phillips intuition, were unable to recognise the full effects of unexpected cost-push inflation from supply side shocks such as oil price shocks, increasing monopoly power in industries and growing prominence of industrial action and strikes. During the period of stagflation, Keynesians argue that the curve had actually shifted to the right, moving from point A to B on Fig 4. Following Phillips intuition, the only way to reduce unemployment would be implement demand measures, incurring high levels of inflation. (Represented as a move from point B > C in Fig 4). However, Keynesians recognise the important effects that alternative policy measures, such as price income policy (restrictions on Trade Union power) can impose on the economy. It was therefore suggested that such policies could be utilized to shift the Phillips curve back to its original position and hence reduce both inflation and unemployment synonymously. Controversially, some Keynesians noted that in extreme cases the Phillips relation may not necessarily be downward sloping. According to this view, significant growth in Trade Union power, or decrease in economic growth, and hence demand for an increase in real wages, could lead to an extreme case of cost-push inflation, significant stagflation and hence, an upward sloping Phillips curve, represented in the movement from 'A' > 'B' in Fig 5.
Secondly, Keynesians noticed that rapidly changing industrial structures; such as technological revolution, alterations in the nature of demand; from labour intensive, to capital intensive products and increased competition from abroad, had changed the nature of the labour market in such a way that the free market could not accommodate. The original Phillips relation failed to account for the possibility that the equilibrium level of unemployment was subject to change and hence higher unemployment levels were experienced as a result of the failings of governments to intervene accordingly.
* * *
The influence of expectations on the output and employment decisions, make up the third factor of the modified approach. Keynesians recognise the significance of expectations of future economic performance on the actual function of the economy and the success of Government policy on unemployment and inflation: "If people believe an expansion of demand will lead to higher output and employment, then, via the accelerator, it will." (Sloman. J. Economics Second Edition p.870)
In a similar fashion to Keynesians, Monetarists also recognise a relationship between unemployment and inflation. The monetarist approach however, emphasises the role of expectations in distinguishing the long-run Phillips curve and the Short-run Phillips curve. Pioneered by leading monetarists such as Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps, this theory is known as the 'Expectations - Augmented' Curve. (  = f(1/u) + 
e ) Recognizing that workers are interested in real, as opposed to nominal, wage increases, the theory places fundamental importance on the level of expected inflation and how this expected level affects wage determination. Expectations for the current year's inflation rates (
et) are based on the level of inflation from the previous year (
et-1): (
et) = (
et-1)
* * *
Furthermore, Monetarists maintain that there is not one single Phillips curve, but that there is an "infinitive number of curves; one for each possible level of inflation." (Sloman, J. Economics, second Edition p.458) In order to reduce the level of unemployment, below the 'natural rate' (U*, from U*> U) real wages must be increased, thus providing an incentive for unemployed individuals to enter into work. However, an increase in wages, leads to an increase in prices and hence an increase in inflation. (W=P=
. represented as a move from point A > B in Fig. 6) An increase in inflation means that the expected inflation rate also increases. The real wage increase no longer holds- even though wages are higher, they have in fact remained constant relative to inflation. In order to prevent the economy moving back to point C on the diagram, that is, a higher unemployment and inflation rate, and maintain the current level of unemployment, the wage rate must be increased again, above the current level of inflation. (point D in Fig. 6). In short; the change in wages, which leads to higher prices and higher inflation, is dependent on the pressure of demand for labour (U* - U) and the expected level of inflation (

e). The higher the demand pressure for labour, the greater the affect. (However, if U* = U, then inflation would equal 

e ). This relation can be represented algebraically as follows:
In the short run, the Phillips relation holds that lower unemployment levels are synonymous with high levels inflation. However, maintaining the unemployment level is dependent on an increasing inflation rate, which over the long term is clearly unsustainable. Therefore, the Monetarists maintain that the long run Phillips curve is not downward sloping, but Vertical at the point of the 'natural rate of unemployment'.
Unemployment %Inflation %ULR and SR PCFig. 8 Vertical LR and SR Phillips curveThe third major criticism comes from the new Classical school of economists. Emphasising the flexibility of wage and price levels and the importance of 'rational' expectations, this more radical critique argues that there is no downward sloping relation between inflation and unemployment in either the long or the short run. According to the theory, the relationship between unemployment and inflation is constantly vertical. The implication of this is that demand management policies will have no affect on either component in the short or long term. The rational behind this assertion stems from the New Classicalist belief that rational expectations produce vertical short and long CP2P1SRAS2SRAS1AD2AS1LRAS = SRASNational OutputQnPriceABFig. 7 Vertical LR and SR AS curvesrun aggregate supply curves. Due to the way in which expectations are formed, aggregate supply (AS) remains constant over both the short and long run. For example, an increase in aggregate demand (AD) from AD1>AD2 in Fig. 7 under the new-classical assumption, will not lead to increased output (point B) as advocated by other economist schools of thought, but will move directly to pint C, where output has not changed but prices have increased. This is due to the rational expectation that an increase in AD will eventually lead to a price increase, and hence prices increase automatically due to this expectation. (point B, represents the affect of an increase in AD under the assumption that prices will remain constant based on last years prices.) The implication however, is that demand management policies can be used to manipulate inflation, but because they have no affect on output, cannot be used to influence unemployment levels. Therefore, in both the long and short run, the Phillips relation is vertical.(see Fig. 8) Under the new-classical assumption, all unemployment is viewed as voluntary and in a state of equilibrium. Therefore, if the rate of unemployment does change, this is perceived as a change in the equilibrium level of unemployment, possibly as a result of changing employment incentives such as increased minimum wage, decreases in the rate of unemployment benefits.
Fig. 9 ( radical view of the new-Classicalist theory has become increasingly popular in more recent years. Alan Greenspan, an American economist and former Chairman of the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve, strongly advocated the approach taken by the new-Classicalists. Noting that during the 1990's the U.S had experienced a period of low unemployment alongside low inflation rates, Greenspan argued that no such Phillips relation exists: "In his latest testimony before the Senate, Alan Greenspan shot down the idea of a Phillips curve relation, noting that very low rates of inflation have co-existed with very low rates of unemployment for some time." (Oliver. C. (1999) Ludwig Von Mises Institute. ) (An example of the low inflation and low unemployment in the US can be viewed at European Central Bank: 
).
There are a number of economists which share the scepticism demonstrated by Greenspan. Richard Vedder, a highly published and well respected economist, claims that the Phillips curve, apparent in the 1960's, was merely an illusion; "price inflation fooled businesses into thinking that the demand for their product was going up so they hired more people. That's why there appeared to be a link in the Phillips relation" saying that at some point business leaders figured out that the prices they charged were getting higher due to inflation and not increasing demand. When that happened, the link between unemployment and inflation broke. (Oliver. C. (1999) Ludwig Von Mises Institute). Furthermore, many economists have warned of the dangers associated with policy that follows the Phillips relation. Brian. S. Wesbury, chief economist with First Trust Portfolio's Ltd, in his Wall Street Journal article; "life After Greenspan", discusses how following the Phillips relation as a policy guide can lead to needless instability in the economy: "The Fed's insistence on using capacity measures and the Phillips Curve causes it to overshoot on both sides - tightening too much and then easing excessively. This creates unnecessary volatility in the economy...". Clearly concerned about the future of the economy, he continues by asserting that: "the only way to avoid economic damage is to move away from the Phillips Curve." (Wesbury. B, S. (2006) "Life After Greenspan" Wall Street Journal N.Y. P. A14)
These powerful sentiments clearly highlight the growing skepticism that surrounds the inverse relationship identified by Phillips. While some economists argue that the relationship as presented by Phillips still exists today, the diverse range of modified theories which emerged as a result of the breakdown, are insufficient in supporting a single universal definition of the principle. "The Phillips Curve may still be useful in a short run context, but is not sufficient to explain the long run dynamics of the relationship, and shifts in the entire function over time." (Rummary.S. "What is the relationship between price inflation and the unemployment rate?" t0211.pdf). In fact, whether the Phillips curve slopes upwards, downwards, lies vertically or in fact exists at all is an issue which still remains open to debate and hence clearly carries significant implications for it's success as an economic management tool: "The Phillips Curve does not explain the eight years of economic expansion during the 1990's, when the U.S. economy experienced historically low unemployment and low price inflation, simultaneously! Is this another contradiction of the Phillips Curve, or does it suggest that the Phillips Curve has shifted yet again, this time to the left, and now comprised of lower inflation and unemployment combinations?" (). The ambiguity which shrouds the issue of the Phillips relation is a clear reflection of the growing volatility and growing frequency with which the nature of the economy is changing. External factors, such as price shocks associated with fluctuating commodity prices, are exerting increasing influence over the function and overall stability of both the national and international economy, rendering the derivation and applicability of such a relationship as the Phillips Curve, an extremely problematical or perhaps even impossible task.