The post-war era signified a need for fundamental change. Not only was the global economy in tatters, but international relations were incredibly strained. The Bretton Woods system of international institutions; the IMF, World Bank and GATT, contextualised against a fixed exchange rate sought to rebuild the international political economy. Signed and ratified during the first three weeks of July 1944, The agreement committed member states to peg their currencies, via the exchange rate mechanism, to the dollar which was fixed to the value of Gold, held constant at 35$ per ounce. Members were committed to maintain par values within a 1% margin of the fixed rate, aided by the IMF, initially set up to bridge any temporary payments imbalances.(Grabbe, O. 1996) Despite the intentions and aims of the Bretton Woods system to create a stable global economic environment, the system collapsed within a quarter of a century of its inception. Discussed throughout political economy literature are the possible contributive causes of the breakdown. Whether the demise of the system is perceived as a consequence of inherent structural weakness; as embodied in the functional ineffectiveness of the founding institutions, or operational dysfunction; characterised by the unanticipated emergent asymmetrical arrangement which embodied extensive periods of deficit, uncertainty and speculation, not only shapes our perceptions of the inevitability of the failure, but also our interpretation of the role this tumultuous period has played in the formation of the contemporary global economic structure as we know it. By firstly investigating the interlinked web of contributive causes of the Bretton Woods breakdown, before discussing the various ways in which events post 1971, have been shaped by the consequences of the preceding era, this essay aims to address both the inevitability of the breakdown and the long term consequences of such a development.
A number of scholars attribute the failure to a functional deviance from the envisaged Bretton Woods structure as founded in the charter. Contrary to intention, the founding Institutions lacked sufficient power, credibility and authority to carry out their attributed responsibilities. The IMF, in particular, fell short of its role as 'manager' of the system, failing to acquire "the veto power over parity changes on which American negotiators had insisted" (McKinnon. 1993. p.17) and hence contributed to the "redundancy problem" (Eichengreen, Bal. 1994.). This situation arises due to the inability of N countries in a system to pursue independent exchange rate policies because such a system only contains N-1 exchange rates. The lack of an independent source against which to measure exchange discrepancies enhances the risk of exchange rate conflict. As an independent but collectively representative body, the IMF was to help solve the Nth Country problem. However, where Governments were required to obtain IMF approval before changing their exchange rates in practise it lacked sufficient authority and credibility; "France was far from alone in failing to secure the funds advance approval for an exchange rate change ... the IMF was less an enforcer of rules than a repository for the understandings on which international monetary collaboration was based." (Eichengreen, Bal. 1994. p.30) Furthermore, extensive dollar outflows, due to the dollar as the 'key currency' in the system, eclipsed the "meagre resources of the IMF" in its role as finance facilitator and exchange crises manager (Underhill. G. R. 2003).
Contradictory to the idea of equality which founded the Bretton Woods system, this development highlighted an emergent asymmetry in the international economy. As an economically dominant power, the US utilised this advantage and took on a new role as an international hegemonic power. As hegemon, the US possessed the power to "make and enforce the rules for the world political economy" (Lairsonal. 1997. p.69) and hence, actively promoted the development of new institutions, which facilitated co-operation and dramatic economic growth in Europe, increased its military and foreign aid expenditure and aided the emergence of US based multinational corporations. On the one hand, these actions helped to generate prosperity and hence the confidence to participate in the liberal economic system. However, on the other, each of these factors contributed to a significant outflow of dollars and the development of a deficit so extensive that it is often attributed as the ultimate factor in the demise and breakdown of the Bretton Woods system (Lairsonal. 1997).
Pushing for greater co-operation, US aid to Europe in the form of the Marshall plan, was contingent on greater political and economic unity (Lairsonal. 1997). However, the extensive aid flows were synonymous with increasing US military expenditure abroad, contextualised by the Soviet development of the atomic bomb, which led to the militarization of the Cold War, and the outbreak of the Korean War (Lairsonal. 1997). Further exacerbated by the avoidance of US political leaders to utilize domestic tax increases to offset the mounting balance of payments disparity, the persistence and magnitude of the deficit began to decay the confidence necessary for stability of the system.
Cutting back on military spending, even if it may have helped decrease the deficit, was not an option given the political context. Such a policy may have led to the weakening of the US vis--vis other major rising powers; "US Governments did not want to hear that their position was weakened by the dollar." (Volcker, 1990's, referring to Johnson and Nixon presidencies. In Beams, N. 2001). Of central importance to these Governmental administrations was the "freedom of...foreign policy from the constraints imposed by weaknesses in the financial system." (Beams, N. 2001)
Implicit in the dollar outflows was the rapid accumulation of dollars abroad, which in turn led to significant uncertainty. In theory, such accumulation should not cause problems, but given that the value of currency was based on its full convertibility to gold, at $35 per ounce, the accumulation of dollars only represented a diminishing ratio of US gold reserves to the levels of dollars held and hence reduced convertibility (Beams, N. 2001). Speculative flows pre-empt 'runs' on currencies, which occur when it is uncertain that the currency will retain its par value. A 'run' on the dollar would have been detrimental not only to the whole system, but to the US role as hegemon; as noted by Rostow; "We will not be able to sustain in the 1960's a world position without solving the balance of payments problem" (in Lairsonal. 1997. p.80)
The emergent asymmetry allowed the US to postpone adjustment measures to maintain international credibility by persuading foreign central banks and member states to finance its external deficit by retaining dollar holdings (Helleiner. 1994). However, this behaviour soon prompted a backlash from allies who came to resent the privileges associated with the dollar as key currency. Foreign dollar holders were faced with little policy manoeuvre, forced to retain dollar holdings and expand domestic monetary supplies. Converting dollars back for gold was not an option as it would have undermined the system, given the diminishing ratio of gold stocks. "Some Governments objected that the US was in effect asking them to accept a paper-dollar standard... Countries, especially the French increasingly perceived the US Government to be abusing its seignorage privileges as issuers of the key currency of the system" (Helleiner. 1994. p.90).
* * *
Against the backdrop mounting deficit was the establishment of the EEC free trade area, (Lairsonal. 1997) a slow growth rate of US exports compared with imports (Strange. 1976) and the rapid expansion of the international capital market, exacerbated by development of Multi-national based companies. This rapid development of international industry which required the access to high levels of capital fostered the emergence of the euro dollar market. For resourceful bankers in Europe, faced with domestic capital constraints, the dollar glut represented a large and regular supply of capital to those willing to borrow. Thus the Eurodollar market represented free and unrestricted capital flows, essentially undermining one of the underlying goals of the Bretton Woods system. (Beams, N. 2001) Growing to nine times the size of the US deficit by the 1970's, the market was large and powerful enough to overwhelm Government intervention reinforcing the growing recognition that "the Bretton Woods system of pegged exchange rates was ill-suited to withstand the pressures brought to bear by the increase in capital mobility" (Eichengreen, Bal. 1994. p.29).
US Banks and Investors also sought access to the Eurodollar market in the face of increasing capital constraints (Beams, N. 2001). Mutual demands for such access represented a growing alliance between the bankers and Industrialists, signalling an important transformation from the early post war years, where the groups had remained divided over the issue of such financial liberalism, to the "emergence of a new one supportive of a more liberal approach" (Helleiner. 1994. p. 100). However, the US Government also found the Euro-dollar market beneficial for their cause. As early as the 1960's, US Congress was informed that the Euro-dollar market "provided a good way of convincing foreigners to keep their deposits in dollars, thus stopping the US Gold drain" (Dillon., in Helleiner. 1994: 90). The existence of the Euro dollar market meant the foreign holders of dollars would be more likely to continue such possession thereby easing the pressure on the U.S currency (Beams. N. 2001).
Unlike the international economy of the 19 th century where foreign currency accumulation was an expression of goods and services trade, the Eurodollar market was largely disconnected from trade. Players in the Eurodollar market recognised the significant profitability in the participation of Eurodollar lending where just a few dollars could circulate the system and expand to may times the original credit (Lairson et al,.1997 and Strange. 1976). Furthermore, the markets rapid expansion significantly increased the difficulty for national authorities to maintain fixed exchange rates, as it broke down the "insulating wall within which authorities tried to maintain a desired money supply and level of interest rate" (Strange. 1976. p.176)
Technological progression, which dramatically altered the costs and scales of the communication system, undoubtedly played a significant role in influencing the transformation of exchange markets. New technology allowed even small economic units to participate in instantaneous and communicative systems on a global scale facilitating "a shift in the power relationship of states and markets" (Lairsonal. 1997. p.101). Capital flows became increasingly hard to stem: Germany in the 1970's for example, found the only curtailment of speculative flows was the prohibition of all international phone calls (Helleiner. 1994. p.103). States faced little choice; They had to facilitate inevitable economic forces that if not embraced, would crumple the careful institution of national economy (Lairson et al, 1997. p. 101).
By the early 1970's, the pressure hit breaking point. Following a series of revaluations by member states such as Germany, Austria and Holland in the early 1970's, Nixon devalued the dollar with respect to gold in a last ditch effort to save the system (McKinnon, R. 1993. p.17). However, these measures were futile; by 1971 the US announced the suspension of dollar convertibility into Gold, effectively terminating the Bretton Woods agreement (Lairsonal. 1997. p. 90).
According to some scholars, it was the conflict Governments faced between attending to domestic economy on the one hand and the pressure to embrace the emergent international capital network on the other, which ultimately caused the breakdown; "It required too much in terms of the co-ordination of national policies. Countries were more and more committed to domestic growth...while at the same time technological forces that were driving economic growth required internationalization of the goods market, but also of capital"( Beams, N. 2001).
Overcoming this tension became the main focus of post failure discussions in 1971. The creation of an ad hoc forum within the IMF, officially the Committee of the Board of Governors on Reform of the International Monetary System, or C-20, provided the initial platform for debates (Russell. 1977. p.120). However, according to Williamson (1977); "The outcome of the C-20 was, in effect, a decision to learn to live with the non-system that had evolved out of a mixture of custom and crisis over the preceding years" (cited in Braithwaite et al. ). A conflict which emerged between the interests of the failed hegemon, and the rest, characterised the rest of the decade, shaping the search for a new international economic order.
The main concerns of the EEC and Japan were that floating exchange rates lead to rising employment levels, uncontrollable inflation, skyrocketing interest rates and debt crises (Lairson,al. 1997. p.95). Furthermore, these countries were worried about the loss of political sovereignty over their domestic economies as was experienced under the Bretton Woods system (Kraus, L. Cited in Garrett, 1998. p.795). Exacerbating these worries was the growth of multinational companies who encompassed the "potential to evade the influence of many Government policies" (Wells. 1972. Cited in Garrett, 1998. p.794) Therefore, the changing economic climate engendered a "control gap between the aspirations for control over an external range of matters and the capability to achieve it" (Keohane and Nye. In Garrett, 1998. p.795).
In order to prevent "the disruptive capital movements that were the single most important cause of the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system" (Margaret De Vries. In Helleiner. 1994. p.103), Western Europe and Japan consistently argued for increased and co-operative capital restrictions on the basis of traditional Keynesian welfare economics. "Is it reasonable that such speculative movements should influence the flow of international trade, and hence the jobs of millions of persons throughout the world? We are convinced it is not"( Willy De Clerq, Belgium's finance Minister. In Helleiner. 1994. p.101) The IMF supported this view recognising not only that the US stood alone in its stance, but that disequilibrating capital movements were the "main factor making it virtually impossible for officials of large industrial members to maintain par values on their currencies"( Helleiner. 1994. p.103)
The US however, was forceful in its pursuit of a floating system. Where Bretton Woods instability had fostered growing scepticism of traditional Keynesian economic approaches, its failure ultimately signalled a shifting dynamic towards a neo-liberal stance. Economic freedom became the goal as managed money became the "fundamental cause of instability" (Yeager, L. In Crain, B. 1989. p.58) and the reason for Bretton Woods crises; "...efforts made to sustain that regime had to fail because they could not accommodate any of the avenues by which real exchange rates could adjust to relieve dollar overvaluation" (Yeager, L. In Crain, B. 1989. p.58) Furthermore, MNC's found such capital controls increasingly cumbersome and interfering (Helleiner. 1994. p. 119). The US also believed that a Liberal International framework would preserve US policy autonomy in the face of growing external and internal deficits. Therefore, capital controls were directly counterproductive to their strategy of "using international markets to force a major adjustment to the system" (John Odell, 1982. cited in Helleiner. 1994. p.113).
US arguments countervailed European and Japanese misleading interpretations of liberal capital flows as "disequilibrating". The US believed that capital flows were not necessarily negative; perceiving capital movements as an indication of domestic economic inefficiency. Therefore, such flows would prompt improvements to domestic economic structures through the adoption of better suited more sound fiscal and monetary approaches and hence restore basic market equilibrium (IMF, 1974. In Helleiner. 1994. p.108). The persistence of US opposition to controls and the predominance of the New York financial market, effectively killed the initiative; "the relative size of the US economy, the continuing prominence of the dollar and the attractiveness of US financial markets all gave the US indirect power via market pressure to change the range of choices open to others"(Strange, 1988. In Helleiner. 1994:114). In short, "no change could be made in the structure of world finance without the consensus of the US" (Denis Healy, 1989. In Helleiner. 1994. p.109)
The phoenix which rose from the failed discussions was the European Monetary system (EMS) created in 1979. For the intermittent years following the collapse of Bretton Woods, most EEC countries were signatories of an agreement to maintain stable exchange rates known as the "European Currency Snake in the Tunnel". While under this system, a currency could fluctuate 2.25 % on either side of the fixed parity, with a maximum variation of 4.5 %. The aim was to provide relative stability against a backdrop of potential international monetary chaos (European Navigator). By 1979, this system was replaced by the EMS, encompassing an Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM). With the German Deutsch-mark as unofficial leader in the structure, the system collapsed following a series of currency crises. None-the-less, these developments formed the foundation on which the European Monetary Union, and currency union of the EURO was later formed.
This period was also characterised by the pursuit of states to maintain their exchange rate parity according to "what an appropriate dollar exchange rate should be in terms of their domestic currencies" (McKinnon. 1993. p.28) The US dollar, which had remained centrally important to the emergent global economy due to its firm establishment as a universally recognized and interventionist currency (McKinnon. 1993), continued to affect the international economic structure. Throughout the 1980's, the supply of world money fluctuated in converse relation to the strength or the weakness of the dollar. In addition to the oil price shocks of the 1970's, two world inflationary shocks were attributed to dollar weakness, indicating "a high and rising degree of interdependence" (Bordo,al. 1989. p.237).
This emergent economic structure, characterised by the fluidity of capital around the world facilitated by the strength of the dollar, is a close analogy to current global economic configuration which emphasises liberalization of Capital. Current data illustrates just how this change has affected the economy. Before 1970, 90% of all transactions were accounted for by trade, and only 10% by capital flow. Today, despite a vast increase in global trade, that ratio has been reversed with 90% of transactions accounted for by financial flows, not directly associated with trade in Goods and services" (US Congress. In Kelly 1998. Southcentre.org) Furthermore, according to Crain (1989. p.58), the flexibility of the floating system has had significant positive impact, allowing "the gap between domestic savings and investment to be closed" and non-inflationary expansion of the US economy, effectively pulling "the world out of recession". This would not have been possible under the "straight jacket of fixed exchange rates" as Europe would have come under severe deflationary pressure and any fixed exchange rate system would have collapsed (Haberler, G. 1989. p.294)
From the evidence submitted throughout this essay it is indicated that the inception of Bretton Woods agreement itself engendered inevitable collapse. Whether the conscious decision of the US to pull out when it did signalled a pre-mature ending to the era is open to debate. However, by 1967, many held the view that the financial system was clearly insufficient; unprecedented levels of financing from the IMF, in the form of Special Drawing Rights (SDR's) and the G-10 central banks failed to prevent devaluation of the pound and later, the dollar with respect to the value of Gold (Helleiner. 1994). It appears that ultimately, it was the ill-fated combination of economic, political and technical developments which contextualised the era such as; the inability to deal with changing currency parities which resulted in often unrealistic exchange rates; inherent structural deficiencies, reflected in the unprecedented asymmetry of the system and authoritative deficiency of the supporting Institutions, such as the IMF, which led to the breakdown of the agreement. However, the emergent consequences, such as increased global trade facilitated by decreases in average tariffs from 40% in 1940 to the current figure of 5% (Lairsonal. 1997. p.66), the development of the European Union, and the restoration of sovereignty over domestic monetary policy, are undoubtedly advantageous, and have together have contributively created a much more stable international economic system.