Until recently, the study of the political structure and processes of the European Union, (hereafter E.U) has been dominated by traditional state-centric, rational approaches such as Neo-Functionalism and Intergovernmentalism. However, major institutional reforms, such as the Single European Act (1986) led a number of researchers to question the affect that these institutional changes would have on the structure of Europe and the nature of its political processes; "Theoretical progress first occurred in the analysis of the ways in which institutional reforms such as the introduction of the SEA have redistributed decision-making power among the competing actors." (Schneider et al, 2001:7) 'New Institutionalism' is the name for the approach which arose out of these enquiries and has gained such impetus that it has even "begun to make in-roads in the theoretical landscape once dominated by Intergovernmentalism and Supranationalism" offering a credible alternative to the dominance of rational approaches. (Schneider et al, 2001:13) For New Institutionalist scholars, it has become increasingly evident that understanding change requires comprehension of how the need for deliberate wide-ranging reform may depend on how routine processes of institutional learning and adaptation are working. (Olsen, 1997, cited in Olsen 2002:592) This new interest in the role and procedures of European institutions has unearthed a number of significant insights which have helped to shape our understanding of E.U. political processes. Using the work of Bulmer, March and Olsen and Schmitter, amongst others, this essay will start by mapping the brief history and explanation of the core principles of New Institutionalism, before breaking the approach down into its component parts, in order to illustrate the way in which the core ideas help shape our understanding of the political processes of the E.U.
Neo institutionalism, which asserted itself as a response to the three sets of lenses 'pre-ground' for observing the process of European Integration; neo-realism, neo-functionalism and neo-rational," (Schmitter, cited in Marks, Gal. 1996;3) has had a clear impact on the way in which the political processes of the E.U are analysed. Asserting itself as a response to the shortcomings of traditional approaches which neglected the impact of decision-making rules in the integration process, New Institutionalism has the "virtue of beginning with the intergovernmentalist claim about member state primacy, but then taking account of the way in which institutions structure individual and collective policy 'choices'. (Pollack, 1996, cited in Rosamond, 2002:116) The Key assumption for New Institutionalists is that "institutions matter". This is because institutions represent "persistent and connected sets of rules that prescribe behavioural roles, constrain states and shape expectations" (Keohane, 1989. cited in Bulmer 1998:368) New Institutionalists are particularly concerned with the beliefs, codes, cultures and knowledge which is embedded not only within, but between institutions. (March and Olsen, 1989. Cited in Bulmer 1998:369) Although still relatively infantile, this does not mean that the institutions are value-free; rather, they are embedded with norms and values which evolve gradually and it is these norms which may have a significant impact on how functions allocated to the E.U are operationalized. (Bulmer, 1998:368)
* * *
Encapsulated by Peter Hall (1986), the definition follows that "institutions are formal rules, comparative procedures and standard operating practices that structure relationships between individual units of the polity and the economy." (Rosamond, 2002:116) In this case, institutions are not just formal constitutional entities, but also "instances of established informal interaction and normative social order." (Ikenberry, 1988, cited in Rosamond, 2002:116) Institutions provide legitimate and stable contexts where actors can enter into successful "positive-sum" bargain deals". Furthermore, these deliberative arenas not only connote trust due to their transparency, but they provide a rich source for information. (Rosamond, 2002:114) Therefore, according to March and Olsen, Institutions can be described as; "relatively stable collections of practices and rules defining appropriate behaviour for specific groups of actors in specific situations." (March and Olsen, 1998. Cited in Schneider et al, 2001:1) The New Institutionalist emphasis on rules and procedures however, implies that institutions possess substantial room for manoeuvre and significant influence over European policies and implementation.; "Institutions affect outcomes... they structure political actions and outcomes rather than simply mirroring social activity and rational competition among disaggregated units." (Schneider et al, 2001:1)
According to March and Olsen, "Formal organizations, bureaucracies, legal systems together with their patterns of work come to provide order and influence change in politics." (March and Olsen, 1989, cited in Bulmer 1994:357) It is widely perceived that policy outcomes can be explained in terms of the processes within the decision making structure, such as the Committee structure of the European Parliament or Comitology for example. (Bulmer, 1998:375) Lindberg and Campbell believe that there are in fact three ways in which the institutional structure can actually shape the policy processes; The first of which directs to inequalities inherent in the policy procedure, whereby it is the institutions that structure the access of political forces to the political process, creating a kind of bias. The strong position of council ministers is an example of the way in which this inequality can privilege the interests of national governments. This facet of the structure is also evident in under representation. With reference to the C.A.P Bulmer notes that, "the weakness of consumer responsibilities within the commission and national governments" led to the neglect of these interests. (1991, cited in Bulmer, 1998:374)
Secondly, institutions can themselves develop endogenous institutional impetus for policy change that exceeds mere institutional mediation. (Peters, 1994. Cited in Bulmer 1998:370) as agenda setters in their own right, the European Council and Commission can exert influence over the policy problems that they are charged with finding solutions for. Finally, the emphasis on member states with regard to the budgetary structure means, that the scope of policy, where large financial transfers are concerned, is limited. (1991, cited in Bulmer, 1998:374)
Inter-institutional relations are also important because they define the power balance between the bodies concerned with regard to particular contexts. For example, the power of the European Parliament is enhanced significantly if the area of governance falls under the co-operation procedure rather that within the very limited consultation procedure. Furthermore, its influence is enhanced further in areas governed by the co-decision procedure where under specified conditions the European Parliament acquires the power of veto. (Bulmer, 1994:359) New Institutionalism also highlights the existence and impact of informal rational decision-making. For example, Bulmer recognises the fact that where co-operation procedures apply, the European Parliament may be able to capitalise upon any division within the Council, hence alerting the Council to the sense to reach decisions consensually and thus, avoid the European Parliament increasing its influence. (Bulmer, 1994:360)
There are also informal practices or 'soft law' which can have significant impact on the shaping of procedures and outcomes. According to Nicoll "Commission practice notes, memoranda, declarations attached to the treaties and statements recorded in the minutes of the council of ministers" constitute this 'soft law', which relates to the rules of conduct that are not legally enforceable but nonetheless have a legal scope in that they "guide the conduct of the institutions". (Nicoll, 1993. Cited in Bulmer 1994:368)
Analytical focus on the polity is also a key attribute to the New-Institutionalist approach, the result of which suggests that the polity structures the inputs of social, economic and political forces and has consequential impact on policy outcome. (Bulmer, 1998:369) However, the relative importance of the ordering of these 'inputs' has highlighted contention among New Institutional scholars regarding the importance of such factors. "New Institutionalists have been promiscuous in importing the cognate disciplines of economics and sociology and the source of their importation makes a difference in how they interpret the influence of institutions."(Schneider. 2001:1) This quote encapsulates the fundamental problem with the 'New Institutionalist' approach. The broad umbrella of the analytical framework blankets a number of disciplines with those from a rationalist economic grounding interpreting institutions as "sets of rules which actors create in a strategic fashion, to achieve desired, but unrelated goals," contrasted by the sociological interpretation which follows that institutions are "constitutive of identities and preferences- helping actors to interpret and give meaning to appropriate behaviour." (Schneider et al, 2001:1)
For rational choice Institutionalists, where rational actors will undertake the rational pursuit of self interest, institutions become decisive constraints upon this self-interested action; and hence "political and economic institutions are important for rational choice scholars interested in real world politics because the institutions define the strategies that political actors adopt in pursuit of their interests." (Thelen and Steinmo, 1992 cited in Rosamond, 2002:116) Institutions are merely formal legalistic entities and sets of decision rules such as the Qualified Majority Voting (QMV) procedure in the Council of ministers which forces Governments into strategic coalition games in pursuit of their interests. (Rosamond, 2002:115) Furthermore, institutions are simply a hindrance to policy ends to the extent that according to Aspinwall and Schneider, "actors bump into institutions, go 'ouch' and then recalculate behaviour and strategies." (Aspinwall and Schneider, cited in Rosamond, 2002:115) Institutions are seen more as a strategic context that provides incentives or information, thus influencing the strategies agents employ to attain given ends, not the ends themselves and therefore, they are an intervening variable hindering but by no means preventing the attainment of national interests. (Checkel, cited in Schneider et al 2001:20)
However, institutions can also be important, because they also provide a number of benefits to the States that create them. (Keohane, 1984. Cited in Rosamond, 2002:116) Such benefits may take the form of the reduction of transaction costs of bi/multi-lateral bargaining, associated with the increased validity and legal reinforcement of agreements. Furthermore, according to Sandholtz (1996) States may create institutions so that they can become acquainted with the goals, aversion, tastes and domestic constraints of the other members. (Rosamond, 2002:117)
According to Historical Institutionsalists, which derive their attitudes from sociological values, Rational Institutionalists do not credit the institutional processes and structure with the level of influence that they retain over European processes. It is thought rational choice research has not yet devoted sufficient attention to the impact of informal institutions and hence, from our definition of an institution, this can be understood as the informal norms and rules of the informal decision making process. (Schneider et al, 2001:9)
Historical Institutionalism, a tenet of the broader framework of New Institutionalism "builds upon scholarship in international Relations which has sought to identify normalities and cultural mechanisms by which both state behaviour and state identity are deconstructed or constructed." (Schneider et al, 2001:13) It extends beyond the boundaries of rationalism, emphasising the way in which behaviour is influenced by context and the way in which identities are intrinsically shaped rather than exogenously given.
This inclusion of broader, wider aspects helps to capture a more informed understanding of the dimensions of E.U. Governance. According to Wver, "Europe has become a reference point embedded in all national identity constructions." And hence, for this reason, it is vital to understand the way in which this reference point affects political decision-making in order to fully understand the processes. (Schneider et al, 2001:13) Systemic change can be conceptualised through analysis of both the formal and informal institutional processes of negotiation. Rather than emphasising the outcomes of 'zero-sum' negotiations, Historical Institutionalism attributes importance to negotiational processes and the way in which "negotiating fora shape the outcome of negotiations in a process of state reconstruction." (Bulmer, 1998:377) According to Habermas, it is the process of deliberation and argumentation which manufactures the "epistemic glue" that binds actors together. (cited in Rosamond, 2002:121)
This 'stickiness' of European Institutions, is a key tenet of the Historical Institutionalist agenda. It is a commonly held view that "(s)ometimes institutions are rigid in spite of changing environments and deliberative reform attempts. They outlive their functional efficiency as well as their normative support. They are outdated, promote superstition and allow exploitation." (Olsen 2002:592) Whereas a Functionalist or Intergovernmentalist approach may assume that inefficient institutions will be driven out of the market by competition or competitive pressures, research has pointed to the strictness and longevity of prior structural arrangements and thus according to North, "there is no guarantee that competition will drive out inefficient institutions." (North, 1990, cited in Olsen 2002:592). Using the Common Agricultural Policy as an example, Bulmer proposes one explanation for these assumptions. Institutional isolation from the broader issues of decision making, such as the financial aspects, meant that the agents involved gained exploitative powers over supranational policy making and hence, enhanced their own power resources. It was only with the imposition of power constraints from 1988, and the exogenous variable of the need for reform regarding Eastward enlargement, that the isolation of the CAP became restricted. (Bulmer, 1998:373) The inference drawn from this example highlights the potential danger that policies which are implemented may remain functioning outside the arena of political scrutiny, and it is only through a change in exogenous factors that structural development may arise.
Institutional iteration exacerbates this problem of institutional rigidity. In this case, it is the framework of policy programmes and policy review; such as the use of rolling medium term policy programmes, and the agendas in research and technology, environmental action and social affairs or agreements such as the Lom convention; whereby negotiators explicitly include a time specific review clause in legislation, in recognition of the fact that the agreed legislation is as far as could be reached at the time, and the fact that policy making is predominantly trial and error. (Bulmer, 1998:367)
Path dependency, which is the idea that past behaviours and actions condition current and future actions, provides a broader, sociological explanation for such institutional rigidity. Historical Institutionalism highlights the way in which "Institutional and policy change become path dependent as actors define their preferences endogenously based upon what has occurred in the past." (Schneider et al, 2001:10) In this view, social changes are overridden by the longevity of prior structures, and hence, the disequilibrium which occurs proves inefficient over time. According to Schneider, "Institutional arrangements are winched into place slowly over time..." (Schneider et al, 2001:10) Risse ascribes the incremental nature of change to the fact that the "E.U is an evolving polity held together by the binding power of normative consensus." (Risse, cited in Rosamond, 2002:121) This view takes more of a normative, value-laden approach, which uses historical research, focussing on policy choices, to reveal important insights into the evolutionary policies.
* * *
By taking into account the analysis of sub-systemic structure, historical Institutionalism can also highlight the way in which developments in institutional configurations between political systems may possess enduring affects, such as the perceived notion of diminished state supremacy. (Pierson, 1996. Cited in Bulmer, 1998:373) Pierson describes these changes of sub-systemic structures in terms of "gaps" which emerge in member state control over institutional evolution and the difficulty associated with attempts to close them. (Pierson, 1996. Cited in Schneider et al, 2001:10) This idea highlights the incremental nature of policy and structural transformation introducing the idea that "change is not (necessarily) a product of history-making decisions." (Peterson, 1995, cited in Bulmer. 1998:367)
Historical Institutionalism can also provide us with significant insights into the dynamics of the policy process. According to Bulmer, historical Institutionalism can help us to organise an exercise in process-tracing policy case studies, highlighting the way in which exogenous influences in the policy process can actually shape and reinforce the presence and roles of the institutions. For example, the demands of interest groups to receive consultation, which leads to produce a governance regime, and the way in which the problems of policy implementation, which require judicial jurisprudence, facilitate the development of legal norms. Following on from this point, Historical Institutionalism can help forge a link between the jurisprudence of the European Court and the legislative process, illustrating how these two processes are complementary to one another.
Historical Institutionalism does not claim the rights of a grand theory. Nevertheless, it offers a method for deriving analytical insights, such as the day-to-day policy making, policy administration and judicial dynamics of the EC pillar, which are not offered by the rational approach. (Bulmer, 1998:376) However, it has come under criticism for a number of reasons. Firstly, the main criticism of Historical Institutionalism is due to its emphasis on the influence of rules and norms in the policy process. This emphasis inhibits the establishment of causality. From his approach, it is impossible to define whether the implementation and growth of Institutions is a result of exogenously influenced behavioural transformations, or mutually reinforced decisions of an intrinsic nature. "The notion of feedback mechanisms where institutions influence choice and behaviour, but are also subject to alteration, leaves analysts without a theoretical purchase if they wish to test causality." (Schneider et al, 2001:12) Therefore, without this test of causal definition, Historical Institutionalism suffers a critical deficiency in validity.
Secondly, alongside its inability to provide a "detailed analysis of the role of political forces, namely the role of interest groups, national interests arising from domestic politics and so on." Historical Institutionalism has been criticised for failing to present a "dynamic picture of governance". (Bulmer, 1994:369) The approach certainly contributes to our understanding of the nature and historical derivation of current political processes; however, it does not present an informed representation of the nature or power structures of E.U governance.
One of the key tensions within new institutionalism is the question of how much autonomy do the institutions really possess? According to historical institutionalists, institutions are not just mere arenas, but they structure the way in which socio-economic forces act.
Cultural explanations are problematic because there is no single, identifiable European Culture. However, the study of norms and values, inherent in the historical institutionalist approach, enables the identification of a kind of 'institutional culture', inherent within the institutions of the E.U. This culture may be observed in the informal voting practices and consensus building which occurs in the policy process. According to Maley and Richardson, (1996) this 'culture' provides some stability to what they describe as "such a fluid system". (Cited in Bulmer, 1998:376)
The context provided by a Historical Institutionalist approach to institutional analysis, allows us to go beyond the detailed configurative studies of the E.U. institutions that already exist and place them in a context which allows differentiation between formal political institutions, informal conventions and the norms and beliefs embedded within those institutions". (Bulmer, 1994:353) It is argued, that this approach may also help understanding of the transformation of E.U Governance brought about by the Single European Act and subsequently by the Treaty on European Union. Therefore Historical Institutionalism can be used as an analytical tool in which to help increase understanding of the major changes brought about by the SEA and the TEU. The implementation of these changes brought about "changes in institutional and inter-institutional behaviour; they brought about changes in conventions and above all, the norms embedded in the institutions." (Bulmer, 1994:370) It is clear, from the New Institutionalist ideas proposed in this essay, that political actors are clearly driven by institutional duties and roles as well as, or instead of, by calculated self interest. Furthermore, the analysis tells us that politics is organized around the "construction and interpretation of meaning, as well as, or instead of the making of choices; routines, rules and forms evolve through history-dependent processes that do not reliably and quickly reach unique equilibria". Therefore, the institutions of politics are not just "simple echoes of social forces; and the polity is something different from, or more than an arena for competition among interest." (March and Olsen, 1984. Cited in Bulmer, 1998:375) Essentially, "Institutions play a central role in structuring the governance of the E.U" and therefore, it is clear that "institutional analysis is thus the central element of an E.U toolkit." (Bulmer, 1994:378)