This quote, written in 1915, highlights the nature in which societal attitudes regarding food and diet were undergoing a period of transition. Food was increasingly being viewed as a nutritional source, with associated health consequences. It was during this period that Seebohm Rowntree produced a systematic study detailing a minimum requirement for subsistence or what is known as the 'poverty line'. Using the emergent ideas about nutritional requirement, his aim was to distinguish, between those who were unable to purchase basic necessities for economic reasons and those who's income was 'sufficient to buy basic necessities, but who were unable to do so for other reasons.' (Veit-Wilson, cited in Dowler, 2002: 699) His work highlighted that malnutrition and poor dietary habits were not necessarily an exclusive product of insufficient income, but that nutritional choices were also shaped by sociological and/or political factors. By analysing the dietary behaviours and choices made throughout history and the contextual variation which dictated the shaping of these behaviours, it is possible to identify such influencing factors and indicate the way in which they have contributed to the shaping of dietary patterns in poor households. Technological innovation and scientific advance, together with incremental political change and the significant affects of the Second World War have provided the contexts of social structure I which dietary behaviours are dictated, nutritional attitudes shaped and food choices informed.
Research into the dietary patterns of the 19 th century indicates that diets were not merely influenced, but shaped by the predominant social structure. The dramatic difference between the dietary composition of the most affluent classes and the poorest classes was particularly astonishing, in that the poor existed barely at subsistence level. (Nelson, 1993: 102) The diet of the poorest class typically lacked adequate calorific, fat and protein intake, as well as severe essential vitamin and mineral deficiency, in particular, Vitamin A, Vitamin C and calcium. Consumption of fruit was particularly uncommon, especially in urban areas where fruit eaten consisted of a 'few currants'. Meat was particularly scarce due to its expense, and what there was of it was predominantly eaten by the male of the household. (Nelson, 1993: 102-103) "The women and children suffer from underfeeding to a much greater extent than the men. It is tacitly agreed that the man must have a certain minimum of food in order that he may be able to perform the muscular work demanded of him" therefore, this usually involved "underfeeding of the women and children greater than is shown by the average figures." (Rowntree 1902, cited in Nelson, 1993: 102-103) As the breadwinner of the family it was therefore imperative that the male be provided with sufficient intake of energy. If he lost his job- none of the family would be able to eat.
Bread became the main source of mealtime provision for most poor families, a rudimentary but nonetheless popular and widespread staple. It could be eaten cold and therefore not only saved money on expensive fuel costs of cooking, but was quick and easy to prepare- an important quality for busy mothers. Furthermore, when bread went stale, it could be toasted, it was a readily available and a relatively cheap foodstuff, it could be served at any meal and most importantly, the family liked it. (Reeves, M, P., 1979, p.103) This last point was, and still is, a particular concern for housewives. Under economic scarcity, there tends to be little experimentation with food. Variety is not only more expensive, but carries significant risk. It is likely that the family members will not favour the introduction of a new food, and hence the waste associated with their refusal to eat is significant for a household under extreme economic pressure.
Clearly this last point indicates that when it comes to consumption, humans are influenced by more than calorific maximization, they are not necessarily the 'eating machines' attributed by Wood, cited at the beginning of this essay. Physiological and sociological factors, such as taste and preconceived ideas/societal norms associated with particular foodstuffs are indeed some of these other influencing factors. In her book "Round about a pound a week", Reeves makes explicit reference to these issues, using the example of porridge. (Reeves, 1979) In terms of its supreme nutritional value, one would expect it to have been a predominant foodstuff for the lower social classes. However, in actual fact, it rarely documented as a staple of the poor household diet. The women complained that despite the calorific benefits of porridge, it was rejected by family members on account of its tastelessness and nausea caused through consumption. Without the addition of expensive foodstuffs such as milk or sugar, it was unsavoury and un-palatable. It was the food associated with the work-house and hence held negative societal connotations. Furthermore, it required cooking, which was unfavourable for the time, effort and expense, to the poor working mother.
According to the literature, milk was particularly scarce for the poorer households, especially for those living in urban areas. It was such a problem in fact, that women are documented as having breastfed up to a year of infancy; 'in many cases where a better off mother would recognize that she is unable to satisfy her child's hunger and wean it at once, the poor mother goes hopelessly on because it is simply cheaper to nurse.'(Reeves, 1979: 102) For women, the everyday grind was particularly harsh. Not only did they experience frequent under nourishment, to satisfy the needs of their families, but the constant grind of what to feed the family was particularly stressful. Many poorer households lacked adequate storage facilities, and hence, shopping trips had to be taken daily. (Reeves, 1979: 103) This helped avoid food spoilage by rodents, insects, and fungus, but furthermore, prevented the eating of food by family members, that may have been bought in advance for the preparation of meals throughout the week.
It is clear that the poor family throughout the nineteenth century lived a pretty miserable existence in terms of food choice, variety, quality and quantity, especially in larger families; 'The diet where there are several children is obviously chosen for its cheapness and is of the filling, stodgy kind. There is not enough of anything but bread. There is no variety. Nothing is considered but price.' (Reeves, 1979:102) At this time, there was little Governmental interest in the nature of and dietary habits of individuals. The provision of food was considered very much a component of the domestic sphere and therefore, poor families were left exposed, vulnerable to the mercy of the unpredictable ruthlessness of the economic climate.
The late 19 th Century witnessed a number of small changes, both in the sociological and technological environments, which had a positive impact on the experiences of food for poorer households. The industrial revolution yielded a number of positive changes for the poorer families during this period. The use of more machinery and factory processes to produce food led to reductions in prices. In the UK, the introduction of 'steel roller milling', a new process which made the availability of white bread much cheaper had significant impact on the diets of the poor households. (Burnett, 1979: 139-140) Before this time, poorer households made do with cheaper, unrefined, brown breads. The new cost-effective process of milling meant that white bread was affordable, and hence soon replaced the wholesome and nutritionally beneficial, but less palatable brown bread. As noted by Nelson, this brown bread reduction led to a drop in the consumption of iron and fibre, two key elements of a nutritional healthy diet. Other technological changes included the introduction of freezing, or cooling methods, and tinning of foods, which enabled the importation of meats, usually in the form of carcasses. These two methods helped lower the price of meats, making it more available to the working classes. Technology has also helped shape socio-cultural aspects of the household diet. The introduction of the steam trawler, and the use of ice for preservation leading to an increase in the consumption of fish in poor households, is a prime example of this process. Until this time, the latter stages of the 19 th Century, fish was rarely documented as part of a working class diet. However, the introduction of cooling techniques allowed trawlers to utilize 'untapped' fish sources in the North Sea for example, and hence sell them at affordable prices, even for the working class who were developing a taste for fish covered with breadcrumbs and fried. (Burnett, 1979:135)
Shifting societal attitudes in the mid to late 19 th century, associated with developmental research into nutrition and diet perhaps provided one of the most socially and politically poignant transformations. Increasing technological and scientific advance allowed researchers to convert data into practicable findings. The controversial conception of a 'minimum dietary requirement' which was provided by Rowntree, in the early 20 th century, carried politically significant implications for the government pursuing an economically productive work force. Society moved away from the prevalent tradition of placing male dietary satisfaction over and above the needs of others, towards meeting the needs of those now deemed the most 'needy', such as expectant mothers and young children. The Government 'milk in schools' scheme which was implemented in 1934, provided free milk to children in pre schools and exemplifies the way in which the government intervened ion light of attitudinal change. (Burnett, 1979:320) 'Governments started to realize the need for nutritional policy as an essential part of constructive health services.' (Burnett, 1979:321)
Surprisingly enough however, the onset of World War II, had the most prominent and unexpectedly positive impact on the dietary habits of the poorest classes. The strict governmental food management policies and rationing actually led to an increase in meat and some fat consumption for the poor households, than ever experienced previously. (Nelson, 1993:104) Furthermore, according to Nelson, vegetable consumption (other than potatoes) peaked in all social classes, helping to raise vitamin and mineral intakes. After the war, the inequality of dietary habits between social classes were the lowest they had ever been, facilitated mainly by the Governmental implementation of Keynesian social democratic policies. (Lang, T., Heasman, M, 2004:95) These clearly political factors led to almost a 'reversal' of eating patterns. During the aftermath of the War, foods which had been heavily restricted, and hence were heavily craved, became more readily available and affordable in high street shops. As the quantity of goods brought in increased, so did the variation of foodstuffs imported. For the first time, the lowest social classes were eating the same foods that characterised the diet of the most affluent. Consumption of foods such as fish eggs, fats and sugar were the highest they had ever been. (Nelson, 1993:107)
Today the concern for the diet of the working class poor family has shifted away from emphasis on deficiency in calorific and fat intakes, to quite the opposite. Although a number of characteristics which typified the dietary habits and behaviours of the lowest social classes in the 19 th century still exist amongst those of today's equivalent sociological status, the context in which food decisions are made have changed dramatically, creating a whole new set of concerns for nutritional health.
There appears to have been a near role reversal. The evolution of food production techniques has revolutionised food culture. Large quantities are now produced at such low costs, that it is rare in a working household, or even unemployed household, but receiving state benefits, to go hungry; 'for one whole week I eat nothing but pasta with pesto. For another, baked potato with cheese or tuna. I don't go hungry though. I find I can get eight chocolate bars for eighty pence.' (Abrams, 2002:25) This account of an experimentation investigating life on the minimum wage highlights the inexpense of certain foodstuffs in society today. However, similarly to the 19 th Century diet, the foods available to the weak socio-economic classes, lack sufficient vitamin and mineral composition. Furthermkore, monotony and tedium is common in poor diets.
Radical developments in food production, the process of using additives, flavourings and high levels of salt, sugars and fats to enhance the palatability of packaged goods, and the ability to produce high levels of these goods at very low cost to firms, has led to the emergence of a 'junk food' culture among the poorest classes. These foods, such as ready meals, tinned and frozen goods, are extremely popular for a number of reasons besides the simple low cost of them. Firstly, often, they require little cooking or preparation, usually they are microwaveable and ready within a matter or minutes. Similarly to the 19 th Century housewife, this is of particular importance to a working mother who doesn't have the time to cook from scratch, or simply doesn't possess the skills. Furthermore, the mechanic and chemical processes used in food manufacture ensures standardisation and consistency of the product, which is favourable to those households where meals cannot afford to be wasted if they do not meet the preferred taste of a family member. (Dowler, Turner, Dobson, 2001:35)
Cooking from scratch requires time, energy costs and the purchase of fresh produce which tends to be more expensive. Furthermore, the ability to cook in this manner assumes a certain level of knowledge and culinary education. The media has been criticised for its role in the reinforcement of these socially constructed stereotypes. According to Crotty, the media can be blamed for reinforcing lower social class dietary habits through the barrage of advertisements aimed directly at these groups, in which often feature strong stereotypical working class icons alongside the lower quality 'fast food' that is being advertised. (Crotty, 1999:135) This acts to reinforce the socially constructed association of these food types with classes of lower sociological status in two ways. Firstly, internally by direct address to the working class through the manipulation of emotive social icons which appeal to them, and externally, to the 'other' social classes who define themselves through their avoidance of these foods.
However, even with the widespread availability and affordability of food, studies show that vitamin and mineral deficiency is still a problem of particular concern. 'it does appear that the nutritional and physical condition of families is closely related with financial status' (M'Gonigle., Kirby. 1936:274 cited in, Dowler, 2002:696) Similarly to the historical case, 'money for food can be used as a reserve to iron out fluctuations in income and to meet emergencies; hence people on low incomes often go without food.' Studies have even shown that out of the lowest social classes,  of mothers admitted to sometimes going without food to meet the needs of their children. (Howard, Garnham, Fimister, Veit-Wilson, 2001:107)
Ironically, the new availability of cheap foods, the economic attributes associated with bulk buying and the advantages of low costs of supermarket shopping are often unavailable to those who would benefit most from them. In today's society, the majority of cost-efficient supermarkets are situated in 'out-of-town' locations, rendering them often inaccessible to those from the most deprived areas where the accessibility of both private and public transport is rare. (Dowler, 2001:706) Furthermore, research has shown that in these areas, the provision of food shops is rare. These classes tend to shop little and often, purchasing small quantities of the cheapest food. It is simply not cost-efficient for commercial business to remain in these areas. However, where these small 'corner shops' and mini-marts do exist, the prices are higher than average, thus causing an even stronger financial burden on those already in economic dire straits. In fact, the lowest income families are forced to spend an extra 25% of their income on food if forced to purchase their goods in these corner-shops. Evidence has shown that a difference of 5-10 pounds in food expenditure in the lowest income families can cause the difference between eating and not eating in any given particular week, or at least, the avoidance of purchasing fruit and vegetables. (Dowler, 2001:708) 'when economizing, qualitative studies have shown that people economize on food either by buying cheaper or different items (omitting fresh fruit or vegetables) cooking out of their store cupboards, or omitting meals altogether, by eating cereals and sandwiches.' (Leather 1996; Dowler et al 2001, cited in Dowler, 2002:707)
Shopping behaviours of the poorest households are affected by the quality of storage facilities at home, whether there is access to a working refrigeration system etc. Furthermore, in the same way that historically the poorest families shopped little and often, this is the case also for the modern economically deficient household. Food is likely to be bought little and often so to avoid consumption by other family members, and hence lead to deficiency or hunger later in the week. However, this also means that often the advantages of 'cost-effective' bulk-buying cannot be enjoyed- even if access to these offers is available. (Abrams, 2002:25)
It is clear from the historical data and numerous research articles that sociological and political factors do, and have, exerted some influence on the shape dietary patterns. The government is more involved now than it ever has been with the introduction of regulated nutritional guidelines, and has been proactive in the provision of welfare foods, such as the provision of free school meals for underprivileged children. However, the positive results of these measures are ambiguous. State provision or 'welfare food' is often socially stigmatised, and therefore carries the possibility of significant negative social and psychological implications for the recipients of these benefits. Furthermore, the need for cost efficiency has, particularly of late, led to a degree of national concern for the nutritional standards of state-funded meals. The sociology and politics which shape dietary experience of the lowest socio-economic classes however is undeniably underpinned by economic circumstance. The context in which dietary decisions are made and carried out in terms of food behaviour has changed dramatically, with a much more varied availability and affordability. However, as noted whether households can gain physical access to these outlets is a point of contention. Furthermore, the worries associated with an economically underprivileged household, such as the 'risks' associated with the introduction of 'new' foods, and individual taste, remain as present as they ever have been. Despite the disappearance of a large number of dietary trends, significant behavioural similarities have remained prevalent throughout history; or rather have re-emerged in the more recent, post WWII era. The causes of deficiency may have changed due to contextual nature in which they are shaped, but the general affects and consequences of economic scarcity remain the same: 'In general, whatever the methodology, however general, the results have been similar: those living on low wages or state benefits could not afford to purchase sufficient, appropriate food to meet healthy dietary guidelines or nutrient requirements laid down by the government committee of experts. They have insufficient money however well they budget, shop and prepare food." (Dowler, 2002:702)