The quote above encapsulates the problem faced by the UK government concerning its food policy throughout the post war period. However, in recent years, the Government introduced its remedy to this problem by creating an independent Food Standards Agency (FSA). Despite the recency of such a reform, an abundance of material has emerged concerning the future of food policy and regulation in the UK, highlighting its contemporary importance. However whether the reforms and new structure will succeed in overcoming the problems of the past is still open to debate. This essay attempts to analyse the way in which the FSA operates and hence attempt to answer this question by firstly; contextualising the reforms in terms of the preceding inadequacies of agency structure. From this context, evidence will be used to analyse and detail the FSA arrangement as it is today. Finally, through evaluation of its recent performance, with respect not only to any successes, but also the failures or shortcomings that it has encountered, conclusions will be drawn, indicating any changes that may need to occur in order to reinstate consumer trust.
* * *
The development of the Food Standards Agency was largely viewed as an "attempt by the Labour Government to be seen to clean up the food system and to re-legitimate the public sector regulatory structures concerning food." By the end of the 1990's, it was clear that "Labour inherited a flawed food policy". A number of issues including pesticide residues, salmonella in eggs, BSE and an outbreak of E.Coli 0157, had generated a loss of public confidence in both public institutions and food governance. The years of organizational and operational shortcomings of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF), which was responsible for food policy throughout the post war period, culminated in this crisis of confidence which ultimately led to the need for such substantive reforms. Common perception held that "on food safety issues, MAFF (was) no longer being taken seriously.
The Government's philosophy behind the creation of the FSA was based on the James Report. This White Paper on the FSA identified three main factors that had eroded consumer confidence in food safety. Firstly, there was the conflict of interest within the MAFF between its responsibilities for sponsoring the food and farm industries and ensuring the safety of food. "For politicians do not have only the consumers to please and it has been the fact that the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food represents the interests of the constituency of farmers as well as those of the general public, rendering it both gamekeeper and poacher so to speak, that has lost it so much public confidence and trust." According to James, due to the contradictory nature of its operational structure, there was almost no nutrition or food policy analysis made either by the DoH or MAFF which did not affect the food or agricultural industries. It became increasingly apparent to the public that there existed a bias in favour of industry needs over consumer requirements. This argument has been documented throughout literature writing on the MAFF and is especially apparent in its behaviour in the BSE crisis which appeared in the late 1980's. Complete removal of the disease required the slaughtering of all livestock and the de-contamination of all cow feed- a project which would cost a reported 20 billion at current prices. Documentation has found that the "dominant concern of policy makers was their aspiration to maintain stable levels of demand for British beef in domestic and export markets, and their desire not to increase commercial costs or public expenditures... A concern with public health was never a dominant factor in ministerial decision making"
The second factor leading to the erosion of consumer confidence was the fragmentation of responsibilities for food within government between MAFF and the
Department of Health. This fragmentation led to significant confusion of responsibility and public accountability. Increasing authority on the part of the DoH, especially in terms of the food nutrition and safety issues, witnessed the growth of a strong public health and food policy culture. The dichotomy of the food sector led to "inevitable turf battles between the two departments over food" and hence exacerbated the lack of control of the MAFF over its environment of operation.
Thirdly, and perhaps most significantly, was the lack of regulative control of the MAFF's operation. With regard to the BSE crisis, in light of the reluctance of Ministers to take costly preventative measures, it was the flawed regulatory system which allowed for the dismissal of certain scientific facts. Reports have highlighted the way in which this flawed structure enabled the vilification of scientific conclusions advocating the need for governmental precautionary action. Furthermore, regulatory flaws meant that decisions about the scope of risk assessments i.e which kind of effects deem as risks and which to exclude or discount, and about the trade offs between risks and benefits were frequently taken within scientific committees and often misrepresented as purely scientific. This meant that ministers and officials could "hide behind the advice of the scientists displacing responsibility for policy on to committees of experts." Regulatory gaps even stretched as far as to allow, in some cases, scientific committees to be set up so that they produced outcomes favouring particular policies; as one MAFF official acknowledged "you have to turn to external bodies to try to give some credibility to public pronouncements, [but] you are very dependent therefore on what the Committees then find... Really the key to it is setting up the Committee, who is on it, and the nature of their investigations."
Alongside these main factors, there were a number of other contributing shortcomings, such as its failure to implement appropriate enforcement strategies, leading to situations where for some local authorities food policy was a high priority but for others it was not. It also severely lacked any form of transparency, a key strategy for maintaining consumer trust: "I was bombarded with complaints about MAFF's secret decision making."
Created in the light of the shortcomings associated with the prevalent structure, the main aim of the FSA is: "to protect public health from risks which may arise in connection with the consumption of food and otherwise protect the interests of consumers in relation to food." Unlike MAFF, the FSA claims to be free from the "direct sponsorship of any food industry sector and is answerable to the minister of health. (at the Department of Health)" The FSA's main responsibilities run "from the farm gate to the plate". Three core values underline its establishment; to put the consumer first, to be open, accessible and transparent, and to be an independent voice; all of which appear to reflect the shortcomings of the policy approach of its predecessor, the MAFF .
The FSA UK headquarters are in London, but also has national offices in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The Agency is led by a Board of members, who are highly skilled and experienced, that have been appointed to act in the public interest and not to represent particular sectors. For example, the Meat Hygiene service is now an executive agency, autonomous, but still under the discretion of the FSA. Furthermore, the Agency reports to the Department of Health and not Agriculture (now DEFRA) so it is removed as far as possible from the line of production, helping to ensure a single line of command to government to whom it is accountable.
This separation of the FSA from the producer, also helps with the FSA's first goal of putting the consumer first. Other consumer issues, such as enforcement standards are another way in which this goal is tackled; The FSA oversees enforcement by setting standards and auditing local authorities' compliance with them, so trying to directly tackle the problem of uneven enforcement. The FSA is also concerned with linking consumers at a local level with decision-making at both local and national levels. It is currently examining ways to build stronger links with existing networks. In identifying different mechanisms for consulting these groups and involving them in policy-making, the Agency is also looking at ways it can communicate to these groups more effectively.
The FSA has also taken an open, transparent and consultative approach with a wide range of interests, including consumer groups and an attempt to pacify and incorporate consumer concerns. It has started to publish the agendas, papers and minutes of some of its advisory committees and its reports on the BSE crisis are reportedly far more forthcoming than the MAFF. Furthermore, the FSA has taken to holding open meetings with stakeholders to take views on needs and priorities and has been "encouraging the use of stakeholder groups in the development of policy." The policy style emerging from the FSA is one of promoting a more open and transparent vulture, "listening to vox pop". This approach is clearly beneficial in gaining the trust of the consumer. It is essential that the public feel that they are not being short-changed when it comes to the truth.
The evidence indicates that the FSA has experienced relative success in its first few years. However, this isn't to say that there aren't any reported problems or criticisms of the new structure. Firstly, despite stating transparency and openness as a main directive, the FSA is still claiming some confidentiality in some specific circumstances. An FSA report claimed that each of its committees should have clear guidelines to define what material can be regarded as confidential. It is unclear as to why the FSA believe that it needs this confidentiality, but the message that this request sends out to the consumer is far from positive; by pursuing this approach the FSA runs the risk of damaging its public credibility or democratic legitimacy.
There have also been a number of claims that report ministers continuing to avoid overt responsibility for the policy decisions that they have made. This is not in keeping with the vision behind the creation of the FSA which intended that food safety policy in the UK would be decided by democratically elected and accountable ministers, rather than unelected unaccountable officials. However, much of the final policy decisions are left to the discretion of the FSA, allowing minister to "remain at arms length".
Furthermore, the FSA has not successfully carried out its goal as an "independent body". Not only has it failed to ensure that all its board members are free from conflict, but some would argue that it is merely defending the status quo; "As the initial gatekeeper and initial communicator of scientific advice and of health-related food risk, the FSA has adopted a role not so much of independent arbiter as defender of conventional agricultural and farming practice and industrialised food manufacturing."
Finally, a significant proportion of criticism is concentrated on the FSA'a approach to policy. It has been criticised for adopting a consumerist market-based approach to many issues of food safety advice, "too often stressing the role of individual preference and choice as opposed to a more fundamental, structural assessment of food safety and the food system." The FSA typically ranks consumerist issues associated with the purchase of food, such as the time it takes, the cost of food and the convenience, most highly as primary concerns. Of secondary importance, are environmental and welfare considerations associated with intensive food production alongside any concerns raised about the use of pesticides and food safety. There is little attention paid to or discussion regarding these secondary issues leading us to question the real extent of the reforms. Have the changes really been that radical - or has the FSA merely adopted a "conservative and relatively narrow approach to its remit of protecting the consumer" against risks associated with food.
It is claimed that the separation of food standards and safety responsibilities to the FSA has been one of the main institutional reforms in food policy at UK national level in recent years. However, the reforms that have been laid in place are still under much scrutiny. While some think that the reforms are radical, others think the reforms are not radical enough; The FSA is charged with protecting and informing the consumer. But its remit clearly excludes key dimensions of modern consumerism such as environmental or ethical considerations in food. Yet all down the food supply chain demands informed by such considerations are now extremely influential in the marketplace. According to Tim Lang, "It might be worth considering giving the FSA a broader role. The Danes, after all, first created their agency in response to environmental food concerns, then gave it a public health role, and then added the food safety dimension. It would be helpful if the FSA was given a wider remit anyway."
On reflection, the FSA appears to be tackling their goals adequately, but perhaps not whole-heartedly. The FSA would agree, placing particular emphasis on their stated goal of openness; "Our experience so far is that the powers we have are certainly adequate. It is the way we use them that is critical and the new ways we find of doing work which has not been done before. The openness agenda was a new approach to that."
Clearly, the FSA was created at a time of real need; however, if it is to win consumer trust 100 percent, it must continue to operate in this sphere of transparency. It may also need to consider widening its domain of operation by taking a broader, more secondary set of concerns into consideration. What is apparent is that the FSA has made a successful attempt at separating itself from producer pressures, and creating a more direct link to Government.