This essay will analyse whether the two predominant theories in North America relating to how the landscape should be best utilised, namely those of pastoralism and progression, were at all compatible and if so, whether a third, middle way was therefore possible. A wide variety of writers and artists, both American and English, will be analysed in order to gauge opinion, predominantly during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Leo Marx's book The Machine in the Garden will be given particular attention due to the nature of its study.
When Europeans first arrived in North America, the majority longed for a natural environment in which they could be close to nature. America was seen as a New World, a type of utopia in which the colonists could leave behind the disease ridden cities of Europe and start afresh. There was a tendency to idolize rural ways, and, consequently, pastoralism was advocated as the ideal form of landscape. Low-intensity farming was seen as idyllic because land was plentiful in North America. The dominance of the pastoral theory continued and even experienced a revival in the post-revolutionary period after the English had been beaten and a Republic declared.
Thomas Jefferson put forward a case for the pastoral ideal in Notes on the State of Virginia. His ideas reflected the post-revolutionary patriotism that so many American citizens felt at that time. His argument centred on the fact that the abundance of land made America a place where the pastoral ideal was possible - 'Those who labour in the earth are the chosen people of God... For the general operations of manufacture, let out work-shops remain in Europe." As Marx describes, early colonists wished to settle North America as a cultivated garden. He also goes on to explain Jefferson's view more fully - 'By the same token, if all America somehow could be transformed into a garden, a permanently rural republic, then its citizens might escape from the terrible sequence of power struggles, wars, and cruel repressions suffered in Europe." This seems a rather positive, nave even, outlook. It seemed unrealistic that Jefferson's dream would be able to be achieved.
Indeed, within a relatively short space of time, the American landscape had been permanently altered by the rapid development and spread of industry and technology. How was it possible that this transformation could take place in a society which seemed to espouse so vehemently a pastoral way of life? What caused this seismic shift in opinion and was it compatible with the pastoral notion of landscape?
Between 1830 and 1860 there was a huge degree of technological development contributing to a period of sustained economic growth in America. In this thirty year time span over 30,000 miles of railway track was laid down. Certain writers came to advocate technology such as Tench Coxe, a young merchant, who promoted the value of machines to American society. He was excited at the potential power that machines and factories would be able to supply as well as their ability to reduce labour costs. It was Coxe who effectively laid the ground for the emergence of the machine as an American cultural symbol, as his ideas became increasingly accepted by the general public and by the mid-nineteenth century a contrasting image of the machine started to attract the attention of American intellectuals. The railway came to symbolise progress to the American people and was welcomed by most, as it broke down regional barriers and guaranteed social equality by providing everybody with a mode of transport, irrespective of wealth or status. Indeed, the railroad became a national obsession in America in the 1830s - 'a testament to the will of man rising over natural obstacles, and, yet, confined by its iron rails to a predetermined path, it suggests a new sort of fate." That is, one that apparently excluded the initial ideal of the pastoral landscape.
Having given a brief outline of the two contrasting ideologies, the pastoral and progressive attitudes to the landscape, it is necessary to analyse whether these two theories were compatible. Initially, most writers found the acceptance of technology into the rural landscape extremely hard to accept. Nathaniel Hawthorne's observations of his surroundings written whilst in the woods known as the 'Sleepy Hollow' near Concord, Massachusetts indicate a completely different point of view to Coxe's. He is clearly enjoying the natural environment - 'Indian corn, now in its most perfect growth... It is like the lap of bounteous Nature." He seems to spend hours recording the sounds and movements of the wildlife. However, a passing train suddenly disturbs the peace - 'the startling shriek of the train whistle bearing down upon him, [forces] him to acknowledge the existence of a reality to the pastoral dream." At end of the passage, the train can no longer be seen or heard, but Hawthorne cannot get back completely that sense of calm and serenity that he had felt before the interruption of the locomotive. The reader gets a sense that this has never happened before, as if the virginity of the land has been taken by the train and can never be regained. Writers usually associated machines and technology in general with masculine aggression and nature with feminine submission.
This abrupt unwanted interruption of the machine into nature is a common theme among many American literary texts of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Marx even claims that 'it is difficult to think of a major American writer upon whom the image of the machine's sudden appearance in the landscape has not exercised its fascination'. The English poet William Wordsworth also often depicted the machine as being in opposition to the tranquillity and order of the landscape. Henry David Thoreau, the famous American author and philosopher, advocated the idea of the pastoral life and believed that it was being wiped away by the American obsession with technology. He thought that the abundance of machinery transformed men into mere objects.
Annette Kolodny argues that women in general favoured the pastoral ideal in comparison to men - 'What women were apparently less willing to accept was the single-minded transformation of nature into wealth without any regard for the inherent beauty of the place." Many women felt uncomfortable at watching the destruction of the Edenesque landscape. She argues that had women been in control of westward migration, it would have taken a completely different course in respect to the effect on the landscape. It is far more likely, she suggests, that Jefferson's ideal of America as a cultivated garden could have been achieved.
The pastoral model was constantly portrayed positively in the literature of American novelists such as Ernest Hemmingway and Mark Twain - 'No book confirms the relevance of the pastoral design to American experience as vividly as the Adventures of Huckleberry Finn." Although published in 1884, the book is set some forty to fifty years earlier, before the technological and industrial revolution had reached full steam indicating that Twain preferred to write about a time before machines were dominant in society. Neither Mark Twain nor Henry Adams, another famous American author, were 'able to imagine a satisfactory resolution of the conflict figured by the machine's incursion into the garden." Both envisaged a vast explosion of new power in a negative sense. The machine represents the forces working against the dream of pastoral fulfilment. Leo Marx himself identifies with these authors and states that he too would have preferred a more pastoral approach to the landscape when America was developing as a nation - 'By incorporating in their work the root conflict of our culture, they have clarified our situation." That is, a situation where the machine is too dominant in the present world leaving a sense of personal isolation.
However, not every author felt so negatively towards the interaction between technology and the landscape. Between 1830 and 1860, as stated earlier, technology developed a great deal and this change manifested itself in the literature of some American writers who initially only grudgingly came to accept the need for technology before finally embracing it and placing its importance over that of the pastoral landscape. The great revolution in science and technology created a massive shift in opinion about man's relation to nature. Even the aforementioned Jefferson, who was so effusive in his demand for a pastoral ideal, came to acknowledge the need for manufacturing, and he had to accommodate himself to the factory system he so detested.
W. W. Rostow depicted the railway system negatively, but understood that it symbolised the progress of mankind - 'The locomotive, associated with fire, smoke, speed, iron, and noise, is the leading symbol of the new industrial power." He did not, though, regard the interaction of the two positively. With increasing time, attitudes began to change towards the landscape and as Alexis de Tocqueville, the French political thinker and historian noted 'the wilderness was precious to most Americans chiefly for what could be made of it'. This attitude was in direct opposition to the retention of the pastoral landscape.
Thomas Carlyle was an English writer who had great influence in America. He seized upon the machine as the most telling indication of modern life and depicted the mid-nineteenth century as the Age of Machinery. In his mind, machines were the dominant and, therefore, most important facet of the period and so should take priority over everything else. American writer Timothy Walker attached a political value to technology - he regarded the new technology as being able to fulfil the egalitarian aims of the American citizen. To Walker, machines represented democracy and a better life for mankind. By 1850 there seemed to be a special affinity between the machine and America - 'the raw landscape is the ideal setting for technological progress." That is, the raw landscape and the pastoral ideal were purely testing grounds for technological inventions.
However, there were a significant group of people who saw the interaction of technology and the pastoral landscape as entirely compatible. Perhaps the most interesting depiction of the relationship between the machine and nature is in George Innes' painting The Lackawanna Valley (See Fig. 1). It depicts technology as being part of the landscape. The train is shown to be a unifying device as it meanders through the scene rather than creating an abrupt dissection of the picture. The animals are unmoved, completely unaffected by the passing train. Another artist who had no problem in integrating technology into nature was Clarence King who aimed to 'propel and guide the great plowshare of science on through the virgin sod of the unknown'. David E. Nye argues that an increasing number of 'nineteenth century Americans saw no irreconcilable contradiction between nature and industry; rather they enjoyed contemplating the dramatic contrasts created by rapid progress.'
The American writers Ralph Waldo Emerson and Walt Whitman seemed to give the most enthusiastic tribute to the industrialised version of the pastoral landscape idyll. Whitman, especially, was able to assimilate the forces of the machine into the natural landscape. Emerson, too, had an enthusiasm for technological progress as well as a love of nature. He evoked a popular American attitude toward mechanization and industrialisation - 'Like a divine rod, the machine will unearth the hidden graces of landscape." Tench Coxe also had no difficulty in blending together factories and machines into the rural scene. In fact, he often depicted machine power as naturally arising and even inherent in nature.
Therefore, in conclusion, the two theories of pastoralism and progression through technological development relating to how best the landscape should be used, seem at first to be diametrically opposed in their aims. Indeed, many Americans failed to see how the two would interact without disaster. Many feared the power of machines and technology would override the beauty of their pastoral landscape. However, as time elapsed, an increasing number of people were able to recognise the fact that the two could actually co-exist. 'For nineteenth-century Americans these were not ironic contradictions but dramatic contrasts; the rugged... landscape and the transcontinental railroad were complementary forms of the sublime that dramatized an unfolding national destiny." Although it has become apparent that the idea of progression has been deemed more important to American society than that of pastoralism, it does not mean that the two theories cannot survive side by side. It is just that they are not on equal terms. To use Leo Marx's terminology, the machine has obviously taken priority over the garden, but it does not mean that the garden cannot still exist.