When discussing sexuality it is hard to do so without mentioning Foucault. He has influenced our understanding of sexuality within varying topics, but due to restraints only his understanding of sexuality contained within The History of Sexuality, Volume One, The Will to knowledge (1976), and his influence within the fields of sexology and homosexuality will be looked at. One contribution is his rejection of what he termed the 'repressive hypothesis' by showing that although empirically, sex was silenced, this was merely words and that Victorian sexuality was actually central to society, being discussed through various sexual discourses (for example science and medicine). Moreover, Foucault has also aided our understanding of power (and its relation to sexual discourses) by challenging conventional notions and showing it to be both a positive and a negative force (allowing for the creation of reverse- discourses such as the creation of homosexual identity). Foucault showed us how power and discourse came together to regulate the body, and individuals, through the four key strategies, and they were part of the medicalization of sex, or 'sexology' Also, by looking at work written since Foucault's exploration of sexuality, we can access his contribution by looking for his influence within the texts (such as the study of erectile dysfunction), whilst also looking at criticisms directed at his work (for example, the feminist criticism stating the lack of gender within his work).
One of Foucault's major contributions towards our understanding of sexuality is his rejection, or "attack upon [...] the 'repressive hypothesis'" (Dews, 1984:01). To understand Foucault's contribution to this debate, it is important to understand what the repressive hypothesis actually is. Foucault defines it at the beginning of his book The History of Sexuality, Volume I.
The Victorian Era is conventionally juxtaposed with the seventeenth century where people talked about sex openly in front of children and "bodies 'made a display of themselves'" (3). This era was then silenced by the Victorians as bourgeoisie sexuality was confined and moved into the home (within the married bedroom) Sex was repressed, "denied, and reduced to silence" (4). However, eventually progress, seen for example through the work of Freud, lifted us out of this sexual repression leading to a more enlightened modernity. This repressive hypothesis presupposes "two ruptures" (115); the silencing of sex by the Victorians, and the loosening of repression mechanisms in the twentieth century with many taboos being lifted and some language being restored.
Foucault does not reject the fact that "new rules of propriety screened out some words" (1976:18); language was restricted, and statements were policed. Instead, Foucault's rejection is based on the steady growth of discourses interested in sex. The concept of 'discourse' is central to Foucault's understanding of sexuality. A discourse is a system of language, practices and objects (Haug, 1987:191) and during the nineteenth century discourses regarding sex grew in number, as sex was "put into discourse" (Bland and Mort, 1997:22) . A "discursive explosion" (Morris, 1982:250) occurred, creating sexuality as a distinct domain. This incitement to speak of sex as discourse was a moral and a rational issue; sex became an affair for judgment and administration under the jurisdiction of the state (Morris, 1982:251-252).The state found it necessary to regulate and organise the sexuality of the population through public discourses. The population was not simply a collection of people, but a specific phenomenon with variables such as birthrate and fertility, and at the heart of all this was sex. The future of society was tied up with sex, and the sexual behaviour of the populace was a target for intervention and analysis.
Moreover, Foucault argued against the conventional view that sexuality is a static and natural concept, only ever subjected to repression and self-denial (Haug, 1987:191). Instead of being eternal, he showed us that sexuality has a history, existing as discourse and changing in accordance to the social conditions it inhabits. One example of a "mechanism of 'public interest'" (Morris, 1982:251), (specific site that constructed sexuality), is the church confessional. Conventionally seen as repressing our natural sexuality through guilt and fear of God, Foucault believed it instead helped in the "production of discourses of sexuality" (Haug, 1987:191). The church decreed that sexual actions should be endlessly talked about and spoken aloud. Every act was considered in relation to sex and whether it was worthy of confession; sex became a secret to be uncovered. Rules and boundaries created a sexuality that was meant to be detached from lust and temptation, with the confessor turning back to God (Foucault, 1976:23).
Additionally, Foucault has influenced our understanding of sexuality and discourse, through its relation to 'power'. Power is conventionally seen as a right, "which one is able to possess like a commodity" (Gordon cited in Smart, 1989:6). Power (and repression) is a movement from 'the top' downwards, exercised through the law and the state (Foucault, 1976:85-88, Haug, 1987:193, and Smart, 1989:6-7). Foucault rejected this, believing in power's 'omnipresence' (Dews, 1984:92, Foucault, 1976:93-98). Power is not owned by any particular source, or resulting from any one decision, but is exercised and produced at every point. Power is extended throughout (sexual) discourses other than the state, and "comes from below" (Foucault, 1976:94). Moreover, power is not simply a negative sanction, but can be positive; it is productive and does not simply say 'no' but can say 'yes' (Smart, 1989:7).
However, Smart is not entirely convinced with Foucault's notion of power, therefore questioning his input on our understanding of sexuality (as power underpinned his history of sexuality) (Smart, 1989). Smart stated that Foucault believed the old power (discourse of rights) was diminishing, and being taken over during the onset of modernity, by new knowledges and discourses surrounding sexuality, such as medicine and science (discourse of normalization). Foucault looked at how certain discourses claim to speak the truth, therefore being able to exercise power. For example simply claiming to be a science is an exercise of power as "other knowledges are accorded less status" (9). One of Foucault's flaws is that he never compares the scientists claim to truth with the lawyer's, which, according to Smart, runs in parallel (9). Law has its own claim to truth, systemized language and methods. It sets itself above other discourses in the same way that science does, therefore Smart is "doubtful that law is simply being superseded" (14) by science and new discourses of normalization. Instead law retains its old judicial power whilst extending its power into people's private life, "exercising new contrivances of power in the form of surveillance and modes of discipline" (17). However, Smart does not reject Foucault's idea of power completely, instead stating the two mechanisms of power run in parallel, "symbiotically" (8). Therefore Foucault is still useful in aiding our understanding of sexuality (albeit from a critical perspective).
Moreover, as science set itself up as "the supreme authority" (Foucault, 1976:54) regarding sexuality, Foucault understood this explosion of scientific and medical discourses as a "scientia sexualis" (58) or 'sexology.' Although constantly talking about sex, these discourses actually avoided any real confrontation with its truth, simply existing to obscure and disguise it, until the time of Freud at least (Morris, 1982:256). Sex was incorporated into two distinct orders of knowledge; a biology of reproduction and a medicine of sex, both claiming to try and find the 'truth of sex', whilst in reality hiding it (Foucault, 1976:54-55).
Additionally, Foucault understood there to be two procedures in producing the 'truth of sex;' the Western 'scientia sexualis,' and the 'ars erotica' of the Chinese, Japanese, Indian, Roman, and Arab- Islamic societies (Foucault, 1976:57 and Morris, 1982:257). Within this erotic art, truth is drawn from pleasure, "understood as a practice and accumulated as experience" (Foucault, 1976:57). Pleasure is known in relation to itself, and any knowledge gained feeds back onto itself. Our civilisation does not have this, our sexology represents discourses surrounding sex that subordinate our pleasures to the will of knowledge.
Foucault believed the confessional to be an important part of understanding the history of sexuality, changing how we think about it, through exploring how the confessional developed into scientific discourse (Foucault 1976:58-73). Confession is seen as producing sexual truths and the Western man became a "confessing animal" (59), with sex being the privileged theme told to doctors and psychiatrists (such as Freud). Sex was transformed through confession into discourse located within power relations; it only took place in front of professionals within the fields of medicine, psychiatry, or pedagogy, therefore becoming a specialized form (61-63). Personal history was seen as littered with decipherable symptoms, all of which were caused and related back to sex, and being that these signs were so obscure, they had to be extracted and then deciphered by a professional within a medical discourse (65-67). Therefore, Foucault showed us that although sex was talked about frequently (in opposition to the repressive hypothesis) it was only legitimate within particular fields or discourses, and the one most emphasised by Foucault was the 'scientia sexualis.'
Moreover, Foucault argued that there was no "one single, global strategy bearing on the whole of society" (Morris, 1982:266) but four key strategies that formed specific mechanisms of knowledge and power centering on sex. First there was the 'hysterization of women's bodies': the female body was analysed with the assumption that it was saturated with sexuality and linked to fertility. Next, was the 'pedagogization of children's sex': an assertion that most children engaged in sexual activity, which posed moral and physical danger. Then was the 'socialization of procreative behaviour': this related to the responsibility of fertile couples to procreate with regard to the entire social body. Finally was the 'psychiatrization of perverse pleasure': whereby the sexual instinct, and its behaviour, was assigned a role of normalization, or pathologization, and corrective treatment was used to correct any anomalies (Foucault, 1976:104-105). These strategies created four figures: the hysterical woman, the masturbating child, the Malthusian couple and the perverse adult. This shows how these four strategies resulted in "the very production of sexuality" (105). Sexuality is a historical construct, and the deployment of sexuality resulted in the regulation and 'penetration' of the body, mainly through the family and the power relations of "the husband- wife axis and the parents-children axis" (108). Relatives and parents became chief agents in the deployment and regulation of sexuality.
Additionally, one of the identities created within the anomaly of the 'perverse adult' was the homosexual, and Foucault uses this as an example to show the complexities of power on the creation of sexualities. Foucault stated that "it is in discourse that power and knowledge are joined together" (100) and that discourse can be both an 'instrument' of power, and also a point of resistance. Therefore, although homosexuality was defined as a perversion by new sexual discourses, power relations (being both positive and negative) allowed movements against dominant discourse to be created not outside, but within power, with the creation of anti, or 'reverse-discourses' (Foucault, 1976:101). Before the nineteenth century, 'sodomy' was a sin against nature, and being a "confused category" (101) it was both punished severely and tolerated. The appearance of nineteenth century sexology, and discourses concerning sexual perversions, created the 'species' known as the homosexual (or inversion, pederasty and 'psychic hermaphrodism). Although this made possible the advancement of controls and regulations into the life of the homosexual, it also provided a self-identity which men could take up. Men who came to see themselves as homosexuals began to speak on their own behalf, demanding their own legitimacy and acknowledgement of homosexuality's 'naturality' (101).
Furthermore, Foucault's influence can be seen when looking at other research on homosexuality. For example Weeks talked about how identity formation may lead to "reverse affirmation" (Foucault cited in Weeks, 1987:38) which leads to the creation of a homosexual lifestyle (38-42). Weeks also looked at how sexual identities are not 'essential' pre-given aspects, but are culturally and historically specific, with their creation due to "the valiant efforts of the early sexologists" (31-32). Terry looked at how homosexuality became pathologised and came to mean a certain type of man, and not simply a vice any man could have (Terry, 1995). The body became central to scientific constructions of homosexuality, and was "scrutinized for proof of innate constitutional deficiency" (Terry, 1995:129). Homosexuality became 'embodied,' expressing deviant sexual desires. In addition, Bland and Mort looked at how modern critics have incorrectly led to the "dehistoricization" (1997:23) of sex as they see homosexuality and heterosexuality in binary terms; the perverse against the norm. Finally, D'Emilio also acknowledged Foucault's ideas, questioning "the "myth of the eternal homosexual" (1997:170). These theorists have taken Foucault's ideas and integrated them into their own research, showing how Foucault has influenced their understanding of sexuality, and our own.
However, not all theorists are so convinced of Foucault's worth, even going so far as stating that he has obscured our understanding of sexuality. One such theorist is Catherine MacKinnon (1997). She argues that Foucault's history of sexuality is a history of pleasure, and has little to do with reality. What really happens in sex is hidden and inaccessible to history. Sex includes the abuse of women and children, but "the silence is forgotten in this noisy discourse about sexuality which then becomes its history" (121). Foucault ignored the real experience of women. They are the subordinate object of sex, with sexuality being practiced against them in the name of the male pursuit of pleasure. Hierarchy is "all about gender" (123) and is constantly being played out. Mackinnon does acknowledge that Foucault's approach to sex and power may allow others to take up a more gendered analysis of sexuality, but she does not agree herself, arguing that his denial of gender is fundamental to his perspective. Foucault talks about power without not "necessarily meaning hierarchy" (129). Therefore missing how power is organized sexually, with society being structured along lines of power. To Mackinnon this is a "fairly fatal" (129) flaw and Foucault's contribution is severely questioned.
Nevertheless, not all feminists have rejected Foucault in the way MacKinnon has done, one example is Haug (1987) who argued that Foucault introduces "a degree of flexibility into [...] patterns of thought" (190) and is still useful in studying women's lives. Foucault's influence can also be seen in sexological studies of heterosexuality relating to male erectile dysfunction (ED) (Marshall 2002; Marshall and Katz, 2002; Potts, 2000; and Tiefer, 1997). Marshall and Katz argue that although Foucault did not include human ageing in his construction of sexuality, his ideas can still be expanded into this area of research, allowing the inquiry of "sexual technologies of embodiment to include the dynamics of bodily time" (2002:44). Ageing can then be put into discourse and knowledge-power relations explored.
In addition, Marshall's (2002) inquiry into Viagra and sexology has many of the concepts Foucault advocated, including ideas of knowledge-power within medical discourse. Marshall, similarly to Foucault looked at the rise of science and biology as the authenticating voice of what is 'normal' and 'abnormal' in health. The latter moves away from moral danger and towards 'dysfunction,' which threatens penile-vaginal intercourse within marital relations, (which is seen as 'normal' and functional for both society and the couple themselves). Sexologists such as Kinsey emphasised the role of successful 'marital coitus' in the maintenance of the home, and Masters and Johnson suggested that the greatest cause for marital and familial breakdown was an inadequate sex life (134). Therefore sexuality became medicalized, "rendering it amenable to intervention and management according to a biomedical model" (Marshall, 2002:135). It is here that Marshall cites Foucault, stating that medical discourses and practices "what Foucault has called the 'clinical gaze'" (135), construct the body and truth around it, rather than simply discovering them. "Universalised bodily norms" (135) are constructed which individuals are then measured against and compared. For example the sexologists Masters and Johnsons 'human sexual response cycle (HSRC) is the standard of 'function' that 'dysfunction' is measured from (135). HSRC asserts that there are a series of stages that define 'normal' sexuality: 'arousal', 'plateau', 'orgasm' and 'resolution' (Kaplan later added 'desire' as a preliminary stage). Abnormal events that disrupt this flow (such as ED) therefore need to be treated (as sex is dependent on a full erection). The individual is therefore pathologised and his ED becomes a simple mechanical problem, with a "mechanical solution" (138); Viagra.
To conclude, Foucault's influence on our understanding of sexuality has been enormous. One of his major contributions was to take those things conventionally believed and to challenge them. Firstly he challenged preconceived notions concerning Victorian sexuality, and the repressive hypothesis, and showed them to be false due to a discursive explosion around sex. Additionally, one of Foucault's major contributions is by showing us that sexuality is constructed and is not a natural occurrence (the confessional being one mechanism that constructed sexuality). Moreover, Foucault questioned our preconceived notions of power (as something to be owned, and a negative force exercised through the law) explaining the new power of knowledge and 'scientia sexualis' to be positive and negative, as well as omnipresent. Although the diminishing responsibility of state power is questioned by Smart, she does not reject his notion of power, instead stating the two types of power (old and new) run in parallel. Foucault also aided our understanding through the 'scientia sexualis' (or sexology), whereby knowledge and power (and the pursuit of 'truth) come together to regulate the bodies of individuals, through the direction of scientific authority. Four strategies of knowledge-power came together to construct sexuality, and also four individuals who were pathologised; the hysterical woman, the masturbating child, the Malthusian couple and the perverse adult. Foucault's concept of the homosexual (as created within the anomaly 'perverse adult') is also an example of 'reverse-discourse', and shows that the very creation of this identity also led to counter discourses that allowed them to forge a resistance to fight for their own rights. Foucault's contribution to our understanding of sexuality is shown quite clearly here as he influences later pieces of work around homosexuality which contain many of his concepts. This is also seen in pieces of literature surrounding ED which contain his ideas around sexology, knowledge-power and authority. However, it must be noted that one major flaw is Foucault's failure to recognise gender hierarchy within sexuality (and his ignorance around the hidden sex of women, such as abuse). Whilst MacKinnon rejects Foucault for ignoring it, other feminists have continued to use his ideas. Therefore Foucault's contribution towards sexuality is lacking in this area, but his history of sexuality can be extended into a feminist analysis if, unlike Mackinnon, you are able to "forgive him" (Mackinnon, 1992:128).