It is important, firstly, to understand exactly what I mean when I talk about the normalisation thesis. One important piece of research in this area is Parker et al (1998) and their book Illegal Leisure. The normalisation thesis is concerned with the accommodation of recreational drug use into youth society. Recreational drug use "refers only to the use of certain drugs, primarily cannabis but also nitrates, amphetamines and equivocally LSD and ecstasy". The normalisation thesis does not mean that it has become normal for young people to take drugs, but is concerned with "the spread of deviant activity [drugs] and associated attitudes from the margins towards the centre". There has been a rise in drug trying since the 1990s, with six in ten Britons trying drugs by the age of 18, and the reason for this increase is the increased availability of drugs "in school, college, pub and club". Other theorists, such as Duff (who takes the normalisation thesis and extends it to Australian youth) also believe this to be the case, with a widespread increase in the use and experimentation of legal and illegal drugs among young people.
However, the normalisation thesis is not just concerned with actual experiences and rises in drug use, but attitudes towards drugs. Even those who choose not to do drugs still have considerable knowledge about the recreational drug scene, and are seen as 'drugwise'. Abstainers constantly come into contact with drugs, as by simply being social and going out for the weekend, they will be likely to be offered them, or see people 'doing' them. They learn to draw distinctions between misuse of 'hard' drugs (heroin, crack cocaine) and 'sensible' recreational drug use, for example cannabis and (sometimes) pills. Drug use is seen as deviant, but it is accommodated, with the individualisation of drug use being tolerated as "it up to them if they want to kill themselves."
Moreover, the normalisation of drugs thesis can be seen as an example of postmodernism and post-subcultural theory. Subcultural theory is no longer relevant in discussing drugs as it has moved from a small minority experience into a majority activity. Also, subcultural experience tends to gravitate towards a preoccupation with drugs as a central tenant in the users lives; the heroin user of the 1980s who pull are part of a distinct, criminal, lifestyle is one such example. The drug use described in the normalisation thesis is quite different due to its focus on recreational drug use. In addition, drug use is seen to cross structural boundaries such as class, where the drug user may be middle-class, and gender, with women being as likely to take drugs as men.
In addition, this postmodern move into the mainstream is also seen through its absorption into consumer culture. The language and imagery of drugs has become absorbed into fashion, media, and music and the boundaries between licit and illicit behaviour has become blurred, as recreational drug use and drinking alcohol link together. The decline of tradition, brought about by globalisation, has eroded many of the norms that have underpinned social identity, meaning individuals rely on their own choices, struggling to maintain a stable sense of self, which leads to the production of the self through the act of consumption. Youth identity is created through this act, and the goods we buy tell us something about ourselves, forming a sense of self. Drug use takes place as part of this consumer lifestyle, with leisure time being an opportunity to express identity through the stylistic use of drugs. For example, the expression of identity is seen through the use, and normalisation, of recreation drugs within the current youth 'rave' scene. Recreational drug use is a vital part of this 'rave' experience, and is what Shapiro calls the "drugs/music nexus". The emergence of a distinct rave community in the 1990s saw the use of ecstasy rise among the youth, with its use becoming a defining characteristic of the 'raver' identity. The consumption of drugs has become a "distinctive cultural identity".
However, the normalisation thesis, as presented by Parker, is not accepted by all. The normalisation of drugs focuses on the individual, which "obscures more fundamental, structural determinants of drug use". Parker focuses on growing up in late modernity and living in a "risk society" absorbing ideas of individual, subjective risk into his normalisation thesis. The significance of risk is associated with changes in late modernity, whereby the erosion of tradition (due to science and globalisation) has moved towards a society laden with uncertainty and constant risk as adolescents spend more time in a semi dependent state. Society has become increasingly individualised, and people strive to create their identity through consumerism, making routine "recognisable cost-benefit assessments" about drugs. Drugs decisions become routine and trivial. MacDonald and Marsh reject this individualism, believing that structural determinant, such as changing drug markets influence drug use. They described how after a 'drought' on other forms of drugs, when Teesside was targeted by dealers, heroin became popular within those from socially excluded backgrounds.
It is this very focus on individualism that Pilkington rejects, who believes we should focus on the friendship group as a sight where drug decisions are made. Young people's primary contact with drugs is their friendship group and decisions around drugs are not "fateful decision[s] requiring risk-assessment" but are routine acts "of companionship within the friendship group". Drugs decision centre around emotional needs, being in the 'mood' and 'feeling states' that revolve around group use; the idea of using drugs outside friendship circles is unimaginable. The experience is "peer-group derived" and knowledge about drugs derives primarily from the peer group. The choices made about drugs are individual ones, but risk is not because youths are removed from traditional relations and structures but due to an "absence of secure intersubjective relations"; risk exists in taking drugs when it is done outside the friendship group, and decisions are made from within (not alone).
Moreover, both Shildrick and MacDonald and Marsh believe the term drugs normalisation is too broad a term and look towards ideas of "differential normalisation". Shildrick believed that normalization is too rigid and expansive a concept, homogenising youth drug use instead of understanding the complex relations young people have with drugs. She identified three different types of youths; 'Ordinary' Young People, 'Spectacular' Youth and 'Trackers', each one having different views towards drugs. All groups, similarly to Parker, generally accepted cannabis, but only 'spectacular' youths showed the tolerance and use described in Parker's thesis. Also, although agreeing that middle-class youths do take drugs, there is still a "clear relationship between socioeconomic factors and patterns of drug consumption" with 'trackers' (those with problematic drug use, for example, heroin) being from disadvantaged backgrounds.
In studying whether drug use within youth culture has really become normalised, I decided to perform a qualitative, semi-structured interview, with a white, male, 21 year old work colleague (who currently goes to Birmingham University). As my study was on actual and perceived drug use, I was worried I may not get my subject to agree, especially as the respondent may want to be seen in a "favourable light". However, access was relatively easy to gain and I simply approached him and asked him if he would be interested in doing an informal interview about drugs for one of my modules.
Nevertheless, this is not to say there were not problems at all in gaining access. As the subject was on drug use, he found the idea of being recorded on such a sensitive (illegal) topic off-putting and therefore refused. Nonetheless, I still decided to proceed, following advice that "when faced with refusal [of recording] you should still go ahead". I decided to situate the interview in my living room; with no-one else was at home, hoping my subject would felt more comfortable.
Moreover, the illegality of the subject matter under discussion also brings about ethical questions. As a sociologist, I am responsible for the "social and psychological well-being of research participants". I must protect the interests of my participant, and guard them from harm. Therefore it is very important I maintain his anonymity, and during this research I will be referring to him through a pseudonym; James. This concern for my research participant also led me to be as truthful and open to him as possible. I made James aware of his "right to refuse participation", informing him of his anonymity and also that this work would not be published. In addition, due to the overt nature of my research I avoided the "moral qualms, anxieties, and practical difficulties" 'covert' research has.
However, I did not go into too much detail about the exact reasons for the interview. Other than informing him of the basic subject matter, and asking him to be as truthful as possible, I did not want to provide him with too much information so as not to influence his behaviour and responses. Research should not be oversimplified into 'overt' and 'covert' but as a continuum, with all research having aspects of secrecy, as we can "never tell the research subjects 'everything'" (Roth, 1962:284).
Furthermore, it is important to remember aspects of reflexivity when partaking in research. "Good research is that which accounts for the conditions of its own production". Self-awareness is important. As a researcher, I am part of the social world I am studying. Research is not neutral and is influenced by me, from the topic I chose to study, who I decided to interview, the questions I asked and how I decided to interpret and present the data. My choice of research topic is influenced by my values and interests and I chose to study the normalisation of drugs as I find the subject fascinating. My preconceived experiences and attitudes towards drugs will have influenced my findings (although abstaining myself, I do not find others use of cannabis, if used sparingly, particularly problematic). I work with the knowledge I have, and cannot escape the social world I live in; therefore it is nave to think I will not have presuppositions about the use of drugs that will, unknowingly, influence my research.
Moreover, my research, and concern with reflexivity, has been influenced by the particular methodology I have decided to use (showing a link between theory and method). My research is qualitative (although there is some statistical data present in my literature review) and concerned with subjective social meanings given by James to actions and events related to his experiences of drugs. I wish to understand how James has come to interpret the world (verstehen) and also the 'thick description' prevalent when James talked about his drug experience. In addition, the normalisation thesis is not just based around actual drug use, but attitudes held by adolescents. Therefore it is important for James to tell his 'story' and the interview process should allow room for narrative and a "sociology of stories". Interview data should allow for biographical accounts that "require of young people a coherent narrative that retells the story of the drugs career as a reflexive project of the self".
Therefore, it is important the interview structure allows for adequate expression of subjective experience and narrative. As a piece of qualitative research, I used a semi-structured, flexible schedule that allowed James to give me "rich detailed answers". I had a list of open-ended discussion questions and topics that acted as a guide and although there was a degree of structure to the interview, James had room to talk about subjects he found interesting. For example, with no prompting from me, James started to discuss whether drugs should be legalised; "the government should give you information but the state should not make that decision for you".
However, although wanting to find out James' opinions and narration around drugs, I also want to find out his actual experiences around drugs, not just his subjective opinions. It is important that I did not use leading questions (324). Moreover, I tried to make him feel as comfortable as possible throughout the interview and develop a rapport with him to "minimize reactivity" (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2005:265) I wanted valid, honest, reliable and truthful answers (which may have been problematic to gain due to the illegality of discussion). He did seem uncomfortable at the beginning of the interview and I worried that his "answers may be deceptive" (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2005: 154) with him simply trying to give responses that painted himself in a particular light. However, as the interview progressed he seemed to become more and more comfortable, moving on from giving short succinct answers to more developed responses, including one story of when he had been offered drugs by his friends:
James had smoked cannabis (seen by Parker as a recreational drug) on one occasion, therefore supporting the normalisation thesis. He has smoked it at a house party in the back garden; "I though it was just a complete fuss over nothing, not very exciting at all, I went back to drinking my beer! It didn't really have that much affect." James is more of an 'abstainer' according to Parker's thesis, (having only tried cannabis once), but does indeed to know about recreational drugs and is 'drugwise'. He knew where to get cannabis from, had watched many of his friends smoking cannabis, and had been offered it on a few occasions. He sees it as 'normal' for adolescents to take recreational drugs and his attitude towards them shows he found them to be deviant, but tolerable:
However, his experiences of drugs were, I believe influenced by class (which do not seem to correlate with a postmodern, individualistic view of drugs). Similarly to Shildrick, James believed structural constraints, such as social class, were relevant in deciding whether you decided to take drugs or not believing "poor economic background increases the likelihood". James came from a middle-class background "well-off, nice house, decent school" and did not take drugs until he was at University, and even then it was two years into his degree, at the age of 21, when he finally decided to have one solitary try. Although youth is getting longer, he did not take drugs during the many opportunities he had when "hanging out, outside Debenhams on Saturdays". The people who did take drugs were the ones outside those he knew from his Grammar School:
Unfortunately, as I have only done one interview as a case study, I cannot really locate separate types of youths (perhaps based on class) as Shildrick did, however, this one interview does seem to suggest that there is a differentiated normalisation of drugs based on class difference and "complexity and diversity in young people's experiences."
Moreover, all of James experiences with drugs took place within the context of the peer group. James had been offered drugs in a club and did find this type of behaviour normal, (which does correspond with the normalisation thesis' emphasis on consumption of drugs in the 'rave' atmosphere). However, the time James' actually smoked cannabis had nothing to do with the 'rave' scene, and was at a house party, and another time (at the age of 17) he was offered it whilst sitting in some woods watching his friends smoke. This corresponds with Pilkington's analysis of drugs within the friendship group; he would not have taken drugs from strangers, as can be seen by his rejection of the pills offered to him at the club: "I wasn't about to take it off a stranger!" All his experiences happened with friends, not alone, and he eventually tried it because he was in the mood, and felt "curious".
However, in line with the normalisation thesis, he did believe that image was portrayed through consumerism and the use of drugs.