'Race' and ethnicity are both terms used commonly within contemporary society, but their definitions and history sets them apart. The term 'race' has a long history steeped in hierarchy and inequality, whilst ethnicity, being a relatively new term, does not have this misfortune. 'Race' thinking, often leads to racism, and its concentration on phenotypical attributes and physical difference causes people to not look at commonalities, but at difference. 'Race' was used to justify slavery and colonialism, and 'race-science' did this by assuming natural differences, leading to eugenics, which caused the working-class 'race' to be controlled. Ethnicity does not have this history but whether the two terms are the same depends on how ethnicity is defined. There is not one single definition for ethnicity; is it a fixed, static, ascribed (primordial) role (like 'race') or is it contextual and constantly in flux? Commonsense thinking, often use the two terms interchangeably, with little differentiation between them (also seen in the confused terminology of the census). Terms that have arisen out of ethnicity (such as ethnic minority) also have hierarchical assumptions, like 'race', but, terminology is important, and although ethnicity may have been 'abused' to create hierarchy, and ethnicity offers choice of identification not found in 'race's' static historical roots.
Race and ethnicity are socially constructed, and are both modern concepts Ethnicity does not have a "single, universally accepted" definition. If it were possible to define it in simple terms, Mason believes that cultural distinctiveness is a marker of ethnic grouping. Ratcliffe, meanwhile, believes the term is deployed "loosely, to imply commonalities of language, religion, identity, national origins and/or even skin colour". Ethnicity is, according to Mason, intrinsically social and is at least partly rooted in member's own self-definition, this is not apparent in 'race'. According to Montagu, 'race' is "man's most dangerous myth" and Miles believes the term should be abandoned, as there is no basis for developing a biological typology of the humanity. As Brah states, our identity is never fixed into distinct racial barriers but is dependent on specific contextual meanings. 'Race' and 'racism' serve to naturalise and fix difference. It is due to this controversy around 'race's' "contested character" that many theorists have placed 'race' within inverted commas (as I have done).
Moreover, 'race's' controversy is due to its "long and tortured history". Terminology is important, with "pre-existing terms constitute[ing] pre-existing meanings". Therefore understanding the history of 'race's' creation is crucial in helping understand its differentiation with ethnicity. Race is a sociological construct, emerging within colonialism. 'Race's' origins begin with the global expansion of Europe from the fifteenth century onwards. Europeans were increasingly brought into contact with different human societies across the globe, and what first struck them was differences in physical appearance, most strikingly skin colour, leading to early distinctions between 'black' and 'white'. This early black-white dualism, brought back by tales from traders, missionaries and booty adventurers, attached a significance to skin colour and was associated with naturalised traits. Black became associated with barbarism and evil, white with purity and goodness. Many of these usages linger today, and according to Mason we must be careful not to reproduce these negative connotations.
However, the term 'race' (as we know it now) did not emerge until the eighteenth century Enlightenment period, whereby science became dominant and rationalism made sense of the social world. Moving away from religion, the taxonomic quest began, as scientists believed they could categorise and classify the human population into distinct sub-groups. An example of this is phrenology. Scientists, such as Johann Franz Gall, believed you could correlate the size of a head with mental abilities. The belief that external signs were an indication of innate ability was not individual, but based on differences between 'races', laying the foundation for further scientific study. 'Negroes' were believed to have narrow foreheads, meaning "their talents of music and mathematics [were] [...] limited". These 'races' could then be organised into a hierarchy, as Cuvier did, dividing humanity into three 'races'; 'white', 'yellow' and 'black', with 'white' at the top, and 'black' at the bottom. Other scientists then sought to refine this categorisation, and the concept of 'race' became a paradigm which few, bothered to question; 'race' was (and still is) "a scientific error".
Furthermore, as 'race' became dominant in science, disputes emerged around its exact classification. Banton believed that there was a "doctrine of racial typology" consisting of fundamental propositions that all scientists followed. These were: the behaviour and physical appearance of individuals expressing discreet, permanent biological types; biological type determining cultural variation; biological variation being the origin of conflict between individuals and nations, and the inherent differentiation and superiority of certain 'races'. Consistent with science's preoccupation with classifying humanity, this view should have been displaced with the publication of Darwin's Origin of Species, but instead they twisted his ideas and "the idea of natural selection became wedded to the existing ideas of racial typology". They rejected the core of his study, supplementing ideas around fluidity (central to natural selection), with notions of fixed characteristics; 'race' had no meaning if it was not constant. Social Darwinists characterised humanity as being in a constant state of struggle to survive, legitimating hierarchy, as those who were dominant (white Europeans) were seen as winning the battle. 'Race' and "'the survival of the fittest' became the cry which could justify both conquest and war".
However the discrediting of 'race' is further justified through the eugenics movement, who took the concept of 'race', and used it, not just on their colonial inferiors, on the working-classes. If the hegemony of one 'race' over another could be justified, so too could the hegemony of one social class over another. Other social differences were added, such as gender and disability, which used towards political agendas. Early proponents of the census used it to measure the characteristics of the population to detect problem areas, for example, the "overbreeding amongst the Irish". There was concern over immigration policy, and the threat to the 'racial' purity of the population by black men (mostly Caribbean in origin) seen as sexual predators believed to be stealing the white (inferior) working-class women. 'Race' emerged as a construct of both Social Darwinism and eugenics, centring on commonsense definitions of the 'Other' "implicit in the ideologies surrounding slavery and colonialism".
Therefore, it is with this understanding of 'race' we can appreciate how different it is from ethnicity. Ethnicity is a new term, first appearing in the dictionary in 1972, therefore not suffering "from the historical association of error in the way that the concept of race does". It is because of this fundamental difference between the two, that many academics believe 'race' should be replaced by the term 'ethnic group'. Fenton believed collective identities relating to ethnicity are to do with how people choose to see themselves in regard to other people (it is not a fixed identity in the way 'race' but is to do with social relationships). Unlike 'race', ethnicity, is a vague term, "noncommittal and flexible", eliminating 'race's' necessary biological bias. Choosing a lifestyle is, arguably, part of ethnicity, and today, to be thought of as ethnically 'black', it is not necessary to have 'black' skin pigments, David Beckham being one example.
'Ethnicity' is used, by some, to mean "memories of a shared past", meaning a collective identity of the people. Fenton talks about ancestry, and how people attach themselves to those long dead in order to culturally and socially construct ethnicities. This historical sense of 'peoplehood' is defined by Anthony Smith as "ethnie" and demonstrates how people choose to partake in a collectivity that goes beyond the individual.
Moreover, 'race' is further discredited in favour of ethnicity; as the concept of 'race' emerged, so too did 'racism'. 'Races' were seen as naturally inferior through science, and were used to explain European superiority. This notion of white superiority was a form of euro centrism, and commonsense constructions of the 'Other' were central towards the justification of slavery and the development of colonisation, validating the exploitation and oppression of the inferior 'race'.
Furthermore, Marxists, such as Mahamdallie, believe racism grew out of necessity, used to justify the slave trade and overcome "the contradiction of early capitalism that advanced the creed of equality, yet relied for its early accumulation on mass slave labour". Poor whites were made to feel part of the dominant group without actually improving their economic position in relation to the bourgeoisie. The 'white race', as well as the 'black race' was constructed, and racism used as a "tool of divide and rule". This continues today, making it important to understand the difference between 'race' and ethnicity. As slavery was abolished, 'racism' continued to exist, sustained in capitalism and the economic competition between its workers for scarce jobs and resources.
However, ideas surrounding ethnicity can also lead to conflict and 'ethnic-cleansing', making the two terms seem quite similar. Aspects of ancestry and shared past, as mentioned above, can lead to a form of primordialism which is based upon "recognised 'facts' of history" (perhaps a type of 'imagined community'). This idea of a great past can lead to conflict, for example the 'ethnic cleansing, present within the Serb and Croat conflict. They drew on fragments of history and a 'greater Serbia', fusing ethnicity with nationalism, causing conflict and mass genocide. Similarly to 'race', ethnic identity can become an imperative status, and "an ascribed aspect of their personhood from which they cannot escape". Similarly to 'race' this can lead to conflict.
However, the relationship between 'race' and ethnicity is highly complex, and is determined by how you choose to define ethnicity. It could be argued that ethnicity rather than being simply primordial, and essentialist, is situational and contextual. According to Fenton, although ancestry is part of ethnicity, culture and language are also crucial aspects in understanding the term. Culture is not fixed, and should not be thought of as attached to a particular group which then defines them absolutely. Within ethnic groups, cultural standards are varied, frequently being contested, "defined and redefined". Similarly, language is not always confined to particular ethnic groups, but may stretch across them. Articulated around these fluidic terms, ethnicity itself is also subject to change and redefinition. It should be understood as a social process, "as the moving boundaries and identities which people, collectively and individually, draw around themselves in their social lives". This situational interpretation argues that highly complex and multi-dimensional ethnocentric identities occur and change depending on when and where you are. A simple example of this would be a South Asian youth who, at home speaks Urdu, Hindu or Punjabi and dresses appropriately, but in public speaks, dresses and identifies himself in more Western tones.
In addition, ethnicity is drawn from global, national and local contexts. The essence of this is seen in Diasporas and cultural hybrids that are part of contemporary transnational identities, caused by immigration and the movements of people across the globe, therefore allowing migrants to have roots in various countries. Some ethnic identities, such as the Islamic identity, are played out on a global level, and although there is not one single Islamic identity, it has a global presence that transcends national boundaries.
In addition, the fluidity of ethnicity is further demonstrates through how difficult it is to define distinct 'ethnic groups'. However, although the social context of ethnicity differs enormously, Eriksen believes it is possible to distinguish between different forms of ethnic groups and processes of formation (this schema was later adapted, and altered by Fenton). First, there are urban ethnic minorities, for example Hispanic migrant workers in the United States, and non-European migrants in European cities. Secondly, there are indigenous people dispossessed by colonial settlement, for example aboriginal and Koori people of Australia. Thirdly, Proto-nations (or ethnonationalist movements) are those who have made a claim to be a nation and desire self-government despite being incorporated into a wider state. They are seen as "nations without a state" and examples include Palestinians and Quebecois in Canada. Fourthly, there are ethnic groups in plural societies, which consist of descendents of populations who have migrated as workers, forming distinct, and sometimes large, minorities. They rarely make a claim for separate status, but form a distinct segment of the nation-state. The last category, added by Fenton, is "post-slavery minorities". Classic examples of these include the 'black' African descendents of those enslaved in the New World, for instance, African Americans. These characteristics are further complicated by intermarriage, with 'mixed race' groups forming partly distinct populations, which, according to Ratcliffe, "provides a clear hint [...] that group formation represents a constant process of evolutionary change."
Nonetheless, this identification of separate types of ethnicities tends to freeze and simplify them in contradiction to previous arguments, also painting a picture similar to 'race'. In addition, even if acknowledging change, ethnicity can still be similar to 'race' in how it is implemented. One such example is the emphasis, especially within British society, on nationalism and boundaries. According to Wallman, in Britain the term ethnicity signifies allegiance to a country of origin, implying a degree of choice and possibility for change. This leads to the possible view that migrants can be absorbed or assimilated into British society, and that, if they do not, it is their fault for refusing to adopt our ways. Moreover, this leads to a tendency towards 'ethnic' as meaning only those assumed to be different from the indigenous, British norm. Ethnic become a synonym for those thought of as culturally different, and a sense of 'Otherness'. Difference is prioritised over diversity. A lay example of this is the fashion world's adoption of the term 'ethnic look' which implies ethnicity as an attribute given to the non-white, non-British 'Other'. It distinguishes between 'them' and 'us' and also denies the ethnicity of the British (or perhaps, more appropriately English) populace. This leads to the conceptualisation of English people as individuals, and all outsiders as members of distinct groups. This grouping of people means any cultural differentiation is taken as a cause for behaviour, instead of individual motivations.
In addition, everyday understandings of ethnicity are contradictory, as although emphasis is placed on choice and demand for migrant ethnicities to change, popular discourse use ethnicity in ways that suggest physical distinctions based on skin colour, making it remarkably similar to 'race'. This suggests that ethnicity has simply become a euphemism for 'race' and may simply act as "another way of essentializing and naturalizing difference." Additionally, despite being discredited, 'race' is still common in everyday usage, becoming independent from scientific discourse and becoming autonomous. UK legislation such as the Race Relations Act and the creation of the Commission for Racial Equality, both legitimise the use of 'race'. Although still referring to phenotypical variation, 'race' has moved into a general meaning of 'the Other', recently focusing on religion, an example being the current demonising of Islam after 9/11. 'Race' has absorbed culture, making it similar to our understanding of ethnicity. According to Fenton, 'race' and ethnicity are used in common language interchangeably, with little distinction. Therefore, although the original definition of 'race' may have been very different from our understanding of ethnicity, as 'race' has absorbed cultural understandings, the two terms have become more alike.
Furthermore, as 'race' has absorbed aspects of culture, so has racism. After the Nazi's crimes against humanity, scientific racism was discredited as the Western world overcame with revulsion. However, despite reacting against the political use of racial ideology, the underlying assumptions of racial thinking remained, and the belief that humanity is divided into discrete groups went unchallenged. According to Malik, they "accepted the reality of natural divisions within humankind, though they preferred to term them 'ethnic groups' rather than 'races'". Human difference stopped being discussed in terms of biology, but was now dominated by categories of culture and history.
This 'new racism' emerged under what Rex called "the postmodern turn" leading to a plurality of different racisms based on differing and ambiguous definitions of 'race'. Founded on ideas of cultural incompatibility, political arguments based around boundary and nationality was framed towards the 'threat' of the migrant culture. This is seen as early as the 1980s, whereby discussions towards immigration often took on warlike language, using phrases such as 'the enemy within'. This directed attention to national boundaries, specifying who may, or may not, legitimately belong to Britain. Ethnic groups were a threat to 'Britishness' and its superior culture, and ethnicities were thought to lead to national decline. Migrants were simply formal, legal citizens of Britain, not substantive members, (tied through culture, language, heritage and 'race'). The word 'immigrant' became synonymous with 'black', but 'racism' could now be excused as although the targets were the same, what they were attacking had changed. This serves to demonstrate the ambiguous relationship between 'race' and ethnicity and how the two terms are linked in contemporary society through complex interconnections of culture and nationality.
In addition, this confusion and ambiguity between 'race' and ethnicity continues if you observe problems within ethnicity's descriptive categories. As there are so many different ways to divide social reality, different labels are often incompatible and less than ideal. Issues of nomenclature are important as those who create categories are often from superordinate groups and any application of labels may act to weaken the position of subordinate groups being labelled. The contemporary use of the term 'black' for instance, is a conscious political statement, and those defining themselves through this term are embracing a common identity. However, this term subsumes all those seen as 'not white' within one category, ignoring the diversity of other ethnicities, for example Asians. This focus on the particular phenotypical difference of skin colour also underlines discourses on colour, as those who talk of 'persons of colour' when referring to 'non- whites', refer to the 'Other'.
Additionally, another term often used is 'ethnic minority'. There are two main problems with this term, one; it may be seen as a euphemism for race, and two; it is insulting to those who are described by it as it implies only minorities, and non-whites, have an ethnicity. The ethnic majority is never referred to, and the term, although being an attempt to replace 'race', ends up replicating ideas of power as minorities are often those found in subordinate positions.
Moreover, this problem of defining ethnicity is expressed through measuring ethnicity within the census. Although asking people to choose and self-identify, it also asks them to place their ethnicity within one category, going against its fluidic, contextual nature, returning back to the essentialist, primordial definition seen as a "mistake". In 1991, due to the desire to catalogue and number the migrant, minority ethnic population, the census added its first question on 'ethnic group'. However, the Janus-faced questioning was confusing, as one category asked to tick is 'White', which is not an ethnicity, but a skin colour. It fails to grasp the complexities of ethnicity, placing many diverse ethnicities into one category. The all encompassing 'White' for example, incorporated nations ranging from Britain, Europe, Cyprus (of both Greek and Turkish origin), North America, South Africa, Australia, South America, and so on. This questioning also underlines assumptions about 'race'. "The 'White' we are followed by the 'Black' and the 'Brown/coloured' others" making 'White' minorities remain invisible, and creating a sense that those not ticking the 'White' box are aligning themselves to 'alien' categories. The underlying logic seems to be racial and not ethnic, questioning whether ethnicity really is a distinct term.
What is more, the organisation of groups in the 2001 census, although improved (with the differentiation of 'White' through the addition of an 'Irish' category), it still had many problems. 'White' remains at the apex, with the 'Asian', 'Black' and 'Chinese' categories lower on the list. Although some would argue this is simply a reflection of the majority 'white' community, Ratcliffe argues this is "a rather disturbing echo of Social Darwinist thought", as all 'mixed' categories outside 'White' and 'White-mixed' are subsumed to a residual category. These confusing questions around ethnicity, continue to undermine 'race's' modern-day differentiation from ethnicity.
To finish, 'race's' distinct history, rooted in biology and history, is not prevalent within ethnicity, used by many as a reason to replace the term. The two terms are different, with ethnicity being a more flexible concept, incorporating things 'race' did not include; culture, ancestry and language. However, the distinguishing points between them depend on how each of them are defined, and this has changed over time. Ethnicity as a primordial, essentialist term replicates many of the same hierarchical assumptions and repercussions of 'race' which can lead to forms of racism and ethnic conflict. However, if using a definition steeped in contextual and situational variants, some of this problem is removed, as ethnicity is not seen as static and unchanging. Nevertheless, attempts to define this form of ethnicity (such as Eriksen's) leads to the unfortunate repercussion of freezing ethnic groups into fixed categories. It can also lead to nationalist agendas, which form boundaries and forms of exclusion (as seen in immigration policy). These conflicts are similar to new conceptualisings of 'race' which have moved away from distinctly biological determinants and towards cultural ones. Ethnicity (and its terms ethnic minority and 'black') also incorporate phenotypical differences, so that, in common language, the two phrases are interchangeable (the complexity of the situation demonstrated through problems in the census). However, academically, the two terms are recognised as different, and due to the importance of terminology, 'race' is rejected in favour of ethnicity.