The issue of domestic violence against women has again come to the forefront with the release of the film 'Provoked' based on the famous case of Kiranjit Ahluwalia
 who had burnt her husband to death, after undergoing ten years of physical and sexual abuse in 1989. She was convicted for murder by the trial court and sentenced to life imprisonment but on appeal, she could successfully plead a psychological condition of 'Battered Woman Syndrome' (BWS) wherein a woman, because of the traumatic stress of living in a constant state of fear, may feel unable to escape from the relationship and may resort to violence to survive. Her charge was reduced to man slaughter on the ground of diminished responsibility and was given 3 years imprisonment which she had already served thereby being released in 1992. This Paper attempts to critically examine the concept of BWS in pleading provocation as a partial defence to murder and whether it applies to all women or based on a euro-centric notion of passive, weak, fearful, white middle class victim of domestic violence while locating it in the larger context of sexual divisions in law.
The theory of BWS as a legal defence to murder was first introduced by Dr. Lenore Walker in the United States in 1980. According to Walker, this theory is based on the notion of 'learned helplessness' whereby the effects from repeated physical, sexual and psychological abuse limit a woman's responses to coping with each individual attack rather than focusing on a way to escape her abusive partner. Thereafter, expert testimony is introduced in the court to convince the jury about the reasonableness of the battered woman's conduct since usually the circumstances under which a battered woman kills her abuser do not meet the traditional standards of imminent danger.
Traditionally, the defence of provocation to murder has been available in cases where the defendant had suffered a sudden and temporary loss of self control so that he was no longer in control of his actions, as was held in Duffy's case wherein the court observed that a long course of conduct causing suffering and anxiety are not by themselves sufficient to constitute provocation including a history of abuse which induce a desire for revenge. Though even in Ahluwalia's case the Court of Appeal stuck with the 'sudden and temporary rule', it held that the defence of provocation would not be negated simply because of the delayed reaction in cases of women subjected frequently over a period to violent treatment, provided there was a sudden loss of self control at the time of killing.
However, this principle of loss of self control as the basis for provocation has been criticised by feminists on the ground that it is based on a male behaviour whereby the male defendant suddenly loses self control and kills another person. According to Helena Kennedy, the cultural differences and different socialisation processes of men and women are not taken into account wherein women are less likely to respond to provocation immediately, due to physical and psychological reasons, thereby self defence and provocation being less available to them. But the law takes a very narrow and restricted view of provocation based on male categories wherein if the crime is not committed in the 'heat of the moment' and the defendant had the time to 'cool down' then the defence of provocation is not applicable.
In BWS cases, in addition to the defence of provocation, self defence could also be forwarded since in many cases, women end up killing their partners either to save their lives or their children and if properly applied, it may likely to result in an acquittal than either provocation or diminished responsibility. But this involves a rethinking of the conventional theory of self defence which was conceived as an equal fight between men, of similar stature and strength, where the introduction of a weapon could tilt the scale in favour of one against the other. But in most cases of battered women who kill, because of their physical disadvantage in relation to their partners, they use a knife or revolver or other weapons to protect themselves. This might nullify their plea of self-defence since the use of weapons might imply excessive force and the act of procuring it might be regarded as a deliberate and calculated move and not in immediate response to an attack.
Also, the circumstances under which a battered woman kills her abuser often do not reflect standard notions of 'imminent danger' since she might strike when her abuser is made vulnerable by sleep or alcohol which might be perceived as unreasonable since the woman was in no imminent danger at the time of her attack. This male view of the law of self-defence, coupled with gender stereotypes, limits the ability of judges and jurors to define a battered woman's conduct as reasonable. Aileen McColgan opines that "the test of reasonableness must be assessed in the context of the defendant's own circumstances including the disparate physical size, strength and training of defendant and deceased which would have a bearing on the reasonableness of the force used by her thereby keeping in mind her own individual context.
However, the notion of 'battered woman syndrome' has been criticised due to its over reliance on the psychological condition of the woman as 'learned helplessness' whereby she is reduced to a passive victim of long term abuse without any agency to resist or escape from her situation. This notion individualises her situation and denies the structured nature of violence against women which is entrenched in the societal fabric and legitimised by the legal system. In Ngaire Naffine's opinion, under the BWS, the woman's response is seen as exceptional and pathological bordering on abnormality which is evident from the fact of psychiatrist's expert testimony thereby reinforcing the notions of irrationality or disorder on the part of woman. In Sara Thornton's case, the defendant was held guilty of murdering her alcoholic and abusive husband, since she came across as assertive, in control of her actions and had previously resisted her husband's attempts to abuse her thereby proving that unless a victim comes across as a total passive and helpless being as was evident in Ahluwalia case, the protection of BWS is unavailable.
In addition, black feminists have contended that the notion of BWS is predicated on the gender characterisations which are mostly applicable in a white heterosexist society of women being emotional, submissive, dependant, etc while ignoring the historical and cultural experiences of black women wherein centuries of slavery and racial discrimination have made them actively resist and counter both racism and sexism. Sharon Angella Allard notes that while this theory might explain the reasonableness of a battered woman's behaviour, the construction of 'woman' that imbues the idea of BWS is based upon limited societal constructs of appropriate behaviour for white women and the racist stereotypes and media demonised images of black women as aggressive, strong and violent do not fit into the description of passive victim required by the BWS in order to plead lenient penalty on the ground of 'learned helplessness'.
Allard gives the examples of two battered women, one being white and the other, black, who were both accused of battering death of the children in their custody. While the white woman was let off since she was quite emotionally tortured by her abuser, the poor black woman was charged with manslaughter, hence showing that the treatment of battered women varies in the court, depending on whether she is white or black. Moreover, the concept of BWS based on the common gender notions of violent male and passive female falls flat in the context of battering in lesbian relationships wherein both the abuser and the abused are of the same sex thereby allegedly having similar personality traits. Due to the double handicap of being a woman and a lesbian in a sexist homophobic society, the instances of lesbian battering do not come to light and are not taken into account in majority of domestic violence discourses.
This shows that the legal structure of the society has consistently ignored and deliberately removed women's experiences of their lived realities in different circumstances underscored by their race, class, sexual orientation etc and denied them their own subjectivity. Instead, law has moulded women in contrast to male subjectivity and conceived as the 'other' to male norms. Ngaire Naffine suggests that when women wish to be recognised as women in law, as possessed of their own distinctive characteristics, they lose their legal subjectivity. Women cannot be both distinctively women and legal subjects. This is symptomatic of the larger issue of the sexist biases in law whereby the legal system and its rules and regulations are based on the specific nature of male social and cultural experiences.
According to Naffine, while law professes to organise around a universal 'person', abstracted from his social context, in fact the law endows its legal subject with a very specific sort of qualities whereby the legal model of the person implies a white middle class heterosexual man and hence excluding majority of the population including working class and black men from the legal subjectivity. The sexist bias of the law is further perpetuated by the traditional liberal divide between the public and the private wherein men are supposed to inhabit the public world of government and market place while women are supposed to be ghettoised in the private sphere saddled with the child bearing and child rearing responsibilities.
Katherine O'Donovan argues that the root of inequality of the sexes lies in the dichotomy between private and public, since the former denotes a sphere unregulated by law and this dichotomy lies at the root of the liberalism. Law is not only central to the concepts of private and public, and to the division between the two, but also plays an important role in the construction of that division. She opines that the idea of privacy affects the perceptions of the social world and social policy, if not translated into legal concept. Thus areas which are allegedly within women's domain like marriage, sexuality, reproduction, etc are clubbed in the private sphere thereby rendering them immuned from the state and legal protection which assumes that 'the house of everyone is his castle' and hence masks the physical abuse and other manifestations of power and inequality within the family. Thus, the feminists through their powerful slogan 'personal is political' have sought to emphasise the falsity of the public/private dichotomy as male hegemony permeates in all spheres. In the private arena, relations of domination and subordination are masked by the ideology of love while in the public arena, economic and cultural factors hide the grotesque gender inequalities.
The feminist critique of law has undergone various phases wherein in the first phase, the present character and outlook of law are largely left unquestioned i.e. it uncritically accepted the impartial and objective nature of law but argued that same principle of objectivity and non-discrimination should be applied to women and they should get equal opportunity in education, employment, property rights, voting rights etc. This is essentially a liberal critique of law which argued for equality with men in the public sphere and left the private sphere of inequality unchallenged.
The second phase of the feminist critique is concerned with the deep-seated mail bias which encompasses every aspect of law. It argued that the law embodies a male culture, a male way of doing things which is hidden by the rhetoric of impartiality and neutrality thereby obscuring law's actual partiality: its preference for men and their view of the world. According to Catherine Mackinnon, some feminists have attempted to emphasise the differences between men and women and seek special measures in terms of pregnancy benefits, maternity leave, etc but in this analysis, 'the man has become the measure of all things'. Thus, she advocates the 'dominance approach' in which the issue of gender equality is a question of the unequal division of power, specifically of male domination and female subjugation.
Though it exposed the inherent male nature of the law and its institutions like court, police etc, this phase is also criticised for essentialising women's experiences and the whole category of 'woman' has become a suspect since the feminist discourse for long has concentrated only on the gender identity of women without taking into account other intersecting identities of race, class, sexual orientation, disability, etc which equally impact and affect women's social realities. This universalising tendency of the second phase feminism is sought to be corrected in the third phase wherein the analytical categories through which law proclaims to be impartial are questioned in order to expose the disjuncture between the rhetoric of law and its sexist practice. It views that the actual relation between law and the patriarchal social order is complex and variable. While law is intimately connected to the values and priorities of a sexist, male-dominated society, that relationship is historically contingent, shifting and multifaceted.
The assumption of law as being inherently male biased is termed as too simplistic as it portrays the whole male community as being uniformly oppressive without referring to their socio-economic positions and there have been instances where law has recognised women's rights and encouraged positive discrimination in favour of women, e.g. elimination of sexual discrimination from most areas and also regulating private sphere through granting of equal right to divorce, property, right to reproductive freedom via legalised abortion etc. Carol Smart deconstructs ideas about law as a monolithic, homogenous power which controls women and is exercised by men. In reality, law itself is a multi-faceted system of regulation, containing its own contradictions, and importantly, capable of change and positive influence and not just negative restraint. Despite its partiality and dominance of male subjectivity, law still remains an important discursive site of feminist struggles for legal reform and eradication of gender biases from its societal structure.
This reformist aspect of law is no where more evident than in the area of domestic violence where law has the powerful potential to recognise and eliminate the occurrence of violence against women prevalent at all aspects of societal relations. To view 'domestic violence' as a 'family' problem thereby not requiring legal intervention or to portray it as a 'psychopathological' problem of the abuser, masks the structural prejudices embedded in the society which sanction the male dominance and control in the family as well as justify violence against women through its socio-cultural practices. The feminists acknowledge that not only do women experience a higher rate of severe and lethal domestic violence than men but also socially structured gender inequality is a primary reason for the high rate of violence against women, while simultaneously recognising that domestic violence gets multiplied by the intersections of particular race, ethnic, class, gender, and sexual orientation systems of oppression and discrimination.
In this context, Kimberle Crenshaw's concept of 'intersectionality' becomes important wherein the trauma of domestic violence is amplified by further victimisation outside the intimate relationship including racism, heterosexism and class oppression. It is accentuated by massive poverty, inadequate housing facilities or shelter homes for battered women, lack of legal awareness, fear of racist treatment by the legal system to black men and fear of incarceration, fear of deportation for illegal migrants and lack of multi-lingual support services etc.
Moreover, there is a tendency in the western mainstream literature to blame the occurrences of domestic violence on the ethnic minority community and cultures thereby assuming that domestic violence does not occur in the white, middle class heterosexual relations which has been vehemently denied by feminists. This simplistic analysis of blaming 'other' cultures for domestic violence overlooks the fact that how different communities' cultural experiences of violence including domestic violence are mediated through structural forms of oppression such as racism, economic exploitation, colonialism, heterosexism and other forms of inequalities. Rhea V. Almeida opines that "wife battering is not culture. It is a traditional patriarchal custom that men have practiced and women have accepted for generations."
Though national legislations protecting women against domestic violence exist in most countries including India where the 'Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act' was passed in 2005, the patriarchal nature of the state along with a lack of political will to eradicate violence against women have rendered these legal reforms ineffective. These laws would be of no use unless they are accompanied by attitudinal changes in the mindset of judges, police officials and other service providers including doctors and para-medical staff who are still entrenched in sexist biases and refuse to recognize domestic violence as a potent form of violation of certain basic rights of women. Thus, a better integration of race, class, sexuality, disability and immigration in understanding and combating domestic violence at a macro level is necessary.
In this regard, the concept of 'battered woman syndrome', in my view, needs major re-evaluation since it is premised on the dominant notions of passive and helpless feminine qualities while simultaneously ignoring the experiences of other women who do not subscribe to such notions of weak and passive victims e.g. women of coloured communities, etc. Thus, the restrictive categories of the law of self-defence are unable to accommodate the specific circumstances in which women are forced to kill their abusers, thereby emphasising the need for a comprehensive analysis incorporating the effects of race, class, and gender on the legal system which reinforces the necessity of 'multiple consciousness as jurisprudential method'.
I would like to contend that the idea of 'battered woman syndrome' did manage to focus on the differential experiences of women and their way of dealing with violence and abuse in contrast to the male reaction to violence and attack, which had hitherto informed the legal principles of self-defence and provocation as defences to murder. Though BWS attempted to pathologise and individualise women's conditions who suffer years of domestic abuse to a state of learned helplessness, it fell short of implicating the entire social structure which justifies and perpetuate gender violence at every level. Instead of locating violence as a means of controlling power and dominance over women, BWS separated the abusive situation of women from the larger societal structure of male violence.
Thus, any theory of domestic violence, whether a legal concept to explain women's actions of murdering their abusers in order to claim self defence or provocation, or a sociological analysis explaining the causal effects, has to keep in mind the multifarious nature of violence operating in society inclusive of race, class, gender and sexual orientation factors. The BWS incorporates the idea of 'intersectionality' and pays equal attention to all those factors which render women susceptible to abuse and violence including poverty, lack of welfare and support services, non-access to legal remedies, etc and focus on the entrenched structural disabilities of the patriarchal social order instead of highlighting the psychological condition of survivors. Otherwise it would have limited utility in advancing the cause of the victims of domestic violence like Thornton, women of colour etc. who do not fit into the dominant notions of BWS. Thus, protection for battered women depends as much on social movements for structural changes and social justice as it does on culturally competent services for individual women and communities.