Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease that causes a number of symptoms throughout the entire body. The most common symptom is breathing difficulties, caused by the body's susceptibility to common lung infections. Over the course of time successive lung infections cause significant lung damage, leaving the lungs struggling to function and making breathing difficult [1]. Cystic fibrosis sufferers are particularly susceptible to pneumonia. There is no cure for cystic fibrosis, although the effects of lung infections can be reduced by a course of antibiotics early in the course of the infection.
The pancreas is similarly affected by cystic fibrosis, failing to produce digestive enzymes which makes it difficult for cystic fibrosis patients to absorb nutrients [1]. This means that cystic fibrosis sufferers often suffer from malnutrition, resulting in them growing in height at a lower rate than normal and consequently they have often have lower heights than would be predicted. The difficulty absorbing nutrients also leads to generally low weights when compared with the rest of the population [2]. Cystic fibrosis also causes liver problems and infertility, but this report will mostly be concerned with examining the malnutrition and lung damage of patients suffering from cystic fibrosis.
This report ultimately aims to explore the relationship between the strength of the respiratory muscles in cystic fibrosis patients and their level of malnutrition and lung damage, producing a good model for a patient's maximal static expiratory pressure (a measure of the strength of the respiratory muscles) with respect to their lung volume and other variables.
The cystic fibrosis data is a collection of measurements of age, sex, height, weight, Body Mass Index (BMI), body mass as a percentage of the age-specific median in normal individuals (BMP), forced expiratory volume (1 second) as a percentage of forced vital capacity (FEV1), residual volume (RV), functional residual capacity (FRC), total lung capacity (TLC) and maximal static expiratory pressure (PEmax) from 25 individuals with cystic fibrosis aged between 7 and 23.
The data set is a multivariate data set, with the variables height, weight, BMI and BMP all indicative in some manner of the general level of a patient's malnutrition and the variables FEV1, RV, FRC and TLC all measuring various aspects of a patient's lung volume. RV, residual volume, represents the amount of air remaining in the lungs following a maximal expiration of air from the lungs (all the air that remains after you have fully breathed out). FRC, functional residual capacity, is the amount of air remaining in the lungs following a normal breath. TLC, total lung capacity, is the total volume of the lungs following a maximal respiration. These are complicated to measure and involve the patient being placed in an air-tight chamber, or nitrogen washout of the lungs. They also require the cooperation of the patient to get a reliable measurement and are often under measured. FEV1, the forced expiratory volume as a percentage of Forced Vital Capacity, can be taken using a spirometer and is slightly less dependent on patient cooperation than the other measurements.
The most promising general form of model to fit to the data seems to be a multiple linear regression model using PEmax as the dependent variable. However, given the number of variables involved in the data set, careful analysis will be required to determine the variables chosen to use in the regression. An important aspect of the initial analysis will be data reduction and summary to examine relationships between the variables. Due to the number of variables measuring the same underlying features (and therefore expecting to have high correlations with each other) multicollinearity will likely be a consideration in the regression. The data will also need to be analysed to determine if any anomalous results or outliers are present.
The table below describes each of the variables individually with several summary statistics suggesting the location and spread of each variable.
Additionally, 44% of the group was male and 56% female, suggesting that there is a fairly even male-female spread in the population. The table gives a fairly good indication of the location, range and general spread of the data. Weight, age and RV in particular seem to have a large amount of variation. In particular, none of the subjects have a BMP over 100 so all of the subjects are below the average body mass index for their age. This is a fairly good indication that most of them are suffering from malnutrition.
There do not seem to be any cases of extreme outliers within the variables - all the minimum and maximum values are within three standard deviations of the mean, and the table below demonstrates that all the points fall within the inner fences (at 1.5 times the interquartile range) of the data.
This is not definitive evidence that there are no outliers present in the data, but there are no clear extreme values that appear to be caused by anything other than normal variation in the data. The values of subjects 15 and 25 for PEmax come close to being considered mild outliers and warrant further consideration, but there are no values which need to be eliminated immediately or investigated because they appear to be caused by experimental error.
The table of quartiles also gives some indication of the spread of the data within variables that the simple summary statistics did not highlight. Many of the variables appear to be quite heavily positively skewed. BMP, RV and PEmax all have median values that are far closer to the value of the lower quartile than the upper quartile, indicating skewness of the data. This is further emphasised by examining the distribution of PEmax.
The above histogram gives an indication of the distribution of PEmax. It appears as though PEmax is roughly normally distributed but highly positively skewed, with a heavy right tail. The extreme values could be considered outliers but the number of them suggests they are not. With a relatively small sample size it is difficult to determine whether a variable is actually normally distributed but the histogram seems to indicate that PEmax has some significant deviations from the normal and a normal probability plot of PEmax backs this up.
An idea of the relationships between the different variables and how strongly they relate to each other can be gained from looking at the correlation between the different variables. The table below shows the correlations between all the variables. Particularly strong or notable correlations have been highlighted in bold.
Particularly notable is the strong correlation between age, height, weight and body mass index. As these have been measured to get an idea of the underlying level of malnutrition in the patients it is unsurprising that the correlation between these variables is strong. Age has little correlation with BMP since BMP takes into account the average body mass index of a patient's age, thus removing age as a factor in BMI. Sex has very little correlation with any of the other variables, indicating that there may be no real difference between the male and female patients examined. The correlations of the lung volume variables are surprising. While you would expect larger lung volumes to translate into better lung strength, three of the lung volume variables seem to have a weak negative relationship with a patient's maximal static expiratory pressure. Additionally, FEV1 seems to have produced significantly different results to the other three measures of lung volume, showing weak negative correlation with the other variables. This is likely to be due to the difference between how FEV1 and RV/FRC/TLC are measured.
The strongest relationship of any variable with PEmax is with age. The graph below shows a plot of age against PEmax.
The relationship between age and PEmax appears to be quite strong and reasonably linear. Older subjects clearly have higher values of PEmax in general, although there are two outliers that suggest that the relationship might not be perfectly linear. Height and weight have similar relationships with PEmax.
The graph below gives some indication of the relationship between the lung volumes of the subjects and their maximal static expiratory pressure (PEmax). The graph has ordered the subjects in ascending order based on their PEmax value, with 1 representing the subject with the lowest value of PEmax and 25 the subject with the highest value of PEmax. The circle shows the residual lung volume (RV) of the patient, the triangle their functional residual lung volume (FRC) and the cross their total lung volume (TLC).
The graph demonstrates some interesting features of the relationship between the various lung volume variables. Firstly, for all patients, RV is the highest of all volumes and in most cases the difference between RV and the other two variables is dramatic. On the whole, FRC is also greater than TLC, although there are a few cases where TLC is above FRC (note than in these cases the difference between the two is extremely small). In general, this is enough to conclude that RV is greater than FRC and FRC is greater than TLC. Subjects with low RV values also seem to have much smaller differences between the three measurements, whereas those with high RV values have quite pronounced variation between the variables.
The ordering of the subjects based on the value of their PEmax also gives a rough indication of the relationship between lung volume and PEmax. However, the relationship is not particularly clear (or strong). TLC seems to remain pretty much constant across the graph, indicating that there is little connection between those subjects with high TLC and those with high PEmax. The same applies for FRC, although there is much more variation in this case. RV seems like it might have a weak linear relationship with PEmax but the data does not demonstrate a strong enough relationship to make a solid conclusion on this point.
The cystic fibrosis data appears to be representative, although there is little additional information about how the data was collected or sampled. The analysis looks to model the maximal static expiratory pressure of people suffering from cystic fibrosis, therefore the data should be representative of the population of cystic fibrosis patients. The data is representative of the population of cystic fibrosis patients to some degree, although the age range is the cause of some concern. Cystic fibrosis is usually diagnosed at an early age (over half are diagnosed as a baby and many are diagnosed at birth [3]) and patients typically live to the age of 30 [4], so it seems unusual that the data only spans between the ages of 7 and 23. Since the ages are fairly evenly distributed in that range it seems as though only examining this range was done by intent. There also seems to be a good distribution of males and females within the age range, although all the older results are female and there are no results for a male over the age of 19. Overall the data seems representative of the population of cystic fibrosis patients in the early to mid stages of their illness (ie. between the ages of around 7 to 23).
The lack of results out of this age range means that the conclusions from the analysis cannot necessarily be extended to the whole population of cystic fibrosis patients - while the other variables may lie within the ranges collected other trends may be present outside the age range. For instance, an extremely young patient is likely to be considered relatively malnourished but since they are in the early stages of cystic fibrosis and thus unlikely to have suffered from many infections which are the main cause of lung damage in cystic fibrosis patients. Additionally, in this age group there is likely to be a strong relationship between age and height/weight due to natural growth that may not necessarily hold for older patients.
In terms of reliability, there is not much to go in determining whether the data is reliable or not. There is not much information about how the data has been collected (for instance, whether RV, FRC and TLC were all collected via the same method, as these variables can be measured in different ways). Without this or a larger number of results (a sample size of 25 when dealing with 11 variables is not particularly large, and could pose problems when trying to form an appropriate model) or repeated measurements of some of the variables (this would be particularly useful with the lung volume measurements, which rely on patient cooperation and can change quite a bit from measurement to measurement) it is impossible to conclusively state that the data is reliable.
A few obvious points can be covered, however. Examination of the data has indicated that there are no clear outliers or unusual results that need to be removed or examined in more detail. This would indicate that the data is reasonably reliable and has been collected relatively carefully. However, there is one anomaly with the data that stands out. PEmax appears to have been rounded to the nearest five as almost all the measurements are presented in that format. While rounding could lose some of the data, it is mostly likely to be a result of the reading of the measuring apparatus in taking PEmax and the data can only be given accurately to the nearest 5. The immediate concern with this is the measurement for patient 16, where the value of PEmax was given as 134cm H 2O, not to the nearest five. While this could be the result of an error it is worrying because it could indicate that this measurement was taken in a different manner or by a different person than the rest of the subjects. This raises some doubts over the reliability of the data.
One oddity of the data is with the lung volume variables. Total Lung Capacity, in ml, is the volume of the lungs following a maximal breath in, so should be the maximal volume of the lungs. Residual Volume, in ml, is the volume of the lungs following a maximal breath out, so should be the minimum volume remaining in the lungs at any time. The Functional Residual Capacity should be between these two measurements. However, in the data provided, the greatest of the lung volume measurements is always RV - the Residual Volume. This can be seen by looking at the summary of the lung volume relationships above - RV is always much greater than the Total Lung Capacity. This is extremely puzzling, as the Residual Volume should always be less than the Total Lung Capacity. Since RV is greater than the other measurements in all cases, it seems most likely that the data has been mislabelled and RV is actually the Total Lung Capacity.
Some indication of the reliability can be provided by looking at the correlation of the variables. While none of the variables are repeated measurements, many of them are intended to measure the same underlying features - notably a patient's level of malnutrition and their lung volume. Therefore you would expect a high level of correlation between these variables. While height, weight, BMI and BMP all correlate fairly strongly, suggesting that the data for malnutrition is fairly reliable, this is not the same for the lung volume variables. FEV1 through TLC are all intended to measure a patient's lung volume, but there seems to be little agreement between FEV1 and the other variables. While RV, FRC and TLC are correlated to some degree, there is even some evidence of negative correlation between FEV1 and these variables. This is a cause for concern and could indicate that the lung volume data is not all that reliable.
The method which will be used to find a suitable model to predict PEmax as well as possible will be multiple linear regression. Multiple regression studies the relationship between one dependent variable (in this case PEmax) and several independent variables. Multiple regression fits a linear model,
where Y i is the value of the dependent variable for the ith unit, the x ij's are the values of the independent variable j for the ith unit and the B's are regression coefficients (with B representing the 'intercept' and B 1 through B n representing the various slopes for each of the independent variables). The error e i is the difference between the actual value of the response and the model, representing the natural random error present in a sample. In matrix form this model is
where Y is the response vector of the dependent variable, X is the design matrix of values of the independent variables, B is the matrix of parameters and E is the vector of random errors. The relationship fitted is a linear one as the model involves only linear terms of the independent variables. The method used to find an optimal set of coefficients () so as to best fully describe the data was ordinary least squares, where the least squares estimates minimise the function
This produces a set of parameters that minimise the square of the differences between the actual and predicted values. In attempting to fit a multiple regression model to the data a number of assumptions are made about the data :
(i) That the variables involved in the regression are normally distributed.
(ii) That the relationships between the variables are linear.
(iii) That the errors e i are normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 
2.
(iv) That the errors e i are uncorrelated.
These assumptions will be examined and analysed in the case of the cystic fibrosis data. While the first two assumptions can be analysed in light of what we have already seen of the data, the last two will be examined after the model has been formulated with the help of residuals plots.
A multiple regression taking account of all eleven variables in the data set produced the following results, along with the standard errors of the regression coefficients and their corresponding significant levels.
At first sight it appears as though this is a good model for PEmax due to the relatively high R square value. However regression using all of the available variables is not a good choice of model. Almost none of the variables have coefficients significantly distinguishable from zero and the R square value has been inflated from the effects of multicollinearity. As has already been seen, some of the variables correlate extremely highly with other variables in the data set - notably age, height, weight and BMI. Since there are strong linear relationships between these variables, it becomes extremely difficult to get regression coefficient estimates for these variables and using several collinear variables in a regression is inadvisable [5, pg. 107]. Multicollinearity can be examined by regressing each of the independent variables on the other independent variables it is suspected of being collinear with.
Doing this with age, height, weight, BMI and BMP produces R square values over 0.9 in all cases, with some being extremely close to 1. This seems to indicate that each of these variables can be described by a linear combination of the others and makes it inadvisable to include several of them in a multiple regression of PEmax. The strong collinearity makes sense, as a patient's body mass index is derived from a patient's height and weight and a patient's BMP is derived from their body mass index and their age, so there would be a linear relationship between all these variables. In fact, from the correlation between age, height, weight and BMI, only one of these variables should probably be included in the regression analysis. BMP only poses a problem with regards to multicollinearity when included in conjunction with two of the others.
Collinearity between the lung volume variables is also to be expected, since they are intended to measure the same underlying variable : a patient's lung volume. However, as could be seen from the correlation between these variables, the problem is not quite so pronounced here. FEV1 has little correlation with the other lung volume variables and a regression confirms that there is not a case of collinearity here. Regressing FRC with respect to RV and TLC produces an R square value of around 0.8 - not as high as the height/weight variables but still evidence suggesting collinearity.
Additionally, with a sample size of 25 there is realistically only enough data to sensibly make a regression for PEmax on two to three variables, or four at the most. With the observations regarding multicollinearity taken into account, one of age, height, weight or BMI should be considered, along with one of RV, FRC and TLC, sex, BMP and FEV1. A stepwise regression (using an algorithm to exclude or include variables in a regression model) can be used to give a fairly good indication of which variables are important and what should be included in the model. However, it will not necessarily produce the best result and care should be taken not to just blindly follow the result of the stepwise regression. A backwards stepwise regression, including all ten independent variables at first, produced the following model :
This seems to be a pretty good model for PEmax. All the variables have coefficients significantly different from zero, indicating that they all have some effect on the dependent variable. One concern may be that weight and BMP might be expected to be highly related and therefore the estimates of these coefficients affected by multicollinearity, but a regression of BMP on weight produces a relatively low R square value (0.45), which indicates that they are not expected to be collinear.
In the case of age, height, weight and BMI, the high correlation between variables means that it does not make much difference which of the variables are chosen [6, pg. 147]. The same applies to RV, FRC and TLC. Since these variables all measure the same underlying variable (malnutrition or lung volume), it does not matter which is selected to be included in the model. From general analysis of the data, sex appears to have little effect on a patient's PEmax or lung volume so it does not seem worth considering in the regression. Therefore the choice of variables (weight, BMP, FEV1 and RV) provided by the stepwise regression seems to be a good one. PEmax will be modelled with regards to these four variables and the other variables will not be included in the model.
However, multiple linear regression operates under the assumption that the variables involved in the regression are normally distributed. As has already been seen, PEmax appears to have some significant deviations from the normal distribution, especially with regards to being positively skewed. Weight and FEV1 seem to be fairly well normally distributed but BMP and RV also show signs of being positively skewed. Therefore it is worth considering transformations of these variables to produce data that better conforms to the normal distribution. A square-root transformation has been applied to all three of these variables (PEmax, BMP and RV). The square-root transformation improves the normal fit of these variables quite a bit but does not drastically improve the situation and there is still some evidence of skewness of the variables.
The table below shows the results of a multiple regression on weight, BMP, FEV1 and RV with PEmax, BMP and RV having been subjected to a square-root transformation.
The regression has produced the model :
or
This appears to be a much better model than the one simply regressing PEmax on all the variables in the data set. The regression coefficient estimates all have lower standard errors and are significantly different from zero, meaning that the coefficient estimates are likely to be more reliable.
The plot below shows a graph of the residuals from the regression plotted against the values fitted to the data by the model. This can be used to assess whether the model that has been selected breaks any of the assumptions of multiple linear regression.
This seems to be a reasonably good result for the residuals. There is no clear pattern in the data which could indicate that the error terms of the variables have different degrees of variance.
The residuals seem to fit a normal distribution reasonably well. While the plot does not show a perfect straight line between the residuals from the regression and their expected normal values, the residuals do seem to fit a rough straight pattern, with a few outliers deviating from the rest of the data. This would seem to indicate that the errors in the regression are normally distributed and thus do not break that assumption of the regression model.
The graph above shows a plot of Cook's distance for each of the points in the data set. It can be used to give an idea of which points are having a large effect on the estimation of the regression coefficients. The plot indicates that points 5, 6 and 15 have a large effect on the regression. It might be worth considering removing these points from the data set and performing the regression again to get a better estimate of the regression coefficients, but the Cook's distance for these points is not especially large (a Cook's distance over 1 is usually a good criterion for removal) and it is unlikely this would have a dramatic effect on the model.
A model has been fitted to PEmax based on weight, BMP, FEV1 and RV using multiple linear regression. The suggested relationship is
This suggests that PEmax increases with weight, a patient's forced expiratory volume as a percentage of Forced Vital Capacity, and a patient's residual volume, but decreases with their body mass as a percentage of the age-specific median. The model appears to be a reasonable one, explaining a fair portion of the data and not obviously breaking any assumptions of the multiple linear regression process. While it will be useful as a guide for the general level of a patient's PEmax, it will not be that useful for attempting to predict PEmax precisely. Since the R square value of the regression is still relatively low, there is still a large amount of variation in the data that is not explained by the model. There are probably several other variables that are extremely important to predicting a patient's maximal static expiratory pressure that were not included in the data and therefore are not part of the model.
There are still concerns regarding the model over whether the variables used in the regression are normally distributed. Transformations seemed to help a bit in this regard but the model's trustworthiness is limited while the distribution of these variables remains in doubt. Additionally, the relatively small sample size and concerns over the reliability of some of the measurements means that the model may not be a particularly good one.
The model could be substantially improved by the inclusion of additional data. A larger sample size would allow for more in-depth analysis and make the results of the regression more reliable. In particular, inclusion of some older subjects in the study would be helpful as it would allow the model to be applied to a wider range of cystic fibrosis patients and the relationships between the variables are likely to be different. Age was not included in the model (mainly due to the high correlation between age and height/weight in the age range considered) but if a wider age group were used it is likely to have an effect as the lungs become damaged over time due to continual infections. Similarly, repeated measurements of the lung volume measurements would also be useful to have to determine exactly how reliable these variables are. In terms of additional variables, a measure of the number of lung infections the subject has suffered from would be quite useful to have but is likely to be difficult to quantify.