We all feel as though we are truly interacting in the world. Every day we face a variety of options from which we can freely choose. We buy into the idea that we have a complex process of reasoning and deliberating that can override our natural instinct or change the effect that external influences have upon us. The popular belief is that our action is free, but how can we account for the spontaneity of human freedom in a world follows natural laws of causality? Determinism holds that human freedom, as we conceive it, would violate natural law. Galen Strawson elucidates; "Determinism is the view that the history of the universe is fixed in such a way that nothing can happen otherwise than it does because everything that happens is necessitated by what has already gone before." If humans live in a deterministic universe, then our actions may also be fixed by determinate causes. Determinism, as outlined by Simon Blackburn, can be set out as follows:
P1) The past controls the present and the future.
P2) You cannot control the past
P3) You cannot control the way the past controls the present and the future.
C) Therefore you cannot control the present and the future.
The idea behind determinism is that any present moment is fixed by what happened immediately before, following the fixed laws of nature. The prima facie implication this has that if determinism exists, free will is not possible.
This essay will discuss two fundamental philosophers who both argue that despite the reality of determinism we can have freedom. Hume construes a version of freedom that is compatible with determinism, and his position is traditionally known as the Compatibilist position. Kant initially insists that freedom and determinism are incompatible, however he reaches a similar conclusion to Hume through a complex metaphysical theory.
Hume's account of human freedom (liberty and necessity) appears in both his Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and his Treatise of Human Nature. What Hume was aiming to do in these two works was to create a science of human nature. To do this he had to show that actions and choices possessed the same uniformity as other causes and events do in the physical world. Hume also wanted to show that there is nothing inconsistent in a caused and free action. He calls his account a "reconciling project" (8.73,  Enquiries) and this may refer to a reconciliation between liberty and necessity or a reconciliation between a need for human science and the need for a moral disclosure.
Hume's position on causation is the pivotal axis for his compatibilism, and the section on 'liberty and necessity' follows on from the section on 'the idea of a necessary connection'. A necessary connection refers to a sort of force that drives one action to follow another; "matter, in all its operation, is actuated by a necessary force," (8.64) Being an Empiricist, Hume believed that any knowledge not given in experience is unreliable and noted that causation cannot ever be experienced. We are confined to saying that we simply observe an effect following on from a cause, but we cannot say that we have knowledge of a causal relationship between two events.
Hume treats his examination of human nature in the same way as he treats natural events. Hume supposes that human nature fits in perfectly with a law-abiding and predictable world. We cannot assert that there is a necessary connection between motives and actions and other human related consequences, just as we cannot assert a necessary connection in the physical world, but one must observe that there is a constant conjunction between 'causes' and 'effects' in human nature. If we could not observe a constant conjunction and if nothing were conjoined repeatedly to what went before then we would never have come up with the idea of a necessary connection. John Passmore gives the following example of a baby boy who has only ever been given soft toys to play with. One day the boy's uncle gives him a rubber ball to play with, which he subsequently drops. The baby has no way of knowing that the ball will bounce, unlike his other toys which quietly thud to the floor. What the baby lacks and the uncle possesses is simply experience. The uncle has an idea, using Hume's terminology, of a constant conjunction between the rubber ball being dropped and it's bouncing, and can infer from one instance to another. The two conditions of necessity then, for Hume, are conjunction and inference; "Beyond the constant conjunction of similar objects, and the subsequent inference from one to the other, we have no notion of any necessity or connexion." (8.64, Enquiries)
The uniformity present in nature provides us with an idea of necessity and causation, by way of an internal impression coming directly from repeated conjunctions of A and B, from which the idea of the necessary connection of A and B is derived. For Hume this distinction between impression and idea is important. Impressions are what we gain through perception and experience, they are lively and forceful, whereas ideas are what we have in thought and these are less lively and forceful. We have no impression of the necessary connection, only an idea, and this means we have no direct knowledge of it; "Our idea, therefore, of necessity and causation arises entirely from the uniformity observable in the operations of nature," (8.64, Enquiries, italics added) Hume accuses the rationalist position of holding that 'if we can't know it, it is not the case', but Hume says there are mechanisms that force things to happen and we just cannot see behind the regularity to the inner workings.
Hume begins his section Of Liberty and Necessity with a close description of the way in which language and definitions pose an obstacle for the problem of free will; "the whole controversy has hitherto turned merely upon words." (8.63, Enquiries) Hume assures us that since everyone shares the same views on the doctrines of liberty and necessity, the entire issue relies ultimately upon an uncertain definition of the terms 'freedom' and 'necessity'. At this point that Hume assures his readers that his argument will renew their interest in the subject.
Hume applies this theory of the natural world to human nature using the support of his studies in history. He suggests that in mankind we can observe a certain uniformity. The same motives tend to produce the same actions, to the extent that we can largely predict people's behaviour and reactions; "there is a great uniformity among the actions of men," (8.65) Hume is not suggesting that all men will react in the same way to the same situation, and our predictions are of course made more specific if we know the characteristics and tendencies of the particular person. The passions are the source of all actions, and he uses examples from the uniformity observed in the human nature of Greeks and Romans, French and English and so on (although this would be questioned by come contemporary historians).
Common intuition would suggest that men do act in less than uniform ways, and sometimes with irregularity, but Hume counters that the "human body is a mighty complicated machine" (8.67, Enquiries). The irregular events may just be a product of internal, unobservable operations and cannot be attributed to human spontaneity. Irregular resolutions of men may be due to chance, such as a good tempered man flying into a rage when he has a fever or is in great pain. This irregularity itself is a feature of nature. Hume uses the example of a peasant who cannot tell why a clock does no work other than stating it is broken, whereas an artist has an insight into the inner workings and can tell the specific cause of the problem, perhaps alluding to his own insight as a philosopher. The same conjunction can be observed between motive and action as between cause and effect, and Hume posits that this has been universally accepted. From this Hume reasons that we also observe the same conjunction and expect uniformity between men's characters and their conduct.
We can apply inference to our account of human necessity since we rely on inferences every day. Every action we perform is performed with reflection on the actions of others; "The mutual dependence of men is so great in all societies that scarce any human action is entirely complete in itself," (8. 69, Enquiries) We expect that people will be consistent in their behaviour, according to their characters. There would be no history or politics or morality without inference.
Despite Hume's empirical evidence men insist that they observe a necessary connection in the outside world and it is because they do not feel this connection in their minds they assume that there is a difference between material causality and intelligent causality. But when men speak of liberty they cannot surely be suggesting that it has so little to do with motives and inclinations that we observe little conformity in human nature. We need to realise that necessity is present in every aspect of our behaviour, and we should begin by examining the unintelligible processes of the body rather than the 'soul' or the 'will'. The idea of necessity has always been accepted by philosophers and Hume presents us with a version of liberty that is compatible with necessity; "By liberty, then, we can only mean a power of acting or not acting, according to the determinations of the will." (8.73, Enquiries). In fact freedom and determinism just do not clash whatsoever, and are in fact essential features of each other. The conflict is between freedom and constraint, not freedom and determinism.
In his Treatise Hume makes a distinction between two types of freedom; liberty of spontaneity and liberty of indifference. The liberty of spontaneity is freedom from external restraint. This type of freedom is compatible with natural causation and allows us to act as we choose. The liberty of indifference is that we have the freedom to choose to act other than we do act (Quine calls this a 'sordid boon', a wasted effort). Popular opinion holds that these powers of unexercised choice are real, and this is the real 'freedom of the will' that is widely held. Hume attacks the liberty of indifference in three ways: firstly by asserting universal causality, secondly from the pragmatic need to use inference to predict human behaviour and affairs in our day to day lives, and thirdly by refuting that we can introspect natural reality (thus refuting rationalism). The very idea of the liberty of indifference is inconsistent with a science of human nature and morality.
Hume asserts that there is no way to step outside of the constant conjunction of cause and effect, and humans will always act as they are inclined to do. This includes a notion of determinism because we choose and act the way we do due to our character, passions and inclinations, the sum of which is due to previous experience or genetic dispositions. We do not spontaneously start new causal chains of events, but we are free because to be free means simply to act out our inclinations, to do as we want to do. This is quite a specific view of freedom, a sort of negative freedom, since one is free unless one is perhaps physically restrained or compelled; "this hypothetical liberty is universally allowed to belong to every one who is not a prisoner and in chains." (8.73, Enquiries) Hume therefore believes that his natural account of determinism does not preclude our freedom, however some may object to Hume here saying that this is not what we meant by freedom at all, we mean freedom of 'the will'.
Those who adamantly cling to a more libertarian notion of freedom will no doubt be more appeased by Kant's account, however they might not be swayed by the measures Kant employs in order to preserve what Hume would call the 'liberty of indifference'. Kant intuitively holds an incompatibilist position; a strong belief in freedom and a strong belief in causality. Of course we would generally expect an incompatibilist to hold one or the other true, and deny the other. Kant feels he cannot surrender either and so he actually shares the same aims as the compatibilist. This is the cause of the Third Antinomy. Exactly what position he assumes is rather unclear, and this has led some to suggest that Kant essentially creates a compatibility between Compatibilism and Incompatibilism. This will be discussed later (his incompatibilist view turns out to be compatible on a higher level; our actions are determined by our own, uncaused reason.)
Kant's main discussion of free will forms his 3 rd Antinomy in the Critique of Pure Reason. 'Antinomy' means paradox, and each side of the paradox has a good argument and a lot of evidence. Antinomies do not strictly concern practical freedom or human affairs, but surround more cosmological issues. It is interesting that Kant chooses to present his concerns about human freedom from this starting point. The reason for this is his eventual conclusion; the distinction between the intelligible world and the sensible world. Kant aims to show that if we can accept the possibility of transcendental freedom, this allows us the possibility of practical freedom. Transcendental freedom is more of a cosmological issue than a human issue, and is concerned with possibility rather than fact, and this is a stark contrast to Hume's natural, empirical account. Despite being a rationalist, Kant offers us no certainties. His argument presents us with the conditions required for the possibility of freedom, and Kant explicitly states that he does not think it possible to prove that we are free.
Kant assumes, like Hume, that whatever happens has a cause, however he did not think that Hume explained causality, only made it disappear. Causality?
In Kant's thesis he assumes that it follows whatever an event is (e), it has to have followed a cause (c), this cause also has to have had a cause (c-1), which requires (c-2) and so on ad infinitum; "The causality, therefore, of a cause, whereby something happens, is itself a thing that has happened." (Critique p.252) It would seem natural here for Kant to suggest a problem with infinity, but he is more acutely concerned with the very nature of causality. Kant's problem is that a 'sufficient cause' cannot be found in conditions which are caused, so it follows that this cannot be the only causality. A form of 'absolute spontaneity' must exist; "there must exist an absolute spontaneity of cause, which of itself originates a series of phenomena which proceeds according to natural laws" (Critique p.253) Schopenhauer, in his criticism of Kant simply holds that state A is a sufficient cause of state B. Perhaps what Kant then meant by 'sufficient cause' was 'cause which is sufficiently determined'.
In the solution to the thesis Kant makes it clear that the freedom he is considering is specifically transcendental, and very different from the common psychological use of the word (which constitutes a merely empirical investigation). Transcendental freedom may have nothing to do with human freedom or morality, but we need to support a notion of transcendental freedom to hold practical reason. The 'big bang' may have been an example of an initial uncaused cause. If it was this would be an example of (and also prove) transcendental freedom. This is a purely metaphysical concept that concerns the first cause. He is only concerned with the idea of a spontaneous causal origin. He does not feel the need to account for how we come to have this faculty, since we cannot account for natural causality either, but simply accept it a priori; "How such a faculty is possible, is not a necessary enquiry;" (Critique p.254) We have to accept that there is a faculty that can of itself originate a series in time (the first ever action), and once we have proved this we can attribute all humans with free action. Despite the fact that Kant feels no real need to prove the reality of 'transcendental' freedom, he insists that practical freedom presupposes and relies upon transcendental freedom. Kant also holds that we have to accept practical reason because it is essential for morality, and even if we hold practical reason true, this only provides us with a capacity for free action. Kant reasoning here is perhaps not creditable with philosophical merit.
Kant is generally impressed by the philosophy of David Hume who awoke him from a 'dogmatic slumber', after which he re-evaluated his grounds for believing it was possible to create an unchanging metaphysics. Incidentally Kant was not convinced by Hume's Compatibilism. The antithesis clearly presents an argument against Hume. Kant is looking for a stronger sense of freedom than Hume. The freedom that Kant thinks is essential excludes causal determinism. Kant meaning of freedom allows humans to originate a new causal series, a sort of spontaneous originality. Freedom is not just the power to choose what one wants or desires (as Hume held), but the power to pursue our moral oughts (where 'ought' implies 'can') and to act as a spontaneous first cause of a chain of events.
Hume is a defender of the 'all nature' account that Kant obviously opposes. Hume, in Kant's words, would argue that if you do not accept that the world has a mathematical first then there is no need to look for a dynamical first. Nature is unlimited and we should not search for a first cause. The substances of the world have always existed and the changes of the conditions of these substances have always existed. Kant supposes the consequences of a naturalist viewpoint; if we suppose there is a transcendental freedom then nothing can precede to determine a free action. But, Kant says, "every beginning of action presupposes in the acting cause a state of inaction." (Critique p.252) Transcendental freedom then violates the natural law of cause and effect, and so cannot account for a unified experience. Therefore there can be nothing but nature. Nature conforms to law, and freedom conforms to lawlessness. For Kant the possibility of such an infinite derivation is incomprehensible. If the faculty of freedom exists it cannot exist as a part of the phenomenal world. Therefore we cannot attribute it to objects of the phenomenal world; "this faculty must at least exist out of and apart from the world;" (Critique p.255) A system of natural law seems irreconcilable with a lawless faculty of freedom since they would continually conflict and interfere with each other.
To solve the antinomy that Kant poses he makes use of a complex theory of metaphysics to explain how, despite the fact that freedom cannot be a part of the phenomenal world, it can exist apart from the phenomenal world and create a unified experience. Kant's holds a position of transcendental idealism. Briefly, this makes a distinction between the phenomenal, sensible world of experience; they way things appear to us, and the noumenal, intelligible world accessed through reason; they way things are in themselves. Knowledge conforms to our perception, as opposed to our perception conforming to knowledge of something external, 'out there'. Space, time and causal order are only features of the sensible world, things as they appear to us. Man's faculty of reason is a part of the intelligible world, where natural causality plays no role; "The positive concept of freedom...cannot, as in the case of physical causes, be the nature of the sensible world." (Ch. III 447, Groundwork) There is nothing then restraining the possibility of a free action of reason, or more specifically of the will. Human freedom could have its own causality, one that originates new causal chains of events. This may seem a rather outlandish and perhaps incoherent account of freedom, one that assigns us more autonomy than we are perhaps comfortable with being assigned. Hume's account certainly appeals through its simplicity.
Kant here feels he can reconcile universal causality and a causality of freedom. When we act we are acting as agents within the noumenal realm. In a free human action the motivation (cause) and the action are part of the intelligible realm, but this produces a sensible effect. The cause is outside of the causal laws of nature, but we can perceive the regularity and conformity of the effect to the laws of sensible causality. Contrary to the position he assumes in the antithesis, the two sorts of causality do not conflict because they do not meet, since one is empirical and one is rational. Freedom succeeds the determining laws of nature but does not arise form them. Both causal determinism and human freedom are, under this interpretation, compatible.
In the Groundwork For the Metaphysics of Morals, Kant clearly employs his account of freedom in his moral theory. He gives a negative account of freedom in terms of what it is from (not only restraint but natural causation). The thesis Hume posits offers no positive account of what freedom is since freedom for Hume is characterised by a lack of constraint; it is not a positive force like necessity, but simply allows natural causation to take place without interference. Kant does intend to account for what positive freedom is, but merely asserts that it is to act under self-legislating laws and is identical with autonomy; "What else then can freedom of the will be but autonomy - that is, the property which will has of being a law to itself?" (Ch.III 447, Groundwork). He explains that we need further preparation if we are to logically infer freedom from practical reason. We must presuppose that freedom is possessed by all rational beings. The extent to which this elucidates his account of positive freedom is questionable.
Any account of practical freedom requires an account of morality, since for Kant our desires are controlled by our 'negative freedom' and our positive freedom comes into actuality only when we are acting morally. "a free will and a will under moral laws are one and the same" (Ch.III 447 Groundwork), our autonomy is morality. Henry Sidgwick argues that if only moral action is free, then immoral action must be unfree. Sensuous desires must arise from natural necessity. Does this then entail that we are not responsible for our immoral actions? The essay will now turn its attention to examining the implications freedom has for morality and moral responsibility.
Hume shows how liberty and necessity are not only consistent with each other, but also with morality. Moral responsibility is actually undermined by a lack of determinism because moral responsibility requires ownership of action and this assumes causation. This means that when we act we act intentionally, i.e. in terms of our beliefs and desires and so on. If we can act according to our intentions without constraint, Hume says we are acting freely. We do not need the freedom to act other than we did.
Some worry about the consequence this has for morality. If someone could not genuinely have chosen to act other than he did, we have no right to assign praise or blame for his action. If a man is naturally inclined to be a thief, or his environment encourages him to steal, this disposition arises from natural causation. It is only due to genetic disposition or external conditioning. Surely this limits his accountability for his actions. Hume agrees that we make the choices we make because of our attitudes, intuitions and experiences. But rewards and punishments have a regular influence on our minds and subsequently our behaviour. If the thief is blamed and punished, this should be enough to change his character so that he does not steal in the future. "All laws being founded on rewards and punishments, it is supposed as a fundamental principle, that these motives have a regular and uniform influence on the mind, and both produce the good and prevent the evil actions." (8.76, Enquiries) The implementation of punishments and rewards would certainly have an effect on our future choices. In this way our decision-making can be conditioned.
If the actions men make do not proceed from their character they are not liable for them, and "men are not blamed for such actions as they perform ignorantly" (8.76, Enquiries). But this does not make these actions free, only a product of chance or randomness. When people hold the liberty of indifference people are holding that actions are uncaused. If we could 'self-determine' actions, these actions would presumable follow a uniform pattern, or else be arbitrary. Without liberty (of spontaneity) to act or not act without restraint, men are not responsible for their actions. Since we can infer from action to motive we have the grounds on which to praise or blame.
Hume's account does not allow us to praise and blame in order to give someone their just deserts, since we are not the direct cause of our character, passions and affections. We are merely using praise and blame in a pragmatic way, in a way to modify or maintain subsequent behaviour. This seems like a downfall for Hume, but does it really damage his account or is it another 'sordid boon', perhaps we are too concerned with a realist notion of justice and should settle for pragmatism. What may be a more crucial issue is that we are surrendering our morality to convention, or the state. The implication Hume makes in this account of morality, is that laws are needed because if people were left to act out of their desires or wishes, society would not function. It follows that the society we have, which issues praise and blame, itself acts to constrain our natural desires.
Using Hume's account it is enough to say that for an action to be someone's own it has to be caused by someone's psychological reasons (his acting according to his desires or beliefs etc.). Kant thinks that Hume is too simplistic, and using a modern argument it becomes apparent that Hume cannot account for compulsive disorders like kleptomania where the kleptomaniac is doing what he wants but is acting under a compulsive disorder. In this sense Kant liberates us from compulsion as well as constraint. In defence of Hume we could add that the kleptomaniac's acting under compulsion enough to equal a form a constraint and that, given a rational choice, the sufferer would not want to act in this way. But this example does raise an interesting argument. Perhaps by drawing an empirical cut-off point Hume is missing an intangible, but nonetheless essential human ability. Hume assures us that causality is a property of the states of the world not of substances and we should perhaps be suspicious of Kant's account and motives.
For Kant when we act immorality it is in instances where we lack freedom. This may be due to a self-deception, where a desire convinces reason that a certain act is good and makes us act irrationally, however Kant assumes that we cannot make judgments through desires. A judgment is a claim of the form "I have a reason to do x..." Any desires we have become adapted and transformed into reason. Desire itself plays no causal role in our moral judgments.
Kant thinks that those who claim a simple voluntary action is enough to credit moral responsibility perform a 'wretched subterfuge'. For Kant moral responsibility requires that the agent's action was caused by his practical reason, and that the agent begins a new series of causality. Hume says the agent does what he wants to do, but Kant adds that the agent has to do what he thinks he ought to do. Therefore our moral judgments have to be separate from our sensibility. The will performs these judgments. Practical reason is acting on the basis of practical freedom. Hume might suggest that for every 'free' or 'autonomous' action, and empirical cause can be identified. Kant would probably find on difficulty in defending against this, since our effects are a part of the sensible realm, and these affect other sensible causalities, so that our real autonomous causes are concealed or disguised. We act in uniform and regular ways because we adhere to a universal morality.
Both thinkers assume a universal causality. Kant uses this to assert an equally plausible transcendental freedom, whilst Hume thinks causality is a more credible idea because a constant conjunction can be observed. One might object that these grounds are not sufficient for holding it true. Universal causality might not be a necessary feature of scientific pursuits. Compatibilism, of a form more reminiscent of Hume than Kant, is the current widely held view on this ongoing debate. The most recent development however, endorsed by thinkers such as Quine, is that Compatibilism does not preclude determinism, in fact determinism might become redundant in the debate. The reason for this is development in the theory of quantum mechanics, a doctrine that supports the idea that some events are random. By following a quantum mechanics route to freedom we may encounter far more 'outrageous' suggestions than we could possible point at Kant.
Having considered both Hume and Kant's positions quite thoroughly, we might want to suggest that their theories are not essentially about compatibility at all, but compromise. Both philosophers have to bend, in a sense, the original intuitive problem of freedom. Hume offers us not a freedom without determinism, but instead offers us a freedom that is without constraint. Kant cannot assign us causality in a universal, natural sense, but instead construes a causality of freedom, in which he hold all the strings. Despite the popular opinion of what we want form freedom, and the freedom offered to us by each philosopher, the reader might surprisingly feel soothed by Hume's account, and perturbed by Kant's.