The word 'sublime' comes form the Latin 'sublimis'; 'sub' meaning 'up to' and 'limen' meaning lintel, the top piece of a door. Its meanings include 'exalted' or 'raised aloft'. In aesthetics, the sublime is often a reference to greatness beyond comparison. In more broad contexts this greatness can be artistic, moral or physical. The sublime is something that affects you, something that grips you with awe and terror and challenges the minds usual process of understanding. John Usher exclaimed that the sublime "takes possession of our attention, and all our faculties, and absorbs them in astonishment." The sublime is an experience we are probably all familiar with. We have all been awe-struck by the ferociousness of a storm or the contemplation of the infinity of the universe. One may be struck with the stark contrast between the finite individual and the spatial and temporal infinities of universe. An understanding of the sublime unlocks our most important and exceptional encounters with nature and the arts. F. E. Sparshott says that the "aesthetic concept [is] based on objects that defy conceptualisation." This portrayal of the sublime will feature heavily in this essay.
This essay will focus on the developments of the theory of the sublime from the late 18 th to the mid-19 th century. We will discuss the transition of the sublime understanding from Burke to Kant in the 18 th century and then consider the work of the Romantic and Mystic Arthur Schopenhauer, writing in the mid-19 th century. These three contemporaries were pivotal figures in the history of the sublime and offered perhaps the most influential and comprehensive accounts of it ever written. Thinkers in the 18 th century recognised a strange 'two-stage' process in the phenomenon of the sublime experience. The experience that 'takes possession of our attention' is initially a source of terror, displeasure or threat. However, out of this emerges a feeling of pleasure. The accounts of the sublime in the 18 th - 19 th century attempt to reconcile this apparent paradox.
Burke and Kant were the first philosophers to develop the sublime as an essential part of a theory of aesthetics. Burke and Kant are notably similar in the way they view the general differences between the beautiful and the sublime. Both thinkers see the beautiful as light, delightful, appealing and delicate and the sublime as dark, profound, overwhelming and rugged. The sublime not only differs from but is distinct from the beautiful (they are mutually excusive), but their accounts of what the sublime is differ hugely. Both types of experience can produce pleasure in the subject, and of course this is the main paradox that Burke and Kant attempt to address. This is their first major point of departure.
Burke's major work, A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful, was the first work to fully distinguish, with some success, the beautiful from the sublime. Whilst the beautiful produces a direct and benign pleasure, the sublime experience is at once thrilling and exhilarating, an indirectly delightful horror. The sublime object or event, such as the ocean, provides a threat of destruction to the subject. Here there is the sense of danger which creates in the subject a sense of terror or horror, but at the same time the subject is a spectator, shielded from the real threat of destruction. It is an essential part of the sublime experience that the spectator is at a distance or removed from the object or event. The pleasure comes, on the most basic level, from knowing that you are safe in the face of disaster.
A more in-depth account of Burke's process of the sublime experience might be likened to a 'sublime ascent'. So long as we know the object or event does not really endanger us we can integrate a part of its power and create a likeness to the sublime object. The mind 'rises' to incorporate a part of the sublime experience. The equality we feel with the sublime object produces a feeling of pleasure and delight within us. We may also feel exalted that we have overcome this threat from nature. One of the strongest feelings we have, as people, is that of self-preservation. The spectator may feel invincible or above the forces of nature.
The imagination, as we will later see in Kant, cannot provide a conception of infinity or an overwhelming force or the vastness of an ocean, so to compensate it embraces the idea of infinity or force or vastness. The imagination responds to such pressures actively and positively, almost rising to a challenge. Coming into contact with the sublime has a positive effect on us; it strengthens our powers of conception and, to some extent, our raises our perceived achievements as human beings.
Burke's method of examining the sublime is essentially different from Kant's. Burke undertakes an empirical exploration of the sublime, and is therefore largely limited to examining the observable effect of the sublime. His position therefore seems based on our psychological and physiological responses to objects and events (through our senses), making his theory a scientific one. Using the example of the ocean we can extrapolate: The entire expanse of water is so large that the eye cannot take it all in at once. It stretches the eye beyond its biological capacity, in effect our senses fail to capture the object in the same way that the imagination fails to capture it. In this example there is both a bodily exertion and a cognitive one; an intelligible and sensible epistemological tension. Likewise eternity and infinity are all sublime because they cannot be presented to the mind in a clear and distinct way (neither the senses nor mind can contain them). This shows us the limits of our empirical understanding. The question that seems to remains unanswered after reading Burke is whether 'the sublime' is the object perceived or the subjective response, or in an interaction of the object and subject. Of course if we commit to saying that what the object provides is a sense of terror, we cannot also say it is the direct source of pleasure and this is something that Kant will later pick up on. We might then have to settle on premise that the sublime 'experience' is the object interacting with the mind, or the imaginations assimilation with the object or spectacle.
Burke's analysis of the sublime is distinctive because he deems that man-made forms of the sublime (poetry, art) can be affective. Writers in the 18 th century, such as Milton, create a sense of the sublime in poetry by drawing from a sense of an external, hostile force. Words and language can bring about a renovation of the way one experiences the world. The Sublime is: "Whatever is in any sort terrible, or is conversant about terrible objects, or operates in a manner analogous to terror" (1.7 P.36). The same cannot be said for visual artists, for although Burke does not suggest that a painting cannot evoke a sublime response, but he makes it clear why writing is much more affective. Ignorance, the unknown and confusion are all vital apparatus when it comes to re-creating the sublime. Words alone allow the mind to link incongruent things together and create a more chaotic and overwhelming spectacle. It is difficult to make an idea clear and effecting; "To make anything very terrible obscurity in general seems to be necessary." (2.3 P.54) Burke uses as an example the portrait of Satan in Milton's Paradise Lost
 to illustrate the successes of poetical sublime; "The images raised by poetry are always of this obscure kind..." (2.4 P.57) For Burke there need not be a distinction between the sublime experience and its description by talented writers. For Kant, as we shall see, the sublime is a product of raw nature, and cannot be re-created in art.
Kant is the first to provide an entire philosophical system that incorporated an essential aesthetic theory, which he did in his Critique of Judgment. Kant generally had little interest in the arts, and his philosophical pursuits clearly focus on his love of mathematics, science and logic. He notoriously uses more of a technical vocabulary, of which we will become accustomed to in the following paragraphs. Although Kant shares Burkes aim of tackling the paradox of pleasure produced by something terrible, Kant's motivation for analysing the sublime is more profound and fundamental for the rest of his philosophical enquires. The sublime proves the existence of the faculty of reason, and reason is necessary for both Kant's moral project and for the cohesion of Kant's pure and practical reason. These notions concern Kant's entire philosophical grounding of which this essay does not afford the prognostics, however we will allude to his general philosophy as and when is necessary and as concisely as possible.
Kant's examples of the natural sublime are quite similar to Burke's; the sea, the storm and so on, but his method of investigation is very different. Kant's assumes a radically transcendental nature of philosophy. This means that when he writes about the sublime he is not suggesting straightforwardly what the sublime is, but what conditions would have to be met in order to have a sublime experience. The essence of the sublime falls wholly on the mind. Kant produces a much more distinctly rationalist approach. The sublime is a subjective condition of perception, but he does not include the psychological terror of Burke. External objects only 'excite' a process in us. The sublime does not depend on sensation but has an indeterminate relation with concepts. The pleasure arises despite the appearance of the object, not because of it. The sublime can only be attributed to the object through a dislocation in which reason is attached to the formless natural object.
It is already evident that, for Kant and Burke, the beautiful and the sublime are mutually exclusive states, however Kant finds some similarities between the sublime and the rest of his aesthetic theory. Both the sublime and the beautiful are disinterested, satisfied and are reflective judgements. This terminology is of little use to this essay, but what is more important to note is that both the sublime and the beautiful demand a universal assent.
However, whereas beauty belongs to the judgment of taste, sublimity belongs to the faculty of intellect. The other major differences between the sublime and the beautiful are purposiveness and form. The question of purposiveness, for Kant, is the most significant difference. Beauty seems purposive to its faculty, that is, it seems as if it were fitting or accommodating to our faculty of judgment. The sublime on the other hand is presented as contrapurposive to our reflective faculties, although it is indirectly pleasant and is actually 'felt' as purposive. Kant thinks that man-made objects (works of art) cannot be sublime since they would have purpose and lack the contrapurposiveness typical of sublime objects, and the feeling of purposiveness.
Sublimity may depend on form, formlessness or deformity, also in the unboundedness of an object and the thought of its totality. Examples of the formlessness are the sea or the storm. Examples of form which exceeds our ability to see it are space and vast mountain ranges. This is unlike the beautiful since the beautiful is bounded by its form. What is judged to be beautiful must be perceived by the imagination as a totality, and this is what the mind contemplates and presents to understanding. The sublime is apprehended by the imagination as unbounded and formless, but reason can conceptualise it as a whole or totality. The formal purposiveness of the beautiful is such that it creates a harmony between the faculties of imagination and understanding. Because of its form, the beautiful object is 'exquisitely cognisable'. Where the beautiful involves the relation between the imagination and understanding, the sublime involves the relation between imagination and reason. Both of these unions and conflicts produce a subjective purposiveness. The essence of a work of art is its form, and hence this is another reason why works of art (in Kant's time) were unsuccessful at evoking the sublime experience.
The process of the sublime experience for Kant fell into two stages. The sublime is initially received as a threat or inhibition of life-enhancing qualities. This state produces in us the effect of displeasure and disturbance. The formlessness of a sublime object is accompanied by a thought of its totality. The mind checks its ability to imagine or represent the object. The imagination plays no positive role, unlike in Burke. It makes a futile attempt to comprehend the incomprehensible before it fails. Despite this failure, but reason can grasp some idea of the totality, thus proving the minds rising above or autonomy from nature, and proving the existence of a reasoning faculty. This effect indirectly gives rise to a feeling of pleasure. That my imagination fails cannot prevent me from sustaining an idea of the universe as infinitely great. I can conceive of something my imagination fails to convey. Our faculty of theoretical reason is superior to our faculty of sensibility and imagination.
We discover that we have a 'supersensible nature', a 'higher purposiveness' of reason. We become aware of ourselves as rationally autonomous, we become aware of our 'highest vocation'. This revelation also elevates the human species to an autonomous one that can apply pure and practical reason to moral laws. The sublime for Kant is especially and essentially linked to morality. Kant's moral theory rests on the idea that human freedom is something outside or above nature; "thus found in our own mind a superiority over nature itself even in its immeasurability." (28 5:261 P.145) It is our moral freedom that is superior to the omnipotence of nature. This shows we are beings with faculties that transcend the limitations of our finite phenomenal existence.
Kant suspected that the indirect pleasure of the sublime experience is largely based on ones cultural and intellectual background, whereas the response to the beautiful object is uncultivated. In fact the degree to which the subject feels the sublime experience is dependent on his dispositions; "Feelings of enjoyment or of displeasure rest not so much upon the nature of the external things that arouse them as upon each person's own disposition to be moved by these pleasures or pains." The subject himself must be disposed to receive rational ideas, and for Kant the sublime experience can only occur in a society which already recognises that morality is a consequence of freedom. This means that Kant's theory relies to some extent on an empirical contingency. This is not an isolated demand, however, since the demand is the same for all theoretical and practical thought, and Kant would say that every human has the transcendental conditions for such recognition.
So far we have given a general overview of Kant and have introduced some terminology. One very important aspect of Kant theory that we cannot neglect is his distinction between two types of sublime; the mathematical sublime and the dynamical sublime.
In the experience of the Mathematical Sublime the imagination is challenged and defeated by great spatial or temporal magnitude. "We call sublime that which is absolutely great." (25 5:248 P.131) The subjects sense of individuation is lost. The idea of infinity, for example, cannot be grasped by the imagination and can be conceived only as an idea of reason. If we tried to conceive of the enormity of the universe, or even the galaxy, the imagination would surely fail because we just cannot find any point of comparison. I might start with the size of my own body, and then consider that in relation to the diameter of the earth, and then the earth to the sun, and then the sun to the nearest star and so on. But our attempt failed long ago. The size of my own body just does not compare to the size of the galaxy. In a mathematically sublime encounter, the object or spectacle has to be absolutely great, which is difference from saying that it is merely great. Claims regarding the absolutely great require 'universal assent'. Even though we compare no numerical values, I would expect others to agree with my views on what is absolutely great. Kant presumes that the judgment is based on a shared, and intuitive, standard of greatness. This measure must be inherent within the object, since there is no external measure of it. The object calls our attention to its own greatness. The mathematical sublime is a rational idea of totality.
The Dynamic Sublime is a confrontation with an overbearing power or force, such as storms, volcanoes or hurricanes. The imagination cannot act with understanding in such a situation. We find a fear in the overwhelming forces of nature. We become aware of our weaknesses in the face of danger, but this recognition of our deficiency suggests the existence of a higher reflective faculty of reason, which is greater than either nature itself or our imagination. We realise our physical inferiority as natural beings in the face of great natural force, but we become aware of a capacity to judge ourselves as independent of this nature, and this gives us a superiority over nature, after which nature has no domination over us. The dynamic sublime involves an aesthetic estimation of a great natural force or power which has to be resistible and not actually threatening. A real state of fear would render the necessary aesthetic distance impossible. The imagination fails to contain nature as power. We have a 'supersensible' capacity and vocation that transcends nature. The satisfaction of the sublime does not concern any satisfaction over moral action but shows we are capable of acting according to moral principles. The dynamical sublime is a rational idea of freedom (from nature and the imagination) and it demonstrates that the sublime belongs exclusively to human freedom. It is the dynamical sublime as opposed to the mathematical sublime that has a fully developed link to Kant's moral theory, however he seems to favour the mathematical sublime, or at least indicate that it is the most apparent and clear sublime experience. We might question the extent of the difference between the mathematical and dynamical sublime as Kant himself does not make it clear. For Schopenhauer, this difference is only a matter of degree.
Arthur Schopenhauer expounds his theory of the sublime in  39 of his World as Will and Representation Volume 1. Although writing 50 years after the Critique of the Power of Judgment, Schopenhauer's work is somewhat a development of Kant mixed in with Schopenhauer's fascination with Ancient Indian philosophy that led to his title as a mystic. His theory is very much Post-Kantian in style and he accepts Kant's philosophy and aesthetics on many levels. Like Kant, Schopenhauer was an Idealist and his theory of the sublime rests upon his Idealism. The vital feature of Schopenhauer's philosophy and the root of his pessimism is the driving force of mankind; the will. The will is necessarily negative, something we should strive to overcome, for we are slaves to the will. The will causes all of our suffering and drives us forward to a non-existent end; "like the alms thrown to a beggar, which reprieves him today so that his misery may be prolonged until tomorrow" (38 P. 196). The sublime is integral to his theory of aesthetics because it illustrates an epistemological distinction between knowledge gained from the will and knowledge itself.
Art for Schopenhauer was therefore not an indulgence but an intellectual necessity. He saw that in music, the arts and nature we can distance ourselves from the will and attain objectivity. We can contemplate the universal over our individual sufferings. In the beautiful object we perceive the idea of that object, and this suggests a pure knowledge or intelligence that is free from the desires of the will, in effect the will disappears. (recall what Kant tells us about purposiveness). For Schopenhauer the world as will is primary and the world as idea is secondary, and the latter is what we should strive for. In the experience of the beautiful, pure knowledge is attainable without a conflict with the will. The beautiful object itself ensures this because it possesses a certain quality that aids the knowledge of its idea. The will is imperceptibly removed and not even a recollection of it remains.
The sublime encounter is also a release from the will, but whereas we derive 'beautiful' pleasure from a benevolent object that invites our attention, the 'sublime' pleasure is from encountering a malevolent object. Again, we may imagine the objects of sublime experience to be of the same nature as Burke and Kant conceived them, and Schopenhauer sees these objects as something that threatens the human body and the human will in general, the sublime object; "May threaten it by their might that eliminates all resistance, or their immeasurable greatness may reduce it to nought." The sublime experience involves a "violent tearing away from the relations of the same object to the will which are recognized as unfavourable . . ." (39 P.202). The subject will acknowledge this hostile relation to the will, although he will probably not draw his attention to it, but because this effort is conscious there is always a faint recollection of the will, so the state of exaltation felt by the subject must be consciously maintained. The will that is recollected is not necessarily the individual will but human will in general. This is a typically mystical feature of Schopenhauer, that one sacrifices the individual will for a harmony with the sublime object. Furthermore Schopenhauer points out that if an individual will (pain or fear etc) responded to the sublime object (if the threat or danger were actual) then this will would fully take control of our consciousness. The idea of peace and contemplation would then be impossible. It is precisely because the will that enters consciousness is willing in general that the subject is able to remove it, and it is because of this that the individual can possess fearlessness in a fearful situation.
The initial hostility of the object gives way to a spiritual adulation that arises through the idea of the hostile object. The subject becomes a will-less subject. In this state the subject feels elevated above himself and above his willing. This brings a more profound sense of satisfaction than the beautiful because it involves a struggle and victory over the will. He is left in a euphoric state of contemplation and is filled with this feeling. The subject loses his motivational drive, since this drive is the will itself. One might argue that this state is futile since one could not maintain such a lethargic state of indifference to the world. The subject cannot, in this state, strive for happiness since it cannot strive for anything. Schopenhauer's defence would be that the subject is essentially removed from suffering, since there is no will to satisfy or frustrate. Happiness, for Schopenhauer, is also a negative goal, since happiness is nothing more than the cessation of suffering. In terminating the will we are already causing happiness on some level.
Kant, as we have previously considered, divided the types of sublime experience into two. Schopenhauer sees the difference between sublime experiences in matter of degree. For Schopenhauer the sublime is distinguished from the beautiful only by levels of addition and the strength of the sublime encounter is a matter of how strong the difference is.
The first example of a mild sublime is a winter scene where the sun falls on the ground. We might become aware of the fact that the sun provides light but not warmth. This scene is favourable to knowledge but there is a faint recollection that the lack of warmth is unfavourable to the will and this provides us with a slight challenge to pure knowledge. This is the first transition from beauty to the sublime.
The second example is of a lonely region of horizons, such as the North American prairies. Typical of Schopenhauer, his description of this scene should be commended as much for its poetical excellence as its philosophical content. This calls us to serious contemplation and creates a freedom from the will. There is a distinct lack of object and motion; it is neither favourable nor unfavourable. The will requires there to be a level of strife, but we are left only with pure contemplation. The will is left empty and unoccupied, threatened by the torture and misery of boredom. This example is a perfect challenge; "To this extent it affords us a measure of our own intellectual worth, and for this our ability to endure solitude, or our love of it, is a good criterion" (P. 204) There is an intimate relation between solitude and the sublime. We may have achieved a sublime state of pure knowledge but there is a miserable recollection of the will in need of constant activity.
The third example is a region such as the one described above but with no vegetation, only bare rocks. Schopenhauer suggests a desert horizon. The will is shocked and threatened in such a situation by the stark absence of organic objects that sustain life. This creates a certain degree of fear to the will.
The fourth example is of nature in turbulent motion, a scene with semi-darkness, black thunder clouds, overhanging cliffs, foaming water or an arid desert. As we struggle with this hostile nature our dependence on the will is broken, as long as we are not personally threatened.
The fifth example is of the forces of nature on a large scale; a roaring waterfall that prevents us fro hearing our own voices, a sea storm, the sight of power beyond all comparison. The twofold nature of our consciousness reaches the highest distinctness. The spectator recognises himself as an individual and a feeble incident of the will. The forces comprehended can destroy him, he is helpless and vanishing into nothingness. At the same time he feels himself as external and a serene object of knowing, the supporter of the whole world. He comes to the realisation that this fearful struggle with nature is only his representation. He is ultimately free from all willing and needs. This bears a notable resemblance to Kant's Dynamic sublime.
The sixth example is of a magnitude in space and time whose immensity reduces the individual to nought. We consider the infinite greatness of the universe, or the infinite time scale of the past or the future. This makes us feel like we reduce to nothing, like drops in an ocean dissolving to nothingness. These feelings arise amidst the conscious recollection that all of these worlds must exist only in our representation. We ourselves are the supporters of these worlds, the vastness of the world rests within us, it depends on us. We merely feel we are one with the world. Schopenhauer felt this linked with the consciousness of the Upanishads of the Vedas; "I am all this creation collectively, and besides me there exists no other being." (39 P.205-206) Many objects can have this effect because of their spatial magnitude or great antiquity.
Like Kant, Schopenhauer envisages some dispositional requirement for the sublime experience, perhaps because the tearing-away from the will is a conscious exercise. According to Schopenhauer even the most apathetic person can attain moments of aesthetic pleasure. Plants are the most effective objects of beauty since they have bewildering powers such as a defiance of gravity. Even these, however, do not give us immediate access to knowledge. The observer needs to have a degree of intelligence to bring them into the world of representation and contemplation.
Although very different from Kant's moral theory, Schopenhauer develops a well thought-out theory of sublime character. The ethical sublime denotes a character who is divorced from his will to the point of being master over it, yet still attached sufficiently to provide motivation to live: "Such a character will . . . consider men in a purely objective way, and not according to their relations they might have to his will" (39 P.206). In the sublime character the will is not excited by objects that would excite the lay man, and knowledge always attains the upper hand. He can observe men's faults and happiness without gloat or jealousy. He can perceive the beauty of women without hankering after them. His own happiness or unhappiness will not violently affect him. He looks less at his individual lot than the lot of mankind. He is more of a knower than a sufferer.
We have traced the developments and changes of the sublime from the empiricism of Burke, the rationalism and idealism of Kant through to the more esoteric contribution of the idealist, pessimist and mystic Schopenhauer. There are notable similarities between all three thinkers; they provide similar examples of the sublime in nature and seem to share ideas about what type of object or event can cause a sublime experience. They also all see the solution to the paradox of the 'delightful pleasure' of the sublime as a two-stage process. Burke examines a terror that the mind assimilates, Kant redeems the failure of the imagination with the success of reason and Schopenhauer overcomes the initial perceived threat to the will with a tearing away from the will leaving a state of pure contemplation.
Schopenhauer illustrates the idea that the sublime is an addition to beauty through presenting six gradual stages from the beautiful to the sublime. Burke agrees in places that there are levels of sublime, and that, for example depth of extension is more sublime than length of extension (2.7 P.66), whereas for Kant one need only distinguish between the mathematical and dynamical sublime.
This overcomes the danger Kant infringes upon by making the mathematical sublime and the dynamical sublime too distinct and almost separate states. All three to some extent distinguish between the mathematical and the dynamical sublime and prima facie all three seem to regard the mathematical sublime as the most impressive. However for Burke one would presume that power can be portrayed in writing more easily than magnitude, and Kant's moral theory relies much more heavily on his dynamical sublime. Schopenhauer makes no clear distinction is his writing, suggesting merely that only the last two stages of sublime exemplify the full impression of the sublime.
One question that remains unresolved is the question of where the sublime resides. For Burke, being an empiricist, the sublime is the object that fills you with awe and terror, but he does involve some almost psychological processes in his understanding of the sublime, especially when he uses the examples of poetry, suggesting that the role of the mind is quite integral. Kant very adamantly states that the sublime cannot be in the object, but to posit that the sublime is not in the object suggests that there is a disposition in the subject but not in the object, i.e. any object could cause a sublime experience, and this is something Kant would not commit to. Schopenhauer calls sublime the object that makes the sublime experience possible, but thereafter focuses on the conscious processes that are imperative for the sublime experience. Overall it would seem that each philosopher might compromise on the position that it is the very interaction between object and subject that is 'sublime', it is the two-stage process taken as a whole.
With regards to art there is again disagreement. There is indeed a problem in assessing the extent to which the sublime can be re-created in art, and this is just as apparent now as it was for these contemporaries. Burke places perhaps too much emphasis on poetry and his love of language as an evocative medium, sometimes seeming to lose touch with the original idea of the natural sublime. Kant seems to deny art a place in sublime theory; "that in art is, after all, always restricted to the conditions of agreement with nature." (sec 23 5:244 P.129) However this passage, as noted in the Guyer edition, at least suggests a possible representation of the sublime in art. Paradoxically Schopenhauer claims that nature aids our transition to a will-less subject more readily than 'plastic' arts but hailed the arts in general for liberating us from the individual will. He would most likely suggest that the sublime can take place in vague and undefined arts such as music (as long as they are not pictorial pieces, also note footnote 11).
Each philosophical stage we have examined has become more complex, and each philosopher sees the sublime as increasingly important for his whole philosophical grounding. This may provide their own downfall and invite attacks from sceptics who accuse the sometimes vague theory of the sublime as being moulded by the philosophers for their own personal gain. Certainly each philosopher adds a progressively greater success to the human contemplation of the sublime, from Kant's 'supersensible' powers to Schopenhauer's 'sublime character'. The sublime seems to elevate the human species above all possible expectations, and at the same time we do not lose touch with what is meant by a sublime experience.