For Schopenhauer life is suffering and strife, each man against all others, a Darwinian survival of the fittest, a Hobbesian existence where "The right of nature... is the liberty each man hath to use his own power...for the preservation of his own nature," The natural state of man is egoism, we seek our own advantages, and we might imagine men as beetles clambering over each other to get at a food source. This is the picture Schopenhauer paints for us, and although we may not realise it, we all lie and deceive and use whatever means possible in order to get one step ahead of our comrades, as in the man who does a good deed only to receive future homage, or the man who lends money only to secure a future alliance. Schopenhauer, however, noticed that there was one 'feeling' or 'motivation' quite unlike all other, and he also noticed that it had been largely ignored or dismissed by other philosophers. This motive was compassion, for Schopenhauer a feeling very real and mysterious, since it makes us want to strive for the good and well-being of another as we normally would do for ourselves, appearing to quite contradict the natural state of man; "it is the great mystery of ethics." Is compassion therefore unnatural, and whence forth does it stem?
All other motives of action, that is, egoistic ones, are governed by the Will. The Will for Schopenhauer is not an individual will, it is not simply doing 'what one wills'. The Will is unified and collective, the blind and goalless force behind all of mankinds striving. The grand force of nature and of life, a force that we might liken to our own ideas of evolution or 'mother nature'. There is no need to question why the Will exists or for what reason it harrows and beleaguers us into action, for this is beyond our realm of knowledge, indeed it has no reason. All that we can examine are its expressions and effects, and that includes our motives of action. If a motive of action is a mere expression of the Will, it is not genuinely moral, since the Will cares not for morality.
Schopenhauer was in a sense a precursor to Darwin, anticipating his more scientific theories of evolution and survival instincts. Schopenhauers' Will provides a unique 'stop gap' between a religious explanation of the world (where a deity is the reason and motivation behind all of life) and a scientific explanation (where biology and physics give rise to a theory of evolution). Indeed his theory is pure metaphysics and will always stand out as something that cannot be reduced either to science or religion. That said, his theories provide a great compliment to science. Where Darwin tells us what, Schopenhauer has already told us why, and this is no better portrayed than in his theory of love: We are attracted to strong, healthy individuals, we fall in love, and then we reproduce, hopefully producing strong and healthy children; this is natural selection. But why the 'love' bit? Schopenhauer tells us that we are of such a sentient nature that we realise how abhorred and disgusting the act of reproduction is, and how much suffering life itself causes that if we were of a sane mind no-one would reproduce and the entire species would fail. Therefore the Will provides us with a mechanism that equates love with pleasure and something to be desired. In essence the Will tricks us into thinking that what we most desire in the world is to fall in love and reproduce. Of course when we are married with two screaming infants to deal with we realise that we were mistaken. It is generally believed that as humans we lack instinct and possess free will, but we are in fact very instinctual in matters such as this. I explain this section of Schopenhauers thought to the reader here to clarify what we might expect from the great pessimistic philosopher in accounting for compassion, since I feel that what we might expect is very different from his actual account.
In the case of love, the individual is acting for the benefit of the species where he really believes he is acting for himself (he is pursuing his own pleasure and his own goals). The Will has substituted the actual goal for a belief in another. We might view compassion as a motive of action in the same way. The individual needs to strive for his own well-being, since he knows best how to satisfy his desires and fulfill his needs. But a certain degree of looking out for each other might benefit the species as a whole, and it is more than likely that the will would inspire us to do so from time to time. If the whole of humanity were to injure each other and never care for each other, this would be a great detriment to the future of the species. There are cases where we act for the good of another but know deep down that it is benefitting to ourself as in the examples in the introduction, but what could inspire us to help someone poor and dying, who could not possibly repay our actions, or to act heroically to the extent of putting our own life in danger? The word that Schopenhauer uses to discuss compassion is the German Mitleid, meaning precisely 'to suffer with', so essentially we are talking exclusively of suffering. We all suppose that compassion is an act of altruism; the unselfish concern for the welfare of others, but I wish to propose that we are, in fact, secretly and perhaps unknowingly seeking our own ends. To see another person suffering causes us to suffer, and we act to alleviate their suffering and by doing so alleviate our own. But why should anothers plight cause us to suffer in the first place? Because the Will dictates it, and why should the Will dictate it? Because it is tricking us into preserving the species. Compassion seems to be demonstrated at its most instinctual and innate in the case of mother and child , and this is because this is the most integral case of what we generally perceive as altruism. The mother must have a motive for dedicating all of her efforts to the helpless infant without expecting a return on her efforts. But it makes no sense that a man should act for an end that does not benefit him in some way; such an action would be lacking a motive, would be random. This is where we might suggest that the will provides us with a reason to act, compassion for another causes us to suffer. This account, I believe, fits in perfectly with Schopenhauers account of the Will.
Some account of this sort we might expect and perhaps grudgingly accept from someone for whom the will accounts for everything. But we actually find that Schopenhauers views on compassion are of the most contrary and optimistic kind. For him compassion is real and true for the most enlightened souls. On The Basis Of Morality contains Schopenhauers most illusive exposition of compassion. He explains that we cannot examine the motives of actions in terms of empirical evidence because we can only observe the action, not the motive behind it; "there is always left the possibility that an egoistic motive had influenced the doer of a just or good action." (BM.16). However most of us are convinced that "a man often acts justly, simply and solely that no wrong or injustice may be done to another." (BM.16). The people who act in this way are, according to Schopenhauer 'people of true integrity'. Compassion is therefore a truly altruistic act, and if it weren't then what we call morality would be a futile science without any object, like astrology. Self-interested actions destroy all moral worth of an action because it is an act of survival only, but compassion is excluded from self-interested motives; "The absence of all egoistic motivation is, therefore, the criterion of an action of moral worth." (BM.16). All of our motivations are caused by our 'weal and woe', but compassion causes us to focus solely on the weal and woe of another. How does it cause us to do this? "If my action is to be done simply and solely for the sake of another; then his weal and woe must be directly my motive." (BM.16); in other words the other person becomes the object of my will; "I suffer directly with him." (BM.16). I do not mistake his suffering for my own, I feel his suffering in me.
I have suggested that an evolutional account involving the Will could explain that although a mans compassion is real, it is not really altruism, since acting other than for yourself is no motive to act at all; we are always acting self-interestedly, but not alway egoistically. But our predictions for a Schopenhauerian theory of compassion were very wrong, and here Schopenhauer lives up to his name as a mystic and appeals to Eastern thought. Morality can only be examined metaphysically, and compassion is a boundary mark that only metaphysics can overstep. The compassionate person has true metaphysical insight because they can identify with someone elses suffering as if it were their own. They are thus looking beyond the individual to the complete unification. They recognise not only their own individual suffering, but the suffering of mankind, indeed of all life, and they realise that everything expresses the will to life, which "extends our interest to all that lives," (WWR.66). This new insight into the world shows us that all is one; we have pierced the veil of Maya
 and seen beyond the world of representation where individuation acts as a partition. He hails his own 'supreme principle' of ethics; "Injure no-one; on the contrary, help everyone as much a you can" (BM.16.fn20) and sees compassion as the highest cardinal virtue, and a virtue of action at that. This is certainly quite a powerful Buddhist insight and one that influenced many aspects of his thought. One cannot help but wonder, however, whether this was just an aspect of his fancy.
There are several reasons why Schopenahauers compassion seems at best a slight inconsistency in his theory:
(1) Compassion is not and cannot be a product of reason, it is a non-cognitive feeling. It is an intuition that we cannot express rationally; "It is a direct and intuitive knowledge that cannot be reasoned away or arrived at by reasoning," (WWR.66). Unlike Kant, Schopenhauer thinks you cannot derive morality from a theory of abstract reasoning, and compassion is not merely a feeling but a human essence; a superhuman quality. But the will itself instills in us our intuitions and so would surely be the producer of feelings of compassion. At the same time compassion conflicts with the wills interests of self-preservation. Schopenhauer seems to be suggesting something he cannot be; that the will has provided us with a way of overriding it.
(2) Virtue cannot be taught, people can only gain knowledge from compassion, but our characters are unalterable. However much we praise compassion, an individual either is or is not compassionate. If it were actually an expression of Will, however, everyone would have the capacity for compassion. Indeed we might say that we observe women to be more compassionate than men. Women are by nature the nurturing sex and so it would be reasonable for them to be more instinctively compassionate. I feel Schopenhauer would have difficulty admitting here that it is because women are more knowing and enlightened.
(3) Compassion is sometimes felt, but is not always a motive of action. We might feel sympathy for or pity the beggar on the streets, the plight of the blue cross on an advert might cause us to express an 'awww', but we do not act. Schopenhauer recognises the difference between feeling and acting by illustrating that the just person feels compassion, and the noble person acts on it. Why should it serve as a motive for some and not others?
It would seem undeniable that there is a special quality to compassion. Whether or not it is governed by the will, or allows us to see beyond the Will, it is the only action in which the agent truly identifies with the subject and believes himself to be acting altruistically. If we are to define a genuine moral motive of action as that which is not egoistic, then I agree with Schopenhauer that compassion is eligible. For Schopenhauer, however, altruism is real, although I believe it would be more compatible with his theory of the will to hold that the Will is the force behind this apparent altruism, since an action of absolutely no benefit to oneself (either direct or indirect, conscious or unconscious) seems absurd or at least ambitious. Whatever the answer, compassion breaks away from egoism and is therefore worthy of the title of a 'genuine moral motive of action', just as those who are in love are really and truly in love, whatever the cause of this may be. Compassion is surely the point of unusual optimism for Schopenhauer, a twist we never expected. It is truly an enlightening theory from which the great pessimist gives us the greatest surprise.