The moral philosophy of Schopenhauer and Nietzsche could not, it seems, be more opposing; Schopenhauer glorifies the moral significance of life whilst life for Nietzsche has no intrinsic moral meaning, Schopenhauer's greatest aspiration is to deny the will whilst Nietzsche only affirms it, for Schopenhauer suffering devalues life and yet for Nietzsche suffering inspires creativity, strength and self-overcoming. This idea of suffering, and its counterpart; compassion, form a pivotal point of departure between these two writers. Compassion, for Nietzsche, was an important topic because "the problem of the value of pity conjures up doubt, mistrust, fear, and the belief in all morality wavers." (GMp6), however it was, for Schopenhauer, the basis of morality; a basis which Nietzsche viewed as grossly misguided. This essay will form a study on the merits and demerits of Nietzsche's criticisms of compassion and subsequently his criticisms of Schopenhauer.
It would conform to tradition to clarify here what I intend by the word compassion, as used in the title. Although perhaps not strictly necessary and a little tedious, we are examining, in English, a German word whose meaning may have warped through translation, and so this discussion should satisfy the discerning reader. Both Nietzsche and Schopenhauer use the word 'mitleid', and in Schopenhauer it is accepted that what he means is a direct translation to 'compassion', or more accurately 'suffering with'. Readers of Nietzsche have disagreed as to whether Nietzsche is using Mitleid in the sense of compassion or pity. The difference is thought to be significant because whilst compassion is commonly heralded as benevolent and selfless, pity can sometimes also be interpreted as 'looking down upon'. If Nietzsche is condemning pity in this sense his position is more understandable and less startling than if he were condemning pure compassion, and it will become obvious that Nietzsche see's mitleid as a way of possibly gaining power over the sufferer. The German word 'Mitleid', however, translates equally into English as both compassion and pity. The English word 'compassion', according to the Oxford Dictionary of English, means 'sympathetic pity and concern for the sufferings or misfortunes of others', and pity is 'feelings of sorrow and compassion caused by sufferings or misfortunes of others'. General semantic acceptance then seems to view these words as pretty much interchangeable; 'pity' as a 'looking down upon' seems to have entered general meaning through misuse or misinterpretation. Regardless of these definitions, what is clear is that whatever Nietzsche is addressing, he (rightly or wrongly) takes to be the same condition as the one Schopenhauer is addressing, and his discussions of mitleid are almost direct responses to him. This essay will therefore use the terms pity and compassion interchangeably and the quotes I use will remain faithful to the particular translations I am quoting from.
On The Basis Of Morality contains Schopenhauer's most illusive exposition of compassion. He explains that we cannot examine the motives of actions in terms of empirical evidence because we can only observe the action, not the motive behind it; "there is always left the possibility that an egoistic motive had influenced the doer of a just or good action." (BM.16). However most of us are convinced that "a man often acts justly, simply and solely that no wrong or injustice may be done to another." (BM.16). The people who act in this way are, according to Schopenhauer 'people of true integrity'. Compassion is therefore a truly altruistic act, and if it weren't then what we call morality would be a futile science without any object, like astrology. Self-interested actions destroy all moral worth of an action because it is an act of survival only, but compassion is excluded from self-interested motives; "The absence of all egoistic motivation is, therefore, the criterion of an action of moral worth." (BM.16). All of our motivations are caused by our 'weal and woe', but compassion causes us to focus solely on the weal and woe of another. How does it cause us to do this? "If my action is to be done simply and solely for the sake of another; then his weal and woe must be directly my motive." (BM.16); in other words the other person becomes the object of my will; "I suffer directly with him." (BM.16). I do not mistake his suffering for my own, I feel his suffering in me.
Morality can only be examined metaphysically, and compassion is a boundary mark that only metaphysics can overstep. The compassionate person has true metaphysical insight because they can identify with someone else's suffering as if it were their own. They are thus looking beyond the individual to the complete unification. They recognise not only their own individual suffering, but the suffering of mankind, indeed of all life, and they realise that everything expresses the will to life, which "extends our interest to all that lives," (WWR.66). This new insight into the world shows us that all is one; we have pierced the veil of Maya and seen beyond the world of representation where individuation acts as a partition. He hails his own 'supreme principle' of ethics; "Injure no-one; on the contrary, help everyone as much a you can" (BM.16.fn20) and sees compassion as the highest cardinal virtue, and a virtue of action at that. This is certainly quite a powerful Buddhist insight and one that influenced many aspects of his thought.
Nietzsche's views on morality, and especially compassion could not be further from Schopenhauer's. He agrees with Schopenhauer that the only true moral action is an altruistic one, and if compassion were a truly altruistic moral action it may have saved moral value from contempt, however he asserts that egoism is behind mitleid, as with all of our actions, not altruism: "Benefiting and hurting others are ways of exercising one's power upon others." (GS13) Nietzsche therefore endorses moral scepticism, denying Schopenhauer's meta-ethical realism, for all morality rests on egoistic grounds. For him morality is a 'futile science'.
Nietzsche also criticises Schopenhauer's lack of evidence. Schopenhauer uses metaphysics to explain the moral significance of actions but Nietzsche suggests that his metaphysics are dictated by his commitment to save morality and not visa versa. In Beyond Good and Evil (186) Nietzsche remarks that; "Philosophers one and all...wanted to furnish the rational ground of morality" and that "Schopenhauer too failed to do it". In the Anti-Christ also, Nietzsche claims; "Schopenhauer was hostile to life: therefore pity became for him a virtue". Nietzsche thinks that Schopenhauer is misconstruing compassion, he lacks a psychological understanding of it because he lacks experience of it; "those who glorify pity lack experience of it in the realm of morality" (D133). He is adamant that "'There is no moral yardstick" (D139) and that Schopenhauer is being led by his heart and not his reason. In the Gay Science (99), Nietzsche accuses Schopenhauer of "mystical embarrassments and subterfuges" due to his fascination with Eastern philosophies, and in the same aphorism claims that Schopenhauer's theory is "nonsense about pity, about how it breaks through the principle of individuation and how it is the source of all morality". For Nietzsche compassion is remarkable, but not because it is a 'boundary mark of metaphysics'; compassion should be discouraged since it only brings forth more suffering in the world, a central argument that will be supported later in the essay.
Nietzsche's writing forms the antithesis of Schopenhauer's compassion. In Daybreak (esp. 133) Nietzsche's explanation of why we might leap into the water after someone is far from altruistic. The thoughtless person, he says, puts it down to pity. Nietzsche elucidates that granted, few people would admit to consciously thinking of themselves at such a time, however we have a very strong unconscious egoistic motivation. He goes so far as to say that another's hardship offends us to the point that we would feel shame and cowardice if we did not help. Our reaction to this offence is to feel compassion out of self-defence or even revenge. Power and overcoming others is a significant feature in Nietzsche, and we play the part of the more powerful helper because we expect applause and recognition, and we choose to play an active part in dramas of suffering perhaps to alleviate our boredom. Pure pleasure can also arise in such situations when we contrast the sufferer's position to our own. The thought that we can help if only we choose to and the expectance of praise and homage also make pity pleasurable and therefore pity has many constituents. "Even if we offer ourselves as martyrs do for their church this is a sacrifice that is offered for our desire for power," (GS13) therefore an action from compassion never lacks a reason, and this reason is much less mystical than Schopenhauer's unification principle. One criticism of Schopenhauer's theory is that the compassionate person seems to lack agency, acting always for the will. It may seem more realistic and even optimistic to hold that the person acts compassionately because they are acting autonomously and with agency, and because it will benefit them in some way.
Pity, for Nietzsche, is to be condemned because it is a weakness, and causes more suffering in the world: "suffering itself becomes contagious through pity" (A7). This is partly explained in the same aphorism, as Nietzsche puts it; "Pity stands in antithesis to the tonic emotions which enhance the energy of the feeling of life: it has a depressive effect" and "The loss of force which life has already sustained through suffering is increased and multiplied even further by pity". This is in direct contrast to Schopenhauer, who, "has made it [pity] the virtue" (A7) and for whom no action could better demonstrate moral value. What Schopenhauer fails to acknowledge, however, and what Nietzsche see's as an important point is the role of the sufferer in conjunction with that of the compassionate person. He recognizes that there is something degrading in suffering and elevating in pitying. When we pity we are being unintentionally cruel; "when I helped him, then I sorely injured his pride" (D134). In the Gay Science (338) Nietzsche notes that the sufferer generally hides his suffering, since suffering is a sign of weakness; "All arousing of pity and calling for help is seductive, for our 'own way' is too hard." If others notice our suffering they tend to assume access to the deepest recesses of our heart, but in fact they evaluate us superficially. Pity therefore takes away what is personal to the sufferer.
The kindest way to be compassionate, if we must be compassionate, is from a distance; "I don't want to be recognized for being compassionate" (Z 'Of the Compassionate) he tells us, for the compassionate are too lacking in shame and the sufferer would be shamed by our compassion. This is in no way unkindness on Nietzsche's part; on the contrary it is a warning, a recommendation for a better world. Far from the 'boot-in-the-face' picture of Nietzsche presented by some, in the Gay Science (338) he urges us; "to share not suffering but joy". Our time would be better spent leaning how to enjoy ourselves rather than learning how to be compassionate since it is better that we unlearn how to harm others. This draws out another detail not found Schopenhauer's theory; a differentiation between types of compassion, such as compassion for friends and compassion for strangers. Since Schopenhauer's principle of individuation renders all individuals identical in their suffering we are supposed to treat all men equally. That, in reality, is not the case.
"Can you go near to your friend without going over him?" Nietzsche asks in Thus Spoke Zarathustra ('Of Friends'). Considering how humiliating compassion can be, it is hardly something we should endeavor to inflict upon our friends: "let your pity for your friend conceal itself under a hard shell" he advises us. It is all too easy for us to wish to relieve the pain of a friend, whilst underneath our supposed 'suffering with' him, we are really relishing their active gratitude and homage, indeed one may be familiar with the feeling of rejection often felt when a friend in need has refused our help, when really we should be admiring his independence and strength. "If you have a suffering friend, be a resting place for his suffering, but a resting place like a hard bed, a camp bed; thus you will serve him best." (Z 'Of the Compassionate) This is probably a piece of advice we should all take to heart, for it is easy to mollycoddle our friends and take them under our wing because, Nietzsche says; "we want to show them how advantageous it is to be in our power" (GS13) and by doing so make them weaker. We can therefore, if we are careful, do our friends an honour by providing for him with the right intentions, however; "strangers and the poor must pluck from my tree for themselves - it causes less shame." (Z 'Of the Compassionate') Here, it seems, Nietzsche is far from the selfish egoist he is often supposed to be. Schopenhauer too assumes there is something beyond compassion. His theory of the Saint, the highest human being, see's through the futility of recognising a shared suffering and see's compassion itself as futile. Compassion will not free us from the Will, only a life of self-directed suffering will allow us to deny it.
Nietzsche has strong views on Christianity in general, and this ties in with compassion because many moral doctrines, such as 'love thy neighbour' are produced by Christianity; "nothing in our unhealthy modernity is more unhealthy than Christian pity" (A7). In Daybreak (132) he claims that Schopenhauer and his theories of pity and sympathy merely echo Christianity. "Christianity is called the religion of pity," (GS338) and Nietzsche suggests that Christians praise pity only because it allows them to have power and superiority over others. In perhaps his most famous quote, Nietzsche makes the claim that "God is dead;" (Z 'Of the Compassionate') Fragmented like this it seems he is merely an atheist, but the full quote reads; "God is dead; god has died of his love for man." Nietzsche is concerned with the destructive role of compassion, and perhaps uses god to attack Christian pity. Schopenhauer, although also an atheist, praises Christianity and Buddhism for their morality, Nietzsche attacks them on the same grounds.
For Schopenhauer life is suffering. For Nietzsche it is a struggle for survival. Both have a Darwinist flavour in places, but where Schopenhauer departs onto mystical grounds, Nietzsche remains more rooted; "The enlightened man goes among men as among animals." (Z 'Of the Compassionate') The natural way is the best way, we should follow our will. In an echo of the 'survival of the fittest', compassion destroys evolution because it "preserves what is ripe for destruction" (A7), preserving everything that is miserable and allowing the weak to fester. Brutal and starkly direct, Nietzsche has been branded a pessimist, nihilist, fascist and has been generally misunderstood for decades, and yet, despite his notoriety, he had become perhaps the most widely read and analysed philosopher.
In many ways Nietzsche deserves to be defended against claims that his philosophy is heavy-handed and dangerous, lacking the delicacies offered by Schopenhauer's compassion. Schopenhauer's 'supreme principle' of ethics; "Injure no-one; on the contrary, help everyone as much as you can", is not a far cry from Nietzsche's "share not suffering but joy", indeed they could have been written by the same hand. His attacks on compassion are also, as we have clarified, and attack on revenge and cruelty. As Nussbaum points out; "A true self-creator does not need power over others." Nietzsche not only criticises but develops Schopenhauer's thinking about compassion (and would no doubt feel indebted to him for highlighting the importance of the issue), considering the role and position of the sufferer in relation to the compassionate, the difference between the suffering friend and the suffering stranger, and even the Darwinian evolutional role. In some ways Nietzsche appears more pessimistic than Schopenhauer, focusing on egoism, the animalistic nature of humans, strength and power, and yet at the same time his words are more empowering, more elevating and perhaps more honest.