The reasons for the failure of the Church Missionary Society's Wellington Valley Mission are tremendously extensive and can broadly be divided into two categories. Some were common to the missionary attempts occurring all over the continent. These included the use of the mission by the Aborigines for purposes other than religion; Protestant missionaries' reluctance to pronounce an Aborigine as 'converted'; the decline in the Aboriginal population due to disease, inter-tribal warfare and the driving out of Aborigines by European settlers; the negative influence of the convicts on the Aborigines and finally the vast difference in Aboriginal and European belief systems. Others, however, were more specific to the Wellington Valley Mission such as a lack of funding, poor farming conditions, tensions between senior missionaries and the loss of the Agriculturist, William Porter. The essay will account for and analyse these separate reasons and come to the conclusion that the vast difference in belief systems was undoubtedly the primary cause for the failure of the mission.
One of the principal factors in explaining the failure of the mission was the fact that the Aborigines, and indeed the surrounding white population, used the missions for purposes other than religion. These included the provision of education, medicine, employment, housing and food. None of these were generally available outside of the missionary village. That is, although a significant number of Aborigines showed curiosity in Christianity, it is highly likely that a large proportion were interested in the mission for the other benefits which they could accrue. William Watson stated, 'Since my arrival here I have had a very great number of applications for medical assistance from the white part of the population (as well as the black)." He later goes on to declare that this prevented him from focusing on his primary duties - an obvious hindrance in the spread of Christianity. There was a reluctance of Aborigines to let their children move to the mission but they understood the value of learning to 'read, write and enumerate. They then expected the children to return to their communities for initiation and marriage. In contrast the missionaries expected the children to become Christians and assimilate into European society'. Conversion was a long process of change. Many Aborigines were content to benefit from the advantages during this process without ultimately having to convert to Christianity.
The arrival of the colonists in New South Wales had caused huge disruption in Aboriginal society. This was not at all conducive to the establishment of missions. Europeans settled in areas where Aborigines had once lived and brought with them sheep and cattle to graze on the surrounding lands. These, in turn, displaced the animals which the Aborigines hunted such as the kangaroo and thus caused a forced migration of the Aborigines. This led to increased tribal warfare as groups were forced onto the territory of neighbouring tribes. Perhaps more important than the displacement of Aboriginal peoples was the effect of disease on the indigenous population. N.G. Butlin estimates that disease halved the Aboriginal population between 1788 and 1850. The single most destructive disease was smallpox because it was highly contagious and was able to spread extraordinarily quickly amongst an indigenous population which had very limited resistance. In the accounts of the Wellington Valley Mission there is also a great deal of evidence of sexually transmitted diseases. Watson states, 'The blacks here are inflicted with the venereal in a dreadful manner, children and even infants have it very commonly." This huge loss of Aboriginal population meant there were far fewer people to convert. Even within the time period of the Wellington Valley Mission it is apparent that there is a decreasing number of potential converts. Watson declares, 'We have lately had 70 natives here, now only about 20." However, it is important to note that this reduction in numbers may also have been caused by the other factors examined in this essay rather than explained purely by the deaths of Aborigines.
Also highly damaging to the efforts of the missionaries in the Wellington Valley Mission was the detrimental influence of the convicts on the Aboriginal population. Indeed, the Aborigines were just as likely to follow the convicts as the missionaries due to the fact that benefits could also be gained from this group. Aboriginal men frequently compelled their females (both women and girls) to prostitute themselves against their will, 'because they themselves receive the wages of iniquity, being supported by the Europeans in such connexions'. The missionaries, of course, strongly condemned this behaviour and Watson described the situation as the 'moral wretchedness with which we are surrounded'. This, in turn, infuriated the convicts, some of whom 'have laboured hard to prevent the Blacks and their children from coming to me. There is a great spirit of Revenge manifested against me because I have opposed the abominable practice of living in adultery and fornication with Black women and Black girls'. As with the issue of providing medicine to the Aborigines and convicts, which took time away from the teaching of Christianity, there was also a great deal of theft within the Wellington Valley Mission and Watson's 'time is very much taken up with secular matters for our servants being prisoners they are always on the alert to pilfer anything they can'. The convicts encouraged the Aborigines to stray from the righteous path down which the missionaries were encouraging them. Some missionaries believed that 'true evangelism might proceed best in isolation from the temptations and distractions occasioned by the intrusion of the Europeans'. This idea was put into practice with the institutions at Flinders Island and the Port Phillip Bay Reserve. However, the missionaries of Wellington Valley Mission did not, of course, have that luxury and were forced to contend with the negative influence of the Europeans who were hugely important in the failure of the mission.
Protestant missionaries, such as those working on the Wellington Valley Mission, were generally less willing to pronounce an indigenous person as converted compared to Catholic missionaries. This helps to account for the fact there were no recorded conversions by 21 st May 1835 according to William Watson in his letter despite the fact that the mission had been established three years earlier. In contrast, Catholic missionaries could produce rapid 'conversions' where converts only had to express faith in God and Jesus, and did not have to prove beliefs through rigorous testing. The Spanish missionaries, such as those working in the South West of Australia, could 'draw on a longer tradition of contact with indigenous peoples which made them more tolerant of established custom and more ready to accept... conversion'. The fact that a large proportion of the New South Wales population itself was Catholic also meant that it was hard to know which form of Christianity the missionaries should preach. Finally, Protestantism was founded on individual salvation. Aborigines, however, operated in a far more collective society.
In terms of accountability for the failure of the Wellington Valley Mission, the vast difference in belief systems of the missionaries and the Aborigines was undeniably the single most important factor. Civilization and Christianity were considered by missionaries to be closely connected. Missionaries believed 'Christianity could not be attained until the indigenous peoples wore European clothes, lived in nuclear, monogamous families, worked regular hours, and received rewards for their labour, preferably as wages'. The Aborigines had absolutely no desire to change their lifestyle so drastically. There were perfectly content to live in the way they had done for thousands of years before the arrival of the Europeans. Aborigines actively resisted being 'improved' into peasant farmers. On occasion they did work for the Europeans as sheep tenders so that they could move around their tribal lands and not altogether disrupt customary practice. However, there was no desire to abandon their nomadic tribal nature in favour of a settled nucleated existence.
Europeans brashly assumed that the Aborigines would conform to a way of life espoused by the Enlightenment thinkers who explained 'human varieties in terms of a form of evolutionary development'. Their view was that society went through a transition of phases, the final object of which was a society rather like that of the theorists of the Enlightenment themselves. This was seen as a transition from barbarism to civilisation, with the Aborigines as the least developed and the white Europeans as the most. It was assumed that the Aborigines would move from their status as hunter-gatherers to farmers and eventually to a commercial society. The Europeans saw themselves as merely trying to speed up the process. 'Protestant missionaries tended to assume that the propagation of the Gospel and the propagation of civilisation in its British form were inseparable." The Aborigines had no desire to settle permanently in one place and preferred to continue their nomadic way of life based 'in highly mobile kin-based groups'.
Missionaries believed that participation in Aboriginal ceremonies was incompatible with Christian living. The Aborigines did not accept this and instead wanted to maintain allegiance to their old forms of religion. They saw no problem in following aspects of two separate religions, since, as explained earlier, there were numerous benefits to Christianity besides its spiritual side. 'Acceptance into the church had to be earned over a long period of instruction, through a continuing demonstration that the doctrine of the church had been accepted." The majority of Aborigines in the Wellington Valley Mission were only willing to commit themselves to the missionaries for short periods of time. There were constant fluctuations in numbers and personnel of the Aboriginal population of the mission. Thus, the differences in beliefs between the Europeans and the Aborigines meant that any mission in New South Wales was unlikely to succeed.
So far, the factors examined could be applicable to almost any mission in Australia during its entire existence. It is now important to briefly examine the issues which were specific to the Wellington Valley Mission. The mission was both poorly funded and consequently poorly staffed. It had only three Reverends, J.C.S. Handt, William Watson and James Gunther and a mission 'agriculturist' William Porter. Farming was necessary to provide 'a source of food and productive activity for converts and proselytes." However, the mission was put in almost immediate jeopardy by a severe drought when Porter arrived and constantly batted a lack of vegetation and water in order to produce the food its inhabitants needed to survive. There were also numerous 'tensions between the senior missionaries' presumably due to the lack of success of the mission and the constant problems it faced. Porter appealed to the Church Missionary Society to send out his future wife but the Society's reluctance to comply was 'probably related to the need to keep all costs to an absolute minimum." Unfortunately, Porter was discovered to have had sex with at least one of the mission women for an extended period of time. This led to his removal and the end of the Wellington Valley Mission. 'The Mission had already endured crisis after crisis but the departure of Porter seems to have been the final blow to any hopes that it could continue to limp on in some form.'
Therefore, in conclusion, there were a huge variety of factors which explain the failure of the Church Missionary Society's Wellington Valley Mission. Some of these were specific to this particular mission, namely a lack of funding, tension between the individual missionaries, poor farming conditions and the disgrace of Porter. However, it is important to recognise that the most important reasons for its failure were those which affected almost every mission in Australia: the mission was used by many for purposes other than religion (especially for medicine and food), the Protestant missionaries were reluctant to pronounce an Aborigine as 'converted', the Aboriginal population declined significantly and the surrounding convict population had a negative influence on the Aborigines. However, one factor stands above all others in explaining the failure of the mission: the vast differences in the highly incompatible belief systems of the Aborigines and the missionaries meant that the Wellington Valley Mission was doomed to failure form the start.