The British National Party (BNP) has become the most publicized and well known Far Right political party of recent years. It is rarely out of the news and has become a marginal but dangerously significant part of the current British political culture. Arguably the BNP is a single issue party focussing on questions of immigration, asylum and race. Its recent prominence can be seen as part of the wider revival of fascism in Europe and America faced with the problems of globalisation and terrorism. In the 1980s and 1990s the death of fascism in Britain was being heralded by many as the decline of the National Front was seen to indicate the British public's final rejection of fascist ideology. The popularity of the National Front during the 1970s meant Britain was considered at the forefront of the Far Right in Europe. However, the organisational and ideologically splits of the eighties destroyed this fascist movement. Paradoxically, during this same period continental Europe especially Germany and France were experiencing a substantial rise in neo-fascism both underground and through electoral success. The recent prominence of the BNP in local council elections has led to the fear that Britain is following this continental model (Husbands 1994). This essay will examine, to what extent the BNP is on the rise and what threat it poses to mainstream British political system and culture. In order to answer these questions the following will be addressed: the history of the Far Right in Britain and the recent electoral successes of the BNP.
Before investigating the fortunes of the contemporary Far Right; one must firstly understand the historical development of this movement. Christopher Husbands (1994) argues the Far Right in Britain has never been significantly popular as in the twentieth century it was never electorally successful. This begs the question of why there has never been a mass fascist movement in Britain. Moreover, why has British Far Right politics only ever had a minimal appeal and limited success? The depression in the 1930s caused political chaos and the rise of extremist politics in Europe. However, British fascist leader Oswald Mosley and his party the British Union of Fascists was never able to exploit this socio-economic crisis. However, arguably the depression was never quite as intense in Britain as it was spread over a longer period and Mosley flaws as a leader meant the fascist movement failed in this crisis. Subsequently World War Two exposed the horrors of fascism to the British people. Nevertheless, Enoch Powell's 'rivers of blood' speech in 1967 may have left most disgusted but also left some supportive. These supporters provided the backbone of the National Front in the seventies; its relative popularity stemmed from the parties ability to make capital from domestic resentments toward immigrant workers and difficult race relations. However, by the mid-eighties the National Front was in decline due to its skinhead image, the first-past-the-post system and its failure to take advantage of the disenchanted public mood. The fascist movement lost out to Margaret Thatcher who was able to wean its potential supporters away with draconian law and order and immigration policies. Therefore the fascist movement was never historically successful as Britain never faced the drastic socio-economic crisis that were experienced on the continent. Moreover even when the British political climate was instable; the fascists were never able to turn this into substantial support or political capital.
The main reason for the failure of fascism in Britain as Husbands (1994) argues was the British political and historical character as there was no significant tradition for the Far Right to attach itself to. The British Far Right was ideologically impoverished as it had no mass-based political tradition, the working class were comparatively more integrated and there was a lower intensity of Left and Right polarisation. Far-right parties in Britain have always been fundamentally one-issue parties largely defined by 'crude urban racism, concentrated in specific localities and derived from parochial inter-ethnic competition about materialists or consumption issues or from local cultural clashes' (Husbands, 1994:566). Therefore the fascist movement in Britain has never had widespread historical appeal due to its localised, single-issue politics; the resistance of the British political character and the lack of a substantial tradition to attach itself to. However, the question is: does this historical template still exist? There have been recent suggestions of a rise in the BNP support and racist politics coupled with a weakened conservative movement and the rise of neo-fascism in Europe exemplified by Le Pen coming second in the 2002 French presidential elections. Leading to questions about whether Britain is following this continental model.
Recent electoral successes of the BNP suggest that this is a possibility. The BNP was formed in 1982 by former prominent National Front member John Tyndall. For its first ten years it was in the political wilderness; a marginalised party 'in the shadow of the National Front' (Margetts et al, 2004: 4). However, the party was able to survive and in the early 1990s experienced some modest electoral success. The 1993 by-election victory for the BNP candidate in Millwall ward in Tower Hamlets part of East London was a 'high point' (Margetts et al 2004). There were fears Britain was about to experience an extreme right take-off similar to the rise of Le Pen's Front National in France that became part of the political mainstream in 2002 through success in local elections in the 1980s. Nonetheless, as Husbands (1994) argues the idiosyncratic features of London's East End make the BNP's success exceptional and the danger posed by the BNP was not its electoral potential but its impact upon local ethnic relations. Particular local circumstances meant the BNP victory was an isolated event; the area's 'history of white working class cultural insularity' (Husbands 1994: 569), general economic neglect and sense of political exclusion were all exploited by the BNP. The parties' impact was essentially localised therefore the BNP in the mid 1990s was still marginalised and not a genuine political force on the rise.
However, the BNP's unprecedented success in the May 2003 local council elections winning thirteen new councillors in the Midlands and Yorkshire led to press stories heralding the rise of the BNP and its electoral breakthrough. The reasons behind this supposed BNP ascendance are new leadership and modernisation, the Oldham Riots, the moral panic over asylum and the global political climate post-September 11th. The main reasons presented in the media for the BNP's electoral success is the new leader Nick Griffin and his programme of modernisation. Griffin's aim is to make the party more political credible and moderate hiding the inner core of racist, neo-fascist politics. However, in reality 'the BNP's leadership has not suddenly acquired any greater talent' (Renton, 2003:77) as Griffin is considered a highly controversial figure both within and outside the movement thus the press has overplayed this "modernisation".
The 2003 election successes can however be seen as a result of particular local circumstances including the Oldham Riots of 2001. The Oldham local press and police created an 'impression of constant racial tension' (Renton, 2003:79) which became national news. The BNP seized on this flooding the town with leaflets, whispering campaigns and a series of marches. This coupled with the structural injustices faced by the Asian community and the police allowing marches through these communities fuelled the fire for confrontation. Following the riots Griffin won sixteen percent of the Oldham vote; the highest vote ever secured by a Far Right party.
David Renton argues the most important sources of the recent success of the BNP are external to the movement itself and not merely due to localised problems. The media inspired moral panic over asylum and the rise in Isamophobia post-September 11th have created the political conditions for the BNP to thrive. Since the late 1990s press attention has turned to asylum seekers using 'highly emotive, wildly exaggerated headlines' (Renton, 2003:77) to condemn them. Moreover, senior government figures such as David Blunkett have encouraged these anti-asylum scares through populist rhetoric. Arguably the government and media have created a moral panic over asylum; creating a tautological problem with the press creating hysteria over asylum prompting government action that consequently justifies the press sensationalist stories. The government measures curbing asylum to reverse BNP gains have, in fact, given credibility to BNP claims thus 'legitimising the racism the BNP feeds off' (Renton, 2003:83). Moreover, post-September 11 th rising Islamophobia has seen heightened tensions between Asians and whites in deprived areas, revenge attacks on Mosques and a general climate of xenophobia. The BNP have sought to exploit this through linking terrorism to asylum seekers, immigrants and the Islamic religion. However, these favourable condition do not necessarily spell the BNP's breakthrough into mainstream British politics as the 'BNP's internal state remains weak' even after the 2003 success with low membership, a low level of activism and substantial less grassroots support than the National Front in the 1970s.
Despite their internal weakness of BNP, the June 2004 elections offered the BNP unique opportunities for growth with three different elections at once: London Mayor, London Assembly and European Parliament. Furthermore, the system of proportional representation used in the Mayoral election and the need to only achieve five percent of the vote to win a seat on the London assembly meant smaller parties had high chances of making gains. Thus these elections were a test of whether the 2003 elections were really the start of a sustained electoral breakthrough for the Far Right. The BNP claimed they would achieve great things with Griffin calling the election a 'day to make history' (Renton, 2005:33). However, Renton argues the election was actually a relative BNP failure as they did not achieve the expected gains and they experienced their first instance of vote stagnation. The main reason for the anticlimactic results was the successful revival of the anti-fascist movement with a new coalition UNITE and new tactics. Moreover, the richer, more "respectable" and 'cleverly branded' (Margetts et al, 2004:5) United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) was able to attract many of the potentially fascist votes. Most importantly, as Renton (2005) argues the BNP's electoral breakthrough of 2003 needed re-legitimisation from the 2004 elections; they needed to be 'not just vote grabbers but vote holders' (Renton, 2005:45). The BNP's weakness was its single-issue stance meaning it only attracted votes in protest over immigration and asylum policies and not due to party preference. Therefore, arguably the 2004 elections signalled the stagnation of BNP and indicated that it could be successful prevented from further growth by the activities of the anti-fascist movement.
There are however differing interpretations of the 2004 election results as Margetts (2004) argue the elections coupled with their surveys and focus groups indicate much potential support for the BNP. They challenge the conventional wisdom that there is no room for the extremist right in British politics (Husbands 2003) and that the BNP will never be a significant political force. Margetts (2004:2) argues there is a 'racist rump' within working class that has a long-standing history and offers much potential for a BNP breakthrough. Griffin and the BNP's rhetoric target the neglected and oppressed white working class by arguing they are "telling the truth" about immigration and the loss of national identity. An indicator of this 'racist rump' is the recent Big Brother racism press scandal; the ignorant borderline racist views expressed by some contestants arguably reflect a broader xenophobic trend within some sections of the white working class. Margetts (2004) argues there is a strong potential danger that the BNP and the UKIP will unite and mobilise this racist rump; creating an electorally appealing mass neo-fascist movement. However, the chances of this movement materialising are slim with the BNP's hopes dashed by the 2004 elections and the UKIP and BNP bitterly divided.
In conclusion, the BNP in 2007 has not achieved electoral success and is not a mass-based popular movement thus has not as yet mobilised the 'racist rump'. The history of the British Far Right suggests that the political character of this country and its cultural traditions are antithetical to a fascist or neo-fascist movement. However, it is dangerous to underestimate the BNP especially considering their recent electoral success and accompanying high press profile. Causes for these successes can be found in the movement's modernisation, particular local circumstances and wider changes in the socio-political climate. Recent press reports on the BNP indicate their desperation for a broader-based movement and greater political legitimacy by 'attempting to mobilise new middle class recruits' (Guardian 21/12/06). There is a danger this continued press attention raises the profile of the party and increases its credibility by giving the BNP a voice in mainstream political discourse. Arguably the media and government induced moral panic over the BNP is legitimising and giving a much wider platform to an essentially marginal and vastly unpopular neo-fascist movement.