Britain in the 1980s saw an unprecedented series of increasingly violent urban riots in almost all the major inner-city areas. These were initially met with immense shock from the public and politicians as although Britain has a long history of disorder; from 1945 to 1980 there were 'no riots on British streets' (Benyon and Solomos [eds] 1987). However, by the end of the decade, saturating media coverage and the frequency of urban riots ensured they became a normalized and accepted part of the socio-political climate. This normalisation of British urban disorder in British society continues today with the Bradford riots of 2001 and the Birmingham riots of 2005. From a historical approach, E.P Thompson (in Waddington 1989) argued that collective action was not apolitical but rooted in what he terms the moral economy of the crowd comprising of popular conceptions of justice. Thus for Thompson crowd action is determined by legitimising notions of defending traditional rights and customs. David Waddington (1992) applies this perspective to the study of twentieth-century riots arguing that disorder occurs when the relatively powerless are denied something they feel entitled to. This essay will use this approach to understand the causes for the eighties British riots including the media and government responses influenced by the crowd psychology perspective; the police and racial tensions and the effect of heightened socio-economic deprivation and political exclusion. Therefore the short-term triggers and immediate causes of the riots will be examined alongside the structurally based root causes.
Thatcher's government and the mainstream media's response to the urban riots displayed the traditional Conservative approach attributing them to the inherent 'wickedness' of the rioters. This perspective considers collective violence as an aberration perpetuated by the irrational 'criminal' elements of society and simply revealing the basic flaws and 'ugly facts about human nature' (Douglas Hurd quoted in Benson and Solomos [eds] 1987, p. 30). This corresponds to the Functionalist view that the existing structures of society are adequate thus there is no justification for agitation. Moreover, the government's reaction clearly indicates institutional racism as the disorder was seen as an 'attack on our way of life' (Sir Ian Percival quoted in Benson and Solomos [eds] 1987, p. 25). Therefore ethnic minority and immigrant 'alien' cultures were blamed as the media and cabinet portrayed agitation as contradistinctive to Anglo-Saxon culture. However, this is a complete misnomer as British history is littered with frequent crowd action and violent riot.
The Conservative explanation for the urban disorders was heavily influenced by Gustave Le Bon and his Crowd Psychology perspective. Le Bon (1895, p. 32) argues that in a crowd cultivated individuals 'descend several rungs in the ladder of civilisation' becoming barbarians. Crowd behaviour, for Le Bon, lowers the level of morality and is fundamentally irrational. He believed collective phenomenon is explained by the contagion of emotion that grips crowds thus man is 'no longer himself, but has become an automaton' (Le Bon 1895, p. 32). This conception of contagion can be seen in the description of 'copycat' riots in Manchester, Liverpool etc following the Brixton riot; however as Waddington (1992) argues this is a vast oversimplification. Moreover, Le Bon's psychological reductionism gives primacy to individual motivations neglecting important socio-cultural influences.
The fundamental problem with the Le Bon influenced Conservative perspective is that rioters are not behaving irrational they have fully rational and often even justifiable reasons for their collective agitation. The crowd behaviour in the 1980s urban disorders was very selective and purposive though not formally organised; as Michael Keith (1993, p. 94) argues riot theory demands a 'notion of spontaneity that does not devalue the rationality of individuals'. Therefore it was not the irrationally criminal human element that caused the rioting as this does not explain why agitation only occur in deprived inner-city areas. The social context of violent collective action is, as such, a crucial explanatory factor as it was not the basic flaws in humans but the basic flaws in society that led to urban disorder.
Police policy and the dominant style of policing are a reflection of the political and ideological climate of a state. Correspondingly from a Marxists perspective riots are an explicit challenge to the 'monopoly of legal violence... held by the police as agents of the state' (Keith 1993, p. 94). Therefore there is a definite link between in an increase in coercive styles of policing and the frequency of violent collective action. The riots of the 1980s were almost all triggered by an encounter between the police and black youths. Robert Reiner (in Della Porta [eds] 1998) argues there was a shift in public order policing from a minimal force, community based style to a process of militarization in the late 1970s. Reiner (in Della Porta [eds] 1998, p. 41) argues the British police force historically developed a 'cultivation of a non-militaristic image' with civil and unarmed officers. In contrast to colonial policing with its militaristic and oppressive stance in suppressing protest. However, the late seventies with the economic crisis and subsequent change in political climate led to a new more aggressive style of policing with new equipment, uniforms, training and organisation. This transformation of the police force led to more violent conflict on the streets as there is a 'short distance between...coercive facet of policing and the brutal realization of violent conflict on the streets' (Keith 1993, p.94).
In the context of the 1980s urban disorder the increasingly coercive style of policing is intrinsically linked to a drastic deterioration of relations between the inner-city black community especially black youths and the police. Waddington (1992) argues there was a transformation of British urban riots in the twentieth-century from the inter-racial clashes of 1900 to 1962 to the battles between black people and the police. He focuses on the 1981 Brixton riot arguing they had a 'contrasting notion of rights' (Waddington 1992, p.88) with conflict between black youth subcultural recreational marijuana use and police law-enforcement drug crackdowns. He also sees similar norms of behaviour in black youth and the police with both displaying machismo and solidarity; as a cause of conflict as both groups are unwilling to negotiate or compromise. Moreover, the very real fact of police racial discrimination both individual and institutional meant the black community became 'indignant and resentful... suspicious of everything they (the police) did' (Lord Scarman quoted in Benson and Solomos [eds] 1987). The 'stop and search' operations were a major source of discontent with perceived targeting of black people and widespread accusations of police abuse. Therefore a major cause for the British urban riots in the eighties was the massively heightened tensions between the police and the inner-city deprived black community.
However, as Hall (in Benson and Solomos [eds] 1987, p. 45) argues race is a substantial factor but urban disorder is not exclusively a question of race. The police and societal discrimination experienced by the black community is intrinsically interlinked with their socio-economic deprivation and alienation. Therefore in examining the urban riots of the eighties, one must explore questions of class intertwined with questions of race.
For Benson and Solomos (1987, p.14) the central factor that causes riots is social injustice as the 'fundamental root of urban unrest appears to be unjust treatment'. The riots were not just a result of police policies or practices but also of structural factors of racial discrimination, social deprivation, unemployment and political exclusion leading to the alienation of black people from society. The late seventies saw an economic crisis resulting in high unemployment and soaring inflation. The black population experienced economic difficulty particularly acutely as racial discrimination meant they were 'doubly disadvantaged' (Hall in Benson and Solomos [eds] 1987, p. 46); thus their deprivation was compounded by their racial identity. Moreover, the levels of unemployment were particularly high in black communities with 55% of black youths in Brixton without work (Waddington 1992, p. 82). The inner-city black community also experience dire housing; poor education and social service provision; inadequate recreation and high crime levels. Their position was exacerbated and compounded by the political climate with the Conservative governments 'assault on collective social provision' (Hall in Benson and Solomos [eds] 1987, p. 47). Under Thatcher the underclass massively increased including many black people and were abandoned by the state. Added to their socio-economic deprivation, the black community also suffered from political exclusion and a sense of powerlessness. The top-down approach to local government and the few opportunities for articulating pressure meant decisions were imposed on these communities. Deprived black communities lacked a political voice thus urban disorder was the only outlet for their frustration and resentment as Benson and Solomos (1987, p. 29) 'riots are the ballot boxes of the poor'.
In conclusion, the combination of police policy and practices and the socio-economic deprivation and political exclusion of the black community; lead to their alienation from society. The rioters were not irrational driven by 'criminal' instincts but using their only option to express their frustration and anger towards a society that abandon them. Thus they 'repudiated political authority' (Benson and Solomos 1987, p. 35) as there was widespread disenchantment with political procedures, undermined confidence in society's institutions and eroded value consensus. The central factor was, as such, a question of injustice with the rioters disregarding authority and rejecting what they consider corrupt and unfair practices. Consequently the cumulative alienation of black communities especially of black youth; fundamental lead to the violent explosions on British streets.