The Great Depression that devastated Europe and America in the 1930s producing highly differing reactions from the governments and the left in Britain and Sweden. In Sweden the triumphant left tackled the root cause of unemployment and produced a lasting welfare settlement. Whereas in Britain the political elite, including the left, remained steadfastly adhered to pre-World War One economic principles and social policies. It was not until the 1940s, after the great upheaval of the Second World War that the British establishment, public and the left accepted the necessity of lasting welfare reform. This essay examines why the Swedish left were so successful in creating a lasting welfare consensus in comparison to the failures of the British left to produce this result. Moreover, the success of the British left in the 1940s in producing a lasting welfare settlement will be contrasted with its failure in the 1930s and the Swedish left's success. A lasting welfare settlement will be defined as the adherence to Keynesian (or pre-Keynesian) economic policies including commitment to full employment, state intervention, economic planning and significant welfare reform. Overall lasting social policy reform involves the government accepting the states responsibility towards the welfare of its citizens. In contrast, the traditional economic orthodox approach includes laissez faire policies of public expenditure cuts, the free market and the acceptance of unemployment as a natural part of capitalist society. This essay will argue that the British left's failure in the 1930s was due to their lack of commitment to a general theory of economic expansionism in contrast to the Swedish left's and 1940s British left's pledge to implement a Keynesian programme. Moreover, the divisions in the British left in the 1930s will be compared to the unification of social democratic interests in 1930s Sweden and Britain after the war.
The main reason the Swedish left succeed in creating a lasting welfare settlement in the 1930s was its creation of and dedication to a coherent programme of socio-economic reform. Social democratic politician Ernst Wigforss led a practical political breakthrough from traditional economic doctrines. Heavily influenced by British liberal economists, Wigforss argued the heart of the problem of mass unemployment was underconsumption thus there was a need to expand the workers purchasing power through a positive new economic programme. Wigforss and the social democrats presented a 'new conception of what ought to be done' (Heclo, 1974: 101) including government economic planning and greater public spending. As Higgins (1987) argues, in the late 1920s there was a radical about turn in Swedish left-wing politics with new social democratic leaders demanding practical socialism and the Central Confederation of Trade Unions (LO) questioning the temporary nature of unemployment. When the Depression struck the Swedish left already had a reflationary response with the Social Democrats 'Crisis Programme' of state funded public works and a full employment policy. Thus the 'considerable mobilizing resources of the Swedish labour movement were galvanised around a lucid and appealing alternative vision' (Higgins, 1986:113) creating a consensus around the implementation of a lasting welfare settlement.
In contrast the dominance of economic classicalism embodied by the treasury view ensured the British left did not produce or promote an alternative lasting welfare reform programme. The 1929-1931 Labour government 'failed to break out of the straitjacket of orthodox financial advise' (Salter and Stevenson, 1990: 133) as they were torn between their socialist commitment to maintain unemployment benefit and the pressure to secure the economy. The Labour cabinet was transfixed by classical economic convictions thus 'the major roadblocks to policy adaptations was a continuing adherence to old truths' (Heclo, 1974:118). Across the political spectrum there was a belief that the problems of mass unemployment could not be solved merely ameliorated, as such, the governments reaction to the crisis was 'one of studied inactivity' (Whiteside, 1991:113). The Swedish social democrats were triumphantly elected on the back of their crisis programme; whereas the British Labour party disintegrated due to their lack of radical conviction. However, as Salter and Stevenson (1990) argue there was pressure within the left for socio-economic reform with the Communist associates the National Unemployed Workers Movement (NUWM) militant campaigns of mass demonstrations and propaganda highlighting the need for radical change to society. Some sections of the Trade Union Council (TUC) also called for policy adaptations; this 'union firmness sprang from the Keynes influenced conviction... that the entire deflationary policy was misconceived' (Heclo, 1974:120). Moreover, radical ideas espoused by Keynes, the Lloyd-George liberals and the fascist Oswald Mosley advocated a more planned and positivist interventionist policy. Thus the 1929 Labour governments' failure to explore these theories or develop these programmes presented a 'major missed opportunity in economic policy' (Garside, 1990:385). However, the vague and inchoate nature of these various alternatives ensured the British left in the 1930s was both unable and unwilling to abandon the safety of economic orthodoxy.
It was not until the mid-1940s that the British left formulated a comprehensive programme of reform with the 1942 Beveridge Report producing 'one of the most coherent and long-lasting institutional legacies in modern British history' (Glennester 2000:1). The devastating upheaval of the Second World War stimulated the desire for change and led to the necessity of a new programme of welfare and economic policy. Richard Titmuss' (1962) classical account argues the war bred decisively new attitudes to social policy with the acceptance of greater state control, a shift from selectivity to universalism and the creation of a new social solidarity. The main post-war aim of the inter-war years was to return to the "Great Britain" of the nineteenth-century; whereas the motivations of the leftist reformers after the Second World War were to produce a new more egalitarian society. There was far greater support for state intervention with a 'new approach to the use of the power of the state consciously in the interests of social justice for the masses' (Thane, 1996 249). Moreover, as Baldwin (1990) argues there was a pan-European trend in favour of solidaristic social policy with the 'sentiment of national unity that, born in battle, was now to be made characteristic of the peacetime era' (Baldwin, 1990 107). The popularity of the Beveridge Report and its association with the left precipitated the landslide election of the 1945 Labour government giving a mandate for fundamental welfare reform. Therefore the British left were able to create a lasting welfare settlement due to the sea-change of popular attitudes during the upheaval of the Second World War. However, 'one has to be cautious about ascribing the changes to the war alone' (Peden, 1991:135) as Thane (1996) argues the experience of war speeded up change but there was significant continuity from pre-war developments. Nonetheless, the British left in the 1940s was able to implement the policy reform not dreamed of in the 1930s due to the war changing attitudes and the production and promotion of a coherent welfare programme.
The Swedish left created a lasting welfare settlement in the 1930s due its sustained commitment to and advancement of a new lucid body of reform. In contrast the British left was unable to achieve this same goal as it was did not develop an alternative to economic orthodoxy until the Beveridge Report in the 1940s. However, the augmentation of a new welfare programme was not the only obstacle; arguably a more crucial factor was the extent of unification or division within the respective left-wing movements.
The left were able to implement their welfare and economic programme as they presented the most united and strongest force in Swedish politics in the 1930s. Sweden in the 1920s was dominated by bourgeois and economic liberalism; however as Higgins (1987) argues by late 1930 the balance of class power had shifted in favour of the labour movement. The support of the trade unions and the new crisis programme secured the Social Democrats victory in the 1932 election but not a majority in parliament. The willingness of the Swedish left to make coalitions and concessions with the 1933 Crisis Agreement and the 1938 Basic agreement ensured the survival and maintenance of its welfare settlement. The left gained the crucial support of agricultural interests when the Social Democrats allied with the Agrarian Party unifying the worker and farmer lobbies. The Crisis Agreement was the accumulation of the Social Democrats strategy of courting the farmer vote and the shift of the Agrarian League from pro-conservative to an alliance with socialists. The left made a great effort to show the workers and farmers that they were dependent on each others purchasing power and 'to illustrate the connection between the agricultural crisis and unemployment within industry' (Koblik, 1975:267). The Social Democrats were willing to compromise over the agricultural question giving concessions that ensured the crucial support of the agricultural sphere. Therefore the backing of the Agrarian party gave the left a majority in parliament ensuring the implementation and maintenance of a lasting welfare settlement.
Moreover, the Basic Agreement involving the Swedish Employers Association (SAF) and the LO accorded new rules for industrial conflict leaving the Swedish left in a stronger position to implement their reforms. This agreement resulted in labour peace as it 'made the Swedish labour market one of the worlds calmest' (Koblik, 1975:277). There were many abortive attempts in the 1920s to improve labour relations but it was the 'era of social democracy (that) provided the next impetus' (Johnson, 1962:170) and indicated the changing attitude of labour and employer organisations. The left's electoral victory in 1932 aligned the LO closer to the government and made the SAF aware of the potential power of social democracy; thus making both sides of the industrial divide more willing to cooperate. As Johnson (1962) argues the questions of labour peace are part of larger questions surrounding disputes over economic interests, as such, labour peace essentially means lessened class conflict. The amelioration of industrial conflict and the alliance of farmers and workers tapered societal divisions; thus creating the conditions for the left to successfully create a lasting welfare settlement.
In contrast, the devastating splits and internal divides in the British left ensured it was unable to produce a lasting welfare settlement until it was finally reintegrated by the unifying spirit of wartime. The 1929 Labour government's minority in parliament meant it was heavily reliant on the support of the Conservatives and the Treasury thus the cabinet followed the economic orthodox response to the depression. However, this traditional monetary approach involving considerable unemployment cuts was an anathema to many within the labour movement; thus indicating the 'symbolic importance unemployment insurance expenditure had required' (Heclo, 1974:119). The TUC was firmly opposed to any cuts whatsoever and was advocating Keynesian reflationary policies; this division between the unions and labour drastically weakened the forces of the left. As Garside (1990) argues the government did not incorporate the TUC into the decision making process. Moreover, Prime Minister James Ramsey MacDonald and his supporters almost irreparably split the Labour Party and led to the downfall of their government in 1931 by following the Treasury's recommendations. Therefore in direct contrast to the Swedish left, the British left were divided and weak in the 1930s and unable to make advantageous coalitions; consequently they were unsuccessful in creating a lasting welfare settlement.
However, as Salter and Stevenson (1990) argue there was no great pressure for reform from British socialism as the depression left the working class unemployed disillusioned, isolated and apathetic; as 'the overwhelming majority... had no political convictions whatsoever' (Salter and Stevenson 1990:146). The NUWM and the Communist Party attempted to mobilize and politicize the unemployed working class in support for public works and more state intervention. Nonetheless there was never much pressure from the unemployed themselves for a more radical approach as the Depression 'blunted rather than sharpened the edge of social discontent' (Garside, 1990: 386). Therefore the divisions in the left within the Labour party; between the trade unions and labour and with the more radical Communist party significantly hindered left-wing pressure for the development of a lasting welfare settlement.
The weakness of the British left in the 1930s must be set against the ascendancy of bourgeois interests in shaping the government's response to the slump. The traditional dominance of economic liberalism benefited middle class and ruling elite interests by promoting the theory that unemployment is natural; thus these groups had a vested interested in upholding this economic orthodoxy. The dominant ideology held that Britain's wealth and empire were built on its laissez faire and free trade economic policies therefore the 'policy for the unemployed still betrayed the political and cultural heritage of the nineteenth century' (Whiteside, 1991:122). Even though reflationary economic theories existed; the crucial reason for the lack of reforming socio-economic change was the 'powerful influence which custom, convention and entrenched institutional opinion had upon the formulation of economic policy' (Garside, 1990: 398). Consequently, the sheer magnitude of middle class and ruling elite political support for the economic orthodoxy of the Bank of England and the Treasury; ensured the British left was unable to implement fundamental welfare reform.
Contrastingly, the 1930s in Sweden marked the breakdown of the old liberal economic order and commencement of the labour movement's dominance. The Swedish right-wing parties were irritated by the success of the Agrarian Party leading it to break away from the right; thus with the 1933 Crisis Agreement the 'bourgeois front finally dissolved' (Koblick, 1975:270). Therefore at the same time as the British right prevented the implementation of socio-economic reforms the Swedish right divided; under pressure from the united social democrats to create a lasting welfare settlement.
The predominance of the economically orthodox ruling elite in Britain however came to an end after the turmoil of the Second World War. The mid-1940s saw a revived, united and strengthened British left successfully defeat the Winston Churchill the "man who won the war" in an unprecedented electoral victory. This astounding achievement was primarily accomplished by the Labour party unconditional support of the Beveridge Report and its recommendations for significant social policy reform to produce a lasting welfare settlement. Although this was not the only factor as this electoral success was in a part a result of the unification and strengthening of the British left during the war. Glennerster (2000:10) argues the social legislation and welfare reform of 1944-1948 was part of a post war settlement or a 'temporary tacit agreement between the classes'. He argues it represented the classic compromise with the ruling class giving the labour movement significant social rights in exchange for the left not pressing for more radical change. The British left proved their reliability, respectability and dynamism in government during the second world as they were almost totally responsible for domestic affairs. Labour played a strong role in war victory, as such, the left was able to gain concessions from capital and unite public support around the necessity for a lasting post war welfare settlement.
The increased power and influence of the TUC coupled with their closer ties to the Labour Party and government ensured a more unified and substantial left was able to implement significant welfare reforms. The "people" were held to have won the war thus the important contributions of organised workers and their affiliates the trade unions were recognised and applauded. Consequently the events of the Second World War 'transformed the TUC into more of an Estate of the Realm than any other time in it history' (Taylor, 2000: 76). The Walter Citrine leadership of the TUC in alliance with Ernst Bevin, the Labour minister, strengthen and united the trade union movement. Moreover, it reinforced the TUC and Labour's historically significant association and created an integrated, respected and popular British left-wing. Thus the alliance of the TUC and the revived political left meant the British left was able to succeed in creating a lasting welfare settlement without a coalition with other interest groups.
Nonetheless the important welfare reform of the 1940s cannot solely be attributed to pressure from the left; arguably it was the British right that ensured the implementation of lasting socio-economic changes when it accepted Keynesian economic management. As Peter Baldwin argues (1990: 109), the 'left may have done the pushing but the door was ajar' suggesting that Labour was only able to create the welfare state with the support of the Conservative party and their associates. Bourgeois parties had a direct and positive self-interest for reform as the main effect of the post war welfare state would be providing free social services to the middle classes. British rightist support was a decisive factor as whenever 'those in positions of power opposed social action (they)... largely had their way' (Thane, 1996: 247). The construction of a national minimum of subsistence benefits, as recommended by Beveridge, was never fully implemented as it was opposed by the upholders of the last vestiges of classical economic thought. Moreover, the British Medical Association only allowed the creation of the National Health Service as Aneurin Bevan the health minister 'choked their mouths with gold' (Navarro 1978:23). The parties of the centre and right had an unprecedented association with reform as the pos war legislation 'sprang not solely or even primarily from the strength of the left' (Baldwin, 1990:112). Therefore the lasting welfare settlement created in Britain in the 1940s was successfully formed by the left only with the support and input of right-wing parties and bourgeois interests.
In conclusion, the Swedish left succeeded in creating a lasting welfare settlement in the 1930s as it was a united force in coalition with other groups with a radically new and popular programme of reform. The Social Democrats already had a coherent policy of significant social and economic restructuring thus profound reform was possible in Sweden. Moreover, the Swedish left skilful unification of their own interests with other groups created labour peace and ensured support for their reforms; thus dissolving conflict over welfare policy adaptations. In contrast, Britain in the 1930s was dominated by powerful ruling elite that upheld the vitality of the economic liberal tradition to ascendancy of their own interests. The left in Britain was unable to maintain its tentative hold on government after the devastation of the Depression; thus it was too weakened to produce an alternative welfare plan. Moreover, there was arguably little pressure for reform as the unemployed were too demoralised, the far left were too marginal and the radical economists too isolated to provide an alternative vision of British society. Significant socio-economic reform was only achieved in Britain after World War Two; when the stable running of society and the economy was achieved through greater state intervention and monetary planning. The Second World War produced a desire for change that was hard to ignore by even the most steadfastly orthodox. The leftist influence on the Beveridge Report is palpable and led to the creation of a popular and consistent welfare reform programme over ten years after this settlement was accepted in Sweden. After the war the revived and unified British left won a landslide victory as they were established as a legitimate and formidable political force with a radical programme of welfare reform. However, the implementation of the a lasting welfare settlement in Britain in the 1940s cannot be regarded as a prize of the left; as it was the congruence of the both left, right and public opinion that led to the important reforms. Therefore the amalgamation of several factors leads to a country adopting a lasting welfare settlement; the most important of these is a unified left with at least some support from the right and a coherent and popular programme of reforms.