The Great Depression had a devastating impact on the socio-economic and political landscape across Europe and America. The countries hit hardest by this economic catastrophe were Germany and America as both countries had experienced similar prosperity and growth in the 1920s. Thus it was in these countries where long-standing socio-political and economic relationships were shook to their foundations; resulting in the installation of two new but very different regimes. This essay compares the social policies of Hitler's Nazi government with the New Deal policies of Roosevelt's Democratic government from 1932 to 1937. There are obvious fundamental differences between these two administrations as they emerged from countries with very different historical cultural development. Moreover they represented opposing ideologies and political systems with the Hitler destroying and Roosevelt upholding democratic institutions. However, prevailing historical accounts have highlighted strikingly similarities between the New Deal and Nazi socio-economic policies (Garraty 1973). They both had the same motivations behind their policies to achieve social cohesion and build a national community in face a devastating crisis; as Garraty (1973:432) argues they both called for the 'nationalistic mobilisation of society'. Both were able to implement progressive "leftist" socio-economic reforms while maintaining conservative facades; only possible through the promotion of nationalism.
This essay however, challenges this dominant notion by presenting significant and even fundamental differences between Hitler and Roosevelt's social policies. The most crucial difference was that the Nazi's implemented radical, permanent and unorthodox socio-economic changes; whereas Roosevelt's government did not go as far with the installation of only limited, temporary social legislation. Germany achieved economic recovery and full employment by 1936 prior to its rearmament programmes; contrastingly the Americans only reached recovery after it transformed into a war economy. Thus the social policies of the Nazi and the Democrats in the 1930s were similar in kind but differed in extent and effect. Moreover, Germany's far-reaching reforms were only possible under a totalitarian regime with the government having total control over the economy and destroying all autonomous groups. Whereas American's incomplete, lacklustre policies were restricted by the nature of democratic government; with its reliance on powerful vested interests and lobbies particularly the business community and workers but also all voters and partially autonomous states. Therefore the Nazi and New Deal social policies substantially differed as American's democratic principles ensured Roosevelt's government was unable to implement the far-reaching, more radical reforms that would have dragged the country out of depression; in contrast Hitler was able to use his unchallenged power to take total control over the economy. In order to explore these differences, this essay will examine the extent to which the Nazi went further than Roosevelt in various social policies including: programmes to deal with mass unemployment, attempts to stimulate industrial recovery and social welfare and social insurance reforms. Moreover, relations in both countries between the state and the trade union movement and the state and business community will be explored to examine the restrictions placed on democratic governments by economic interest groups.
The major difference between Nazi and New Deal social policies was the extent to which the Hitler's reforms went further than Roosevelt's; achieving economic recovery far earlier than in America. Practically full employment existed in Germany in 1936 whereas the United States never approached this until the economy shifted to all-out war production. The Nazi cured their economic ills quicker as they reduced unemployment and stimulated industrial production faster. Moreover they used more unorthodox economic policies and had far greater state intervention into the economy; the totalitarian system making it much easier to mobilise society. The crucial question is why Germany recovered so quickly and fully in comparison to America. The main reason for this was the Nazi government's high level of government expenditure and the massive public investment policies designed to directly and indirectly stimulate demand. As R.J Overy (1996:35) argues the 'Nazi government went much further than expected' financing their policies by the unorthodox economic policies of deficit financing and high tax; thereby significantly Hitler went much further than Roosevelt's administration dared to. The Nazi's from 1933 onwards gradually developed a policy of total control over the economy; with momentous power over trade, finance, investment, state and business relations and relations between managers and labour. The 'price to pay' (Overy 1996:37) for this successful economic recovery was that the growth of state spending and the extension of controls were a by-product of the totalitarian political system. Therefore there was an essential 'difference between the liberal recovery policies such as those in Britain and America which were designed to stimulate... recovery which would then become self-sustaining and reduce the need for state intervention, and those of the Nazi regime'. Roosevelt and his democratic administration implemented temporary and emergency interventionist measures whereas the Nazi's executed radical social policies to ensure a permanent grasp over the economy; made possible only by the totalitarian nature of the state.
In order to deal with the devastation of mass unemployment both Hitler and Roosevelt created new and unprecedented public works programmes. Moreover, both instigated similar youth work camps in the countryside organised on semi-military lines with the goal of greater social cohesion and social order by keeping the young off the streets. As Garraty (1973:911) argues the American Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) like its German equivalent 'served paramilitary and patriotic functions not essential to its announced purpose'. However, while it was only in 1935 that public works became important in American with Roosevelt ever worried about wasteful and unnecessary public spending; 'the Germans on the other hand immediately launched an all-out assault on unemployment' (Garraty 1973:909) with a massive programme of public works. The Germans created direct employment through increased government expenditure on labour intensive schemes of repair, maintenance and construction achieving full employment by 1936. Roosevelt and his followers were determine to maintain the distinction between the principles of welfare relief and social security thus their social policies 'did not culminate in... government guarantees to pursue full employment through public action' (Skocpal in Esping-Anderson, 1987:43). In America there was not enough emphasis on public works even by the end of the 1930s; in 1939 public works programmes covered only three million out of ten million unemployed and the CCC only employed 0.8 million young Americans (Amenta and Skocpal in Weir et al 1988). American 'spending on these programmes was not guided by economic objectives' (Weir 1988:68) but on political objectives thus investment in these schemes was not to relieve unemployment but to ensure political support. As the 1930s continued it became increasingly 'difficult to assemble a majority in support of increased government spending and public employment' (Weir 1988:74) as Congress and conservative interests turned against it; thereby in America socio-economic policies were dictated by political factions more than economic considerations. As Piven and Cloward argue (1979:83) the new American public works programmes turned out to be 'far from equal to the magnitude of need, or indeed even to the magnitude of the President's promises'; moreover, they were far from equal to Nazi mobilisation.
The Nazi and the New Dealers pursued similar policies to stimulate industrial recovery with both adopting varieties of corporatist policy. Corporatism is the 'conservative archaic concept of socio-economic organisation... between socialism and capitalist plutocracy' (Garraty 1973:912). Capitalists and workers were meant to join together and eliminate competition, bring order, industrial peace and efficiency in industry. Both countries implemented government sponsored cartels to regulate output and production controls with price and wage manipulation. The same pattern existed in both America and Germany with systems of self-governing industrial codes and with both government policies being justified by "national emergency" propaganda. However 'in America the process went not nearly so far' (Garraty 1973:913) as the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) though initially welcomed by the business community was later restricted by this same group as it failed to stimulate the economy. In contrast, the industrial strategy in Germany was very successful in stimulating growth as the Nazi's created a 'private capital market' (Overy 1996:42) to ensure funds flowed where they wanted and to extend their formal control over the banking and capital structure. In both countries corporatist policies and greater state intervention into the economy faced opposition across the board and yet where Hitler saw the victory of his all powerful one-party state; Roosevelt's government had to concede to the interests of the capitalists. Garraty (1973:914) in presenting the similarities between Nazi and New Deal social policies argues 'the success or failure of American and German efforts to stimulate industrial recovery is... not central to my argument'; however, this is critical as a major difference in the implementation of these reforms is that the Nazi's were the successful where the Democrats failed.
The Nazi and the New Dealers both reformed social insurance and social welfare; Germany had a long-standing tradition of centralized social reforms whereas in America new and unprecedented forms of relief and social security were introduced. Rimlinger (1987:45) argues few historians accept Piven and Cloward's thesis that welfare policies were primarily used as instruments of social control. However, he argues fascist Germany is the exception as the Nazi 'concept of social policy represented the full development of welfare policy as an instrument of social control' (Rimlinger 1987:47). In contrast Roosevelt's social policy was not so much an instrument of social control as though it was used to quell socialist feeling and to placate the masses; American policies in no way resemble the Nazi tyrannical grip over society. Hitler's regime dismissed thousands of social insurance employees replacing them with party activists and destroying the long established participation of worker and employer representatives; from 1934 onwards social insurance was distorted to serve Nazi goals. Furthermore, Gisela Bock (in Bridenthal et al 1984) argues the rigid Nazi ideology of racism and sexism in their social policy reinforced the social control the party developed over its subjects. The pro-family welfare policies oppressed women using the slogan 'Kinder, Kurche, Kirche' (children, kitchen, church) extolling and materially promoting motherhood and housework as the ideal role for pure German women. The policy of compulsory sterilization to exclude "unfavourable" women from childbearing was linked to the pro-family policies as 'Nazi pronatalism for desirable births and its antinatalism for undesirable ones were tightly connected' (Bock in Bridenthal et al 1984:276). This use of social control within Hitler's social policy programmes led onto the T4 euthanasia project that killed thousands of institution inmates and finally to the Holocaust. Theories of eugenics and similar euthanasia programmes existed in some states but schemes on the Nazi scale were unimaginable in 1930s democratic America. The extent of the racist and sexist social control in the ideology behind Nazi social policy far outweighs the social control aspect of Roosevelt's New Deal.
The American social welfare reforms culminating in the 1935 Social Security Act were moderate and restricted by various interests, for example, health insurance was 'politically impossible' (Orloff in Weir et al 1988:74) as the conservative American Medical Association significant influence opposed it. In America the government faced substantial obstacles to the national uniformity and the centralized administration of social insurance due to the 'inability of the New Deal social reform coalition... to overcome the deep resistance of congressional conservatives' (Orloff in Weir 1984:79). Therefore while the Nazi's used sinister and radical social policy initiatives to socially and racially control its population; the Americas were restricted by various interests when implementing simply moderate and restrained reforms.
This examination of the various social policy initiatives adopted by the Nazi and New Deal government's highlights that the major difference was the quick and efficient German economic recovery compared to the stabilisation of the American economy just before the war. Germany was able to recover due to the massive extension in public spending and state control over the economy only possible in a totalitarian regime. The original architects of the New Deal recognised the structural components of the crisis and advocated economic planning and more radical employment and social policies. The early 1930s saw great demands for more progressive public action providing a 'rare opportunity for reorganising nation and political institutions and forming new political alliances (Weir 1988:76). However, the government did not take advantage of this unique situation as the later thirties saw a 'bewildering movement of the president from a planning initiative to a reform initiative' (Bernstein 1987:185). Roosevelt's poor record of economic recovery was the result of the demise of the more progressive element of his policies and the 'failure of the planning apparatus to overcome the political opposition' (Bernstein 1987: 187). Thus the main differences between Nazi and New Deal social policy was that Hitler adopted radical and far-reaching solutions to the economic crisis; whereas Roosevelt only implemented temporary and moderate reforms.
The crucial question is why the Nazi were able to go so much further than the Democratic government in America. Garraty (1973:908) argues the political and ideological differences between the Nazi's and the New Dealers 'did not affect economic policy as much as might be expected'. However, the American democratic system ensured a sharing of power with various interest groups contributing to social policy; whereas the Nazi totalitarian system involved colossal repression resulting in almost total state dominance over all areas of society. In American in the 1930s big business and the workers movement had a massive influence over New Deal policy; contrastingly in Germany the Nazi gradually controlled the business element and successfully destroyed the trade unions. The fundamental difference here is that the Nazi used the threat of force and violent coercion to implement policies unhindered as the essence of a totalitarian regime means the suppression and subordination of all independent interest groups. When in America the government relied on the compliance of private interest groups as 'the political economic coalitions of the New Deal... go a long way towards explaining the successes and failures of New Deal recovery policy' (Bernstein 1987:193). For Overy (1996:38) political instability and pressure group politics are the main explanation for the problems of the Depression and they 'disappeared in the 1933-1938 period in the wake of the Nazi intention to stifle and oppress all opposition'. The direct opposite occurred in America where politics and socio-economic policy of the 1930s was 'driven by the interplay of sectoral dynamics' (Bernstein 1987:285). In America the requirements of political stability, that is, the managing of different interest groups interfered and hindered the economic recovery. Thus in America economic stabilisation or the relieving the masses of unemployed was sacrificed to maintain the political order and placate the capitalist class; in contrast to Germany where the dictatorial government imposed its will over and above all other interests.
In order to understand how these two countries managed the different interest groups firstly the relations between the workers, the business community and the state will be examined. Both leaders were hesitant towards the unions opposing the socialist element of the labour movement. However, while Hitler destroyed the German unions Roosevelt unwittingly enabled the American unions to increase their membership and influence. The Nazi replaced the trade unions with the German Labour Force (DAF) in May 1933 to indoctrinate all workers into the National Socialist mentality. The DAF was engaged in an attempt at the total immersion of the individual into the national community and could 'never have been established without repressive political terror and it certainly could not have continued to exist without the threat of terror' (Mason 1993:152). The "Strength through Joy" and "Beauty of Work" Nazi programmes of improving workplaces and providing entertainment activities were social control mechanisms 'taken with politics and ideology in mind rather than with a scientific view to the problems of labour organisation' (Mason, 1993:163). Therefore Nazi social policy involved the placation, oppression and destruction of workers voices and the union movement. Contrastingly the early New Deal was pro-labour as Roosevelt wanted to appeal to workers; the NIRA gave workers first-time opportunities for solidarity and crucially granted them the right to collectively bargain. Thus the NIRA ignited the aspirations of the workers and resulted in a massive increase in unionization and rise in the influence of the workers movement in America with the 'government conceding the strikers main demand - the right to organise' (Piven and Cloward 1979:173). Therefore when the German unions were being irreparably damaged and their influence on policy destroyed; the America unions enjoyed a period of power gaining social policy concessions from the government.
However, it was capitalist and big business interests that dominantly shaped Roosevelt's social policies. Unanimous support for relief measures in 1933 had evaporated by 1936 as the world of business was improving (though unemployment was not falling); as Piven and Cloward (1979:84) argue 'with the worst of the national crisis apparently passed, opposition to relief in all its forms was rising, especially in the business community'. Business attitudes towards the New Deal varied with economic conditions: in the early 1930s the worst of the crisis ensured high support for Roosevelt's interventionist policies but in the later thirties with the slight economic improvement the business world grew disaffected with state intervention into "their" sector. Thus the business community became the critical 'political economic factor that hindered the establishment of coherent and effective national economic policy' (Bernstein 1987:197). In direct contrast the Nazi though initially needing the support of big business to implement their socio-economic reforms were able to transcend this interest group by consolidating their hold over power in the later 1930s. By 1936 control over the whole economy was in state hands as the Third Reich 'set about reducing the autonomy of the economic elite and subordinating it to the interests of the Nazi state' (Overy 1996:54). When they could industrial leaders ignored the political instructions and used cartel solidarity to obstruct Nazi bureaucrats but ultimately were 'compelled to accept them under threat of force' (Overy 1996:58). Therefore where the American business interest was able to dominate the social policy arena in the late 1930s; the Nazi party in the same period eliminated all autonomous groups ensuring its stranglehold over the German economy. Paradoxically the American Unions had more power and influence but it was the Nazi's who did more for the workers in terms of employment due to the ascendancy of capitalist power under Roosevelt.
In conclusion, the social policies of Germany and American in the 1930s display certain striking similarities in that they both pursued nationalistic social cohesion through unprecedented interventionist and progressive reforms. However, the major difference between the Nazi and New Deal social initiatives is that the Germans were crucially able to implement unorthodox and far-reaching reforms; whereas the American government were restricted to temporary moderate measures. The Nazi's more radical reforms ensured they achieved economic stability by 1936; in contrast Roosevelt's more static policies meant the America only fully recovered from the Depression after the implementation of a war economy. The nature of the totalitarian system enabled the Nazi to take total control of the economy and instigate drastic social policy changes by eliminating all opposition. Max Weber (1947) famously defined the state as the monopoly on the legitimate use of violence; Nazi Germany is the most extreme case of this with all social policy measures bolstered by the threat of brutal coercion. The Roosevelt government in contrast was unable and unwilling to employ the more major change necessary to drag America out of the Depression; as it was reliant on various influential interests groups most importantly the ascendant business community. The central policy measures of the New Deal 'reflect Roosevelt's preoccupation with... appeasing business interests' (Weir 1988:157) and the limited nature of these reforms were a direct result of the opposition of the economic elite. Therefore contrary to Garraty's (1973) claim, it was the fundamental political and ideological differences between these two regimes that ensured the extent and success of their social policies reforms were essentially poles apart.