International Humanitarian Law (IHL), or the laws of war (jus in bello), is the legal regime which encompasses the definition and the limitation of what is permissible in the conduct of armed conflicts and the protection and responsibilities of the persons involved in the conflict. It is codified in the four 1949 Geneva Conventions, the 1977 and 2005 Additional Protocols.
The phenomenon of terrorism appeared centuries ago in the form of state terrorism (the regime of Terror established under the Convention by Robespierre during the 18 th century French Revolution; the terrorist policy of the Proletarian state) but it developed against the state during the 20 th century. Let's consider the synthetic definition Gilbert Guillaume gives of it:
This definition is currently accepted and has been used by the international community to depict the acts of violence which occurred on 9/11/01 in New York, 12/10/02 in Bali, 11/03/04 in Madrid, 7/7/05 in London, and 11/07/06 in Bombay. Though, a legal definition has never been given in any legal international instrument.
These events enact the recent development of non-state transnational armed actors and challenge the traditional legal apprehension of warfare and armed conflicts.
A new type of war has emerged: the asymmetric war opposes a state and a group of private actors. The legal status of the actors of terrorism as an asymmetric war is the focus of this report. Do the actors of an asymmetric conflict observe the limitations on the means and methods of warfare set by the law of war? If not, are they entitled to the protection of IHL rules? Do legal principles apply to the perpetrators of unlawful acts of war? What are their rights and responsibilities?
As IHL is done by and for the states, the question of the legitimacy, if any, of the use of force by non-state actors is highly controversial. Indeed, what are the consequences of the lack of protection and responsibility of transnational non-state groups involved in an armed conflict with a state? How might an increase of this protection change the outcome of the war?
Since only states can be parties in the Geneva Conventions, IHL does not apply to conflicts between a state and a terrorist group.
The necessity of a legal and general definition must be based on the reduction of the concept of terrorism to necessary and sufficient conditions and variables. But then, one might wonder what the use and the implications of such a definition are when it clearly appears that a consensus is internationally reached upon the qualification of the events from New York to Bombay as terrorist acts.
The first section of this report will consider the controversial and ambiguous aspects of the phenomenon of terrorism. The second section will focus on the problems raised by the Guantanamo Bay detention centre. The last section will explore the possibilities and difficulties of the codification of the concept of terrorism and will raise the crucial critical question of its potential consequence on the relation between IHL and Human Rights law.
Terrorism is a concept at the centre of our political life. It is a phenomenon which shapes and informs the global politics of security, cooperation and relations between cultures. It is maybe not advisable that the complex reality of such a phenomenon should be reduced to a single word definition. It might be an error in the process of fighting, preventing and understanding such acts of violence, to wish to apply necessary and sufficient conditions and variables to this concept, and to delimitate it in an abstract category. In the same way, the most serious vigilance must be attached to the acts of the states engaged in the 'War on Terror'. The rule of law cannot be transgressed in the name of the necessity to fight a terrorist threat. The perpetrators of the most horrendous crimes still have human rights. This is the only condition that permits us to judge over them and that keeps the realm of democracy.
The attempts to create a new legal category for terrorism and terrorists rather revealed the complexity of the notion than gave a definite answer to the question. The ambiguity and subjectivity of the concept of terrorism make it impossible to find one example without its counter-example. Indeed all the criteria which qualify an act of terrorism do not apply all at the same time to each act of terrorism. This kind of concept does not fit in a legal perspective. I believe, with Fletcher, that a political intuition, respectful of the rule of law as well as International Human Rights Law, is more relevant than a legal definition. Moreover, situations like the detention of people in Guantanamo Bay are not likely to deter any potential terrorist from expressing his or her resentment through spectacular acts of violence. Politicians must be aware of the multi-faceted phenomenon of terrorism and develop policies aiming at reducing its causes and at prosecuting the perpetrators of acts of violence.
A reflection must be lead about the application of legal and abstract formulations in reality.