Justice is a contentious subject which has troubled philosophers throughout time. This essay will not be a study on the theories of justice, rather it will focus primarily on the practice of law and it's relation to justice. Therefore for the purpose of this essay I have decided to define justice in two ways: justice as truth and justice as fairness.
As it is such a vast subject area, I have decided to limit the practice of law in order to provide sufficiently detailed analysis. For the purposes of this essay I shall confine myself to the topic of evaluating the adversarial trial and whether it is conducive to supporting justice. I have chosen to do so as the adversarial trial is the most high profile and recognisable practice of law in England today. From personal experience when I tell people I'm a law student they immediately picture a criminal adversarial trial, demonstrating the importance of the adversarial trial with regards to public opinion and thus the necessity for constant academic evaluation.
I shall briefly describe the content of the adversarial trial and individually examine three of its defining features; witnesses, judge and jury and advocacy before concluding whether the adversarial system is capable of supporting justice.
In England the adversarial trial can be split into two distinct categories of civil and criminal. The two forms are very similar, the most significant difference being that in a civil case the judge (or bench) is the decision maker, whereas in a criminal trial this is the role of the jury, with the judge taking on the role of the adjudicator of the proceedings. I have decided to focus primarily on the criminal adversarial system due to the interesting questions posed by the relationship and roles of judge and jury.
The adversarial trial has been defined as "...... a dispute between two sides in a position of theoretical equality before a court which must decide the outcome of the contest." Within this contest the prosecution act on behalf of the state competing against the defence with the judge acting as adjudicator and the jury as decision maker. The prosecution bear the evidential burden of adducing evidence to prove the elements of the crime alleged and satisfying the burden of proof "beyond a reasonable doubt." Evidence is adduced through oral examination, subject to the rules of evidence and controlled by the impartial judge who is also responsible for directing the jury. The role of the jury is to analyse and interpret the evidence before them and come to a valid conclusion as to whether the defendant should be convicted or acquitted.
The adversarial trial has come under much criticism from commentators questioning its conduciveness to discovering the truth and producing reliable evidence and questioning the influence of advocacy and the treatment of witnesses. I shall examine and respond to these criticisms through analysing each aspect in turn and determining its relevance to justice.
Having analysed the adversarial trial there appears to be no clear answer as to whether it supports justice. In many ways it appears that some of the basic foundations of the adversarial process are contradictory to the principles of justice; the treatment of witnesses, the reliability of evidence and the influence of advocacy.
It has been suggested that the need for truth in litigation is merely a factor and more important is acceptability and the perception of fairness. Although this may appear irrational in many ways it does make a lot of sense. The adversarial trial has been relied upon for centuries and in reality there is little real alternative in England.
The adversarial trial has the acceptability required and although it undoubtedly has some weaknesses, it is capable of supporting justice. However it must be recognised that the system is far from perfect and improvements must be made to allow the support of justice to continue in the future.