The common law has long been thought of as an unchanging body of common sense and reasoning fundamental to the heritage of English people. The common law is the foundation of the English legal system, described by Sir Edward Cooke as "a maxim of policy, and trial by experience" and as having been "refined and perfected by the wisest men in former succession of ages". Sir John Davies wrote that "the customary law of England.... Doth far excel our written laws." Therefore it can be seen that the primacy of the common law is of fundamental importance.
The common has developed from its earliest origins of the Druids, the introduction of written laws from the Anglo-Saxons and the expansion and modification of the Norman invasion. The common law came under threat from the civil law embodiment of the Corpus Civilis Iuris of the Emperor Justinian and the revival of Roman law. During the sixteenth and seventeenth century the legitimacy of the common law was in direct conflict with the imperialist claims of the King, escalating during the rule of Charles I; ultimately leading to civil war, the execution of the King and the effective creation of the English constitution as we know it today.
Throughout the development of the common law it has undoubtedly been subjected to numerous influences and theologies affecting its direction and development. One of the most influential is of course the Judaeo-Christian theology, an emanation of the natural law theory, its significant influence resulted in the words of William Dugdale, that "the Common Laws of England are grounded upon the Law of God". In order to determine the importance of the Judaeo-Christian theology I shall examine its influence upon the development of the common law and the secular legal profession, in particular focusing upon its period of greatest influence and importance during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
In order to create a more accurate representation of its importance, I shall also undertake a comparative analysis with two other importance influences upon the common law. Firstly the classical Graeco-Roman theology, which arguably influenced the development of the common law in challenging the imperium of the Tudor monarchs and became a basis for the legitimacy of the modern secular legal profession. Secondly I shall also analyse the influence of the symbolic nature of the common law, that its legitimacy is borne from its antiquity and history and its utopic nature. In undertaking these comparative analyses I hope to discover the true contextual importance of Judaeo-Christian theology.
Judaeo-Christian theology is the basic principle of the indivisibility of law and God. Writers during the early modern period aligned the English law with God, Fulbecke stating "where God is not there is no truth, there is no light, there is no Lawe" thus demonstrating the English constitutions indivisibility of divine law and common law.
The Act of Supremacy in 1534 was one of the most fundamental influences upon the common law of England. One effect of the reformation was to abolish the ecclesiastical courts, removing the opportunity of appeal to the Pope. Many common lawyers advocated for the abolition of the church courts at the same time, however this would have required a fusion of canon law and Common law, which was never a feasible proposition.
The Judaeo-Christian influence upon the common law can clearly be seen through the practices at the Inns of Court. The Courts symbolic eating rituals and oratory nature were likened to those of monastic origins. The order of dining was described to be "the order of a lawful world, a symbolic order in which Justice, Rule and Law are to be understood to be expressed together through culinary measures, victuals and wine". During dining members would take communion, further aligning the Judaeo-Christian theology and the practice of law. These rituals became fundamental to the teaching of law and legal practice.
In essence the relationship between the Inns of Court and the Judeao-Christian theology was the defining influence upon the common law during the sixteenth and seventeenth century.
The Act of Supremacy in 1534 resulting in the emancipation of England from the jurisdiction of Rome fundamentally altered the legal and political culture of England. The newly created imperial power of the King created a division between common law and the monarchy; both vying for legitimacy and supremacy. Henry represented himself as Imago Dei
 and adopted the European jurisprudential stance, quod principi plaucit vigorem legish habet (that which pleases the prince has the force of law), in direct opposition to the common law maxim lex facit regem (Law makes the King).
This became an issue of great conflict for the Judaeo-Christian theorists, two competing bodies fighting for divine legitimacy. The failure of natural law to deal with the resultant conflict with the imperium of the King was a significant theme within Titus Andronicus. Following the impact of the Act of Supremacy and increase in Henry's prerogative power forced common lawyers to consider other sources of legitimacy, arguably giving rise to the influence of the Graeco-Roman tradition which I shall deal with shortly. However it would be incorrect to argue that the common law abandoned all Judaeo-Christian influences as this was not the case.
During the rule of Charles I common lawyers continued to oppose the concept of the "intrinsical" prerogative of the King, Coke stating that "it is an act of right, not of grace, that we stand upon". Charles I continued to be at odds with the common law and during his Personal Rule intervened numerous times as to the regulation of the Inns of Court. The outbreak of civil war permanently altered the nature of legal education within the Inns, its role undermined by the rule of Charles I. Following his execution in 1649 a new government was established under Cromwell in the name of Judeao-Christian theology, although its authoritarian nature, isolated those common law, JudeaoChristian scholars from positions of influence.
In the political context of the Act of supremacy, it became necessary for the common law to adopt an opposing source of legitimacy in opposition of the monarch. The common law adopted two major theologies in its fight for supremacy; that of the Graceo-Roman theology, based upon community and citizenship and that of the historical supremacy of common law. I shall examine both of these in relation to their impact upon the development of common law and the secular legal profession.
When assessing the development of the common law and the origins of the secular legal profession, it seems clear that the modern constitution as we know it was influenced by a combination of all of these factors. There can be no doubting that the Judaeo-Christian theology had a hugely significant impact upon the development of the early common law. The Judaeo Christian theology provided the common law with its legitimacy and its influence is seen throughout the early ecclesiastical courts and in the teachings at the Inns of Court. The Judeao-Christian theology was fundamental to developing the common law through the teaching at the Inns of Court and provided common lawyers with a theoretical basis to defend the common law against the imperium of the King.
Similarly the Graeco-Roman Tradition allowed common lawyers to rely upon an alternative source of legitimacy to battle the Kings prerogative powers. Although such a belief appears to be contradictory to the indivisibility of God and law, many common lawyers believed in the Coalescence of the two theologies, creating a divine based law, advocating ideals of citizenship and the welfare of the state.
Finally there is the importance of the image and antiquity of common law. In analysing these three influences a common theme arises of a protection of the common law, rather than a development. All three theologies sought to protect the common law from the imperium of the King and the tyrannical rule of the Commonwealth and Protectorate. The Judeao-Christian influences within the Inns of Court helped to develop the common law through oratory, teaching and dining and created a body of lawyers and a utopian state.
When deciding upon which was the most important influence, the historical antiquity of the common law is surely the most deserving. The significance of the immemorial nature of the common law is not a tangible matter, but a utopic ideal. In creating a legitimacy and faith in the law so strong, as demonstrated by the fervent support from the likes of Fortescue and Coke this has created a legitimacy and a legacy which one can only hope will last forever.