Economists have always expected the "convergence" of national productivity levels. The theoretical logic behind this belief is powerful. The higher per capita income in western countries is based on its applications of the waste stock of industrial and administrative technology of the Industrial Revolution.
This stock is open to all: modern technology is a 'public good'. The benefits of tapping this technology and knowledge are great, and thus nations will strive to accumulate modern technology and their incomes will converge to those of industrial nations.
This hypothesis is known as 'convergence hypothesis' and predicts that the backward economy has a potential for vast advancement and to 'catch up'.
So essentially we need to ask the question: Do poorer countries (after accumulating a knowledge base and technology) grow faster than richer ones?
The aim of this essay is to through the techniques of econometric try and answer this very question. I will first elaborate on the theory behind convergence, then extend the theory to analyze to seminal papers on the subject by Baumol (1986) and De Long respectively. In the next section, I will 'build' my own model and apply it the most relevant and exhaustive data available from the Penn World Table and compare it with the Baumol's and De Long's model. I will go on to analyze my results and conclude with possible policy suggestions to induce convergence and growth where missing.
The main reason why we might expect the convergence phenomena to take place is because of the Solow Model. The model predicts that countries will converge to their balanced growth paths where growth of output per worker is solely determined by the rate of technological progress. Thus to the extent that differences in output per worker will be due to countries being at different points relative to their growth paths. Thus, one would expect poorer countries to catch up with the rich ones. Solow also argues that the rate of return on capital is lower in countries with higher capital stock per capita. Hence as a result of arbitrage, capital will flow from the rich to the poorer countries. This capital accumulation will assist the countries to converge. Additionally, there might be disparity in the extent of knowledge between rich and poor countries which would result in turn result in richer countries growing faster than the poorer ones. However, as poorer countries gain access to new technology, they will soon be able to catch up with the richer countries and this may also assist in convergence.
Using a wider sample of data for the more recent period of economic history, I will attempt to analyse how, in today's world, De Long's findings are more accurate than Baumol's. Specifically, this will be done by looking at a data set consisting of GDP per capita for 64 different countries from the years 1960 to 2000. (See Appendix I)
For analysis, I will divide the 64 different countries into two groups:
and show that on examining the two groups of countries, one will find a greater degree of convergence among developed countries than among emerging countries. Which is in agreement with De Long's conclusion. We use annual per capita GDP because standard of living is given by the evolution of output per capita rather than the numbers of total output. Secondly when comparing countries with different populations, output numbers must be adjusted to take into account these differences in population size. One must also note that the dependant and the independent variables have been expressed in logs to reduce the value of the coefficients, which aids economic interpretation.
Growth in output per capita from the year 1960-2000 will be regressed on a constant and GDP per capita in 1960 i.e. initial income.
The variables and coefficients above have exactly the same meaning and interpretation as in Baumol's Model.
Initially for the purpose of comparison, I look at the same countries as Baumol and De Long did but looks at years 1960-2000 instead of years 1870-1979.
From the table above we can see that the coefficient of initial income is -0.7698, (i.e. a convergence of 76%) which is not close to Baumol's coefficient of -0.995 (i.e. a convergence of 99.5%) considering that data for the same 16 countries was looked at. Thus, convergence is not as high as Baumol estimated but is closer to De Long's estimation.
Additionally, from the previous table, the absolute value of the t statistic is 3.012, thus the null must be rejected which implies that the coefficient is significant at the 5% level.
Moreover, looking at the F statistic value, we can further conclude that the coefficient is in fact significant.
Finally, The R 2 value is 0.80, indicating that the 80% of the data is explained by log of the initial level of output per capita. (See Appendix II)
Looking at the same countries that De Long looked at, the coefficient in the table above is - 0.508, which is close to the coefficient that De Long got in 1988 (-0.566) after he took a sample correction of Baumol's list of countries. Thus a 1% change in initial output per capita will affect ouput per capita negatively by 50.8% in the subsequent years. This indicates a convergence of 50.8%
Moreover, looking at the t statistic and the F test value we can conclude that the coefficient is significant at the 5% level.
The R 2 value here is 0.41, which is lower than what De Long originally got. This may be excused, as a low R-squared value is common in cross section analysis, specially in this case, where data only for the last 41 years was available whereas De Long had examined data over 100 years. (See Appendix III)
Therefore applying Baumol and De Long to an extended list of 64 countries from 1960-2000 leads us to conclude that the data conforms with De Long to a larger extent and therefore shows a 'slower' convergence than Baumol estimated.
Having applied both Baumol and De Long's approaches to my data, I now analyze the data according to my own model and method.
Looking at 26 developed countries and running the regression: growth in output per capita, upon a constant and initial level of output per capita, the equation is as follows:
The table above shows us that the coefficient is - 0.52, so, a 1% change in initial output per capita will affect per capita GDP negatively by 52% in the subsequent years. This indicates a convergence of 52% which is closer to moderate convergence estimated by De long (after sample correction) as opposed to the almost perfect convergence estimated by Baumol.
The t statistic and the F statistic value conform that the coefficient is significant at the 5% level.
Additionally, R 2 value is 0.476 indicating that 47% of the data is explained by log of the initial level of output per capita. A higher level of R 2 could have been reached by expanding the duration under study. However, there were no historical data available. Generally 47% is a reasonable R 2 when conducting cross-sectional analysis.
Now we need to carry out a few tests to check for the viability and soundness of our model. I first test to see if the residuals indicate heteroskedasticity.
In the graph above we can see the residual plotted against the dependent variable and shows random variance in residuals, thus indicating that there is no heteroskedasticity.
However, I also check for heteroskedasticity using White's Heteroskedasticity test:
From this, we can see that there is a slight problem of heteroskedasticity. We can say this because the null hypothesis is that there is no heteroskedasticity, and by looking at the F statistic value, and the corresponding P value we can reject the null at both the 1% and at the 5% levels. Thus, there is a problem of heteroskedasticity. (We must note that since the sample size is small at 26, a more reliable measure of heteroskedasticity is to look at the F-Statistic value and not the Obs*R-squared value.)
Thus, even though the residual plot doesn't show that there is a problem of heteroskedasticity, on carrying out the White's Heteroskedasticity Test we can see that there is a problem of heteroskedasticity, but to a very marginal extent.
This problem of heteroskedasticity is usually corrected by method of weighted least squares. However, since the form of heteroskedasticity is not known, it may not be possible to obtain efficient estimates of the parameters using weighted least squares. OLS provides consistent parameter estimates in the presence of heteroskedasticity but the usual OLS standard errors here will be incorrect and should not be used for inference.
This problem of incorrect standard errors can be corrected and t-statistic vales can be fixed by the robust standard error method. On using this method, the table for developed countries now looks like:
The coefficient of initial income is still significant, but less significant than it was before as the p values have increased marginally and the absolute value of t-statistic has fallen with an increase in standard error values. In this way, the problem of heteroskedasticity has been accounted for but not corrected. Thus, the table above is now more accurate and reliable than the one before heteroskedasticity was detected.
After accounting for the problem of heteroskedasticity we can still see from the t statistic and the F values that the coefficient on the 1960 GDP per capita is significant at the 5% level.
In addition, I need to test for Normality of the residuals in the model. The following results cropped up when testing for normality:
Thus, we do not reject the null hypothesis of the residuals being normally distributed. This fact is further strengthened by the graph below:
Finally, since my model is based on Baumol and De Lonng's idea, it would be a wasteful exercise to check for any omitted relevant variable or incorrect functional form via the RESET test. Additionally, since this is a purely a cross sectional analysis in the absence of any time series, I do not need to check for serial correlation, stationarity or co-integration.
For developing countries, data for 38 emerging countries was looked at and growth in output per capita between 1960 and 2000 was regressed upon a constant and initial output levels and the following results were obtained:
The coefficient on initial output levels here is - 0.199 which means that a 1% increase in initial output level would result in a decrease in growth in output per capita by 19.9% in the subsequent years. Thus, the convergence in developing countries is much slower than the convergence in developed countries.Therefore, convergence among developing countries might be slow in the long run. The data in this project goes only as far behind as 41 years, if data for the last 150 years had been available, perhaps convergence would have been more apparent.
Therefore we have seen that the speed of convergence is much higher in developed economies as compared to developing and emerging economies.
So why is convergence more likely amongst developed countries rather than amongst developing countries, when Solow predicted otherwise.
One of the main reasons for this contradictory result is that, in the Solow Model it was assumed that all economies merely are at different points in the same balanced growth path and will eventually converge when they achieve the same steady state level of capital stock.
But this maybe far from reality as developing countries have a lower steady state in comparison with developed countries. Additionally, developed countries have a steady state level similar to the economic leaders and thus have a higher chance of converging faster with world economic leaders.
Now, there can be steady state differentials due to the fact that countries with lower incomes have a lower savings rate. Now the investment rate is determined by the savings rate and as a result less developed countries will tend towards a lower steady state
Another reason for the contradictory result could be the fact that population growth hampers growth of per capita GDP. Carrying out a regression, I find that a 1% increase in population growth would decrease the GDP growth by 0.57%. This explains why several countries, despite increased economic activity, don't have a high growth rate. I also find , that two emerging countries, India and Brazil who have different population levels but are at more or less at similar development paths have different growth in GDP per capita as well. (See Appendix VI))
In addition to above mentioned, there may be other factors hindering convergence: transfer of technology between developed and developing countries may take a long while due lack of infrastructure and technical know-how in the developing countries. Thus convergence may get delayed.
The 'Convergence Hypothesis' seems to hold strongly only for developed nations; developing countries seem to be crawling towards the path of convergence.
We have found that the problem of a high population growth rate tremendously hampers output growth and convergence. Hence policies that encourage a lower birth rate, such as education about contraception may be a solution. In India, such a policy was aggressively followed with success under the reign on Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. However, too low a birth rate is also not desirable as is witnessed from the experience of certain 'ageing' European countries.
Additionally, the saving rate is also vital in determining a nation's propensity to grow and converge. The Japanese 'growth miracle' from 1953-73 is a case in point for the massive advantages of a high savings rate.
Policy should therefore encourage the development of stable financial to institutions to encourage saving. Additionally, the most direct way for government to influence national saving is through public saving. It can increase public saving by following a 'contractionary' fiscal policy. However, if reducing the budget deficit via a tax rise, it must be careful as higher tax on saving and investment actually discourage savings.
Finally, a country can achieve high rates of growth by a careful restructuring of its social institutions. In doing so, it will be able to efficiently extract from the world pool of technology. For "the storehouse of modern technology is great" and nations would greatly benefit from tapping this vast accumulation.