Feminist theory provides a more comprehensive understanding of international relations than that provided by the established theories of Realism and Neo-realism. For feminist theory, the centre of the structure of international relations is the masculine, which limits "the play of the structure", as Derrida would put it, in such a way as to make the absence of the feminine seem natural, and the structure itself seem gender-neutral. While the realist and neo-realist theories accept the claim to gender-neutrality, made by the field of international relations, feminist theory focuses on determining the various processes that help to maintain the androcentric nature of the system. Having thus established the gendered structure of international relations, feminist theory aims at rectifying its male-bias by redefining the field's ontology and epistemologies, from feminine perspective(s).
It is through this identification and rectification of the androcentric nature of international relations that feminist theory enables a more critical understanding of the field than that provided by the "problem-solving theories" of Realism and Neo-realism, as Tickner labels them ( Tickner 1997, p.619).
Feminist theory believes that everything that is considered to be 'natural' is actually "concocted" by someone (Enloe 1990, p.3). Thus nothing is neutral or value-free. It is this belief in the socially constructed, and thus value-laden nature of the world that provokes feminists to question the claim to gender-neutrality, made by the structure of international relations.
Feminist theory's identification of a male-bias in the structure of international relations has crucial implications for the field. It necessitates the inclusion of women since the field needs to make a claim to "empirical accuracy and adequacy" (Peterson 1992, p.20-21). The inclusion of women into the field of international relations inevitably broadens the ontology of the field to include new levels of analysis, new actors and a redefinition of the key concepts of the field. I illustrate below how each of these rectifications made by feminist theory affords a more complex and complete understanding of international relations than that offered by the aforementioned established theories.
Feminists broaden the ontological field of international relations to include all sites at which these relations are constructed , negotiated and reconstructed. Thus not only the state and the inter-national (as opposed to international) system but also the personal is considered to be central to the study of international relations. Enloe illustrates this with the example of Betsy North and many other wives who tailor their marriages to allow their husbands to serve in the political system. They accept that they would be told only things that are " 'unclassifieds'" and accept a marriage of unequals. It is on such personal relations between diplomats and their wives that the safety of diplomatic secrets relies (Enloe, 1990, pp.10-11). Thus the personal constitutes a part of the base on which the edifice of the international stands, and by ensuring its inclusion, feminist theory allows a more accurate understanding of the field of international relations. This illustration also necessitates the inclusion of women in the list of actors, in the field of international relations; for it is because women consent to "confining notions of femininity" that men get privileged and are able to pursue their interests in the political and inter-national arena. (Enloe 1990, p.17).
Certain key concepts of international relations have also been redefined by feminist theory. The first amongst them is the concept of the state. While the abovementioned established theories consider the state to be a unitary actor, feminist theory visualises it rather as an "on-going process" which needs to be studied in relation to both the internal and external factors that shape it. Studying the state against such a complex background of socio-cultural, political and economic factors, affords a more adequate understanding of this key actor in international relations, than that provided by the theories where the state is "taken for granted"(Peterson 1992, pp.3-6). Another critique of the classical definition of the state is offered by Sylvester. She argues that "in the realist story man is, metaphorically fused to the state" and this "self-state" is obligated by a social contract to ensure the nation's survival in an anarchic inter-national system. Yet this "self-state" does not draw its identity from the "relational ties with the society under contract" but from similar self-states "floating" in the inter-national system---a clear result of the association of the state with the masculine which is opposed to the "relational" , as Hirschmann puts it (Sylvester 1992, p.161). Thus Sylvester shows that not only the international system but also the established theories explaining it are androcentric; thereby allowing only partial definitions of the field and its key actors and concepts.
In the realist and neo-realist theories of international relations a concept that is often associated with the state is that of security. However, feminist theory has redefined this association. In the words of Tickner, " [m]any IR feminists define security broadly in multidimensional and multilevel terms - as the diminution of all forms of violence, including physical, structural, and ecological" (Tickner 1997, p. 624). She also argues that the "hierarchical social relations, including gender relations, that have been hidden by realism's frequently depersonalised discourse" need to be brought to light if " a language of national security that speaks out of the multiple experiences of both men and women", needs to be constructed (Tickner 2004, p.100). Once again, thus, feminist theory rectifies the partial vision and concerns of aforementioned established theories, defining yet another concept of international relations in more all-inclusive and thus adequate terms.
The penultimate redefinition is of the concept of power. Power is the mechanism by which the international system is run. In the realist and neo-realist tradition power is defined as the ability to control and is restricted to the level of the state and the inter-national system (Keohane 1989, p.246). But in feminist theory power is seen as multi-faceted and gendered. Elshtain disagrees with the idea of power as a unitary concept. Instead she argues, that power can be both "potestas" and " potentia". She sees this lack of unity in the concept of power as possessing the potential for change; that is, the overhauling of "potestas" (coercive, organised masculine power) and the bringing to power of "potentia" (unorganised, feminine potential) (Elshtain 1994, pp. 354-6). Enloe too envisions power as multidimensional and argues that it "infuses all international relationships". She also argues that more power is exercised to maintain the international political system than classical theories of the field would have us believe. By rendering women invisible, several power relations that sustain the international political system, get masked too. Thus, for a comprehensive understanding of the functioning of international relations , says Enloe, women need to be made visible so that the horizontal and vertical power relations that enmesh the domestic, national as well as inter-national levels of the system, may become available for study. (Enloe 1990, pp.2-3 ). Keohane uses Hannah Arendt's concept of power as "the ability to act in concert" to argue that such redefinitions of power enable us to look at areas of world politics, where collective effort could be made to cope with common problems (Keohane 1989, p. 246). Thus, these reconceptualisations of power, from feminine perspective(s), afford not only a better understanding of the concept itself, but also allow this central mechanism of international relations to be put to more than the conventional uses of controlling and confining.
With the final redefinition --- of the concept of objectivity--- the argument moves to the aforementioned issue of epistemological redefinition. Objectivity is defined as a "perspectiveless gaze" by theories based on the positivist model. Feminists however see everything as socially constructed and refuse to accept this claim to impartiality, made in the positivist definition of objectivity (Peterson 1992, p.12). These false claims to objectivity-as-neutrality compel the aforementioned theories of international relations to adopt very dispassionate and disconnected approaches to the study of the subject. On the contrary, feminist theory proposes the method of conversation as the ideal way of studying one's subject. It discards the definition of objectivity- as- neutrality and instead defines objectivity on the lines of Evelyn Fox Keller's concept of " 'dynamic objectivity'" (Keohane 1989, pp.247-8; Murphy 1996, p.527)." 'Dynamic objectivity... uses consciousness of self in the interest of a more effective objectivity'" (Keller in Keohane 1989, pp.247-8). This conception of objectivity provides a more accurate approach to studying international relations, for it does not make faulty claims to neutrality but acknowledges its partial status. Thus, feminists believe in not an objectivity, but in objectivit(ies).
However, feminist theory does not stop at discarding objectivity for objectivit(ies) but also formulates ways for enmeshing (and not merging) these various objectivit(ies) to construct a more comprehensive view of international relations . Sylvester suggests the process of "empathetic cooperation", for instance. She defines it as:
Such a dialogue, between objectivit(ies) unaccustomed to conversing with each other, reveals unnoticed links in the network of international relations. These revelations create opportunities for a more nuanced and less naive comprehension of the field, as opposed to the fragmented and incoherent understanding afforded by aforementioned established theories of international relations.
While discussing "empathetic cooperation" Sylvester argues that the conversational processes involved act as "vehicle[s] of disturbance" that make it "more difficult to think of a fixed starting place for theory" (Sylvester 1994, p.317, 321). According to Enloe, this starting place for theory is practice. And since theory for her means critical theory, she says that every time a woman articulates a complaint as to how her government is trying to "control her fears, her hopes and her labours such a theory is being made." Thus, discarding the false dichotomy between theory and practice , that the aforementioned classical traditions uphold, feminist theory allows the field of international relations to become interesting and intelligible to not just men and the erudite but even to women and all those who actually live and sustain these international relations.
Thus, from the argument made above I conclude that feminist theory does offer a better understanding of international relations than that afforded by the theories of Realism and Neo-realism. This is because feminist theory is a critical theory and thus identifies the androcentric-bias in the nature of international relations. It is this identification that brings about the rigorous changes to the ontological space of and epistemological approaches to the field. The final point then being that it is in being a critical theory that feminist theory triumphs over Realism and Neo-realism in providing a sound comprehension of international relations.