In this paper I argue that the multiple processes of globalisation are regulated and appropriated by the system of transnational capitalism to achieve its stability and growth . The system has a hierarchical structure consisting of a core, semi-periphery and periphery. This hierarchy is essential to the existence and growth of the structure. To maintain this hierarchy the core tries to use every opportunity made available by the processes of globalisation to achieve its maximum growth. However, I apply the theories of dependency to establish that this increasing development of the core involves the increasing underdevelopment and dependency of the semi-periphery and periphery of the system. Thus, I argue that the core uses the processes and forces of globalisation not only to achieve its own growth, but also to ensure that the other two categories maintain their position in the hierarchy. It is in being so regulated by the core of the TCS that globalisation becomes a neo-colonial move.
The term globalisation refers to a multitude of processes that widen and deepen "the international flows of trade, capital, technology and information within a single integrated global market" (Petras and Veltmeyer 2001; p. 11). It is these processes of globalisation, which operate at various levels of the global world, that the Transnational Capitalist System (TCS) tries to regulate and appropriate to further its own ends.
At the core of this system are the transnational corporations (TNCs) and a whole network of national and international institutions that support the operations of these corporations (Sunkel and Fuenzalida, 1979, p. 71). The TCS also comprises of a semi-periphery which consists of the dominant classes of developing and underdeveloped countries, while the periphery of this system includes the remaining population of less-advantaged countries.
The TCS is based on the aim of profit-maximisation. To attain this aim the core must attain the highest level of growth possible, which necessarily results in the dependence of the semi-periphery and periphery on the core. This goal makes it essential for the core to regulate the dynamics of globalisation to ensure maximum advantage for itself. It is in being so regulated to achieve the ambitions of the core that globalisation becomes a neo-colonial move.
In this paper, I apply the perspective of dependency to analyse this TCS-regulated globalisation, for the former enables a complex understanding of the relations between the core, semi-periphery and periphery, which are essential to the regulation and appropriation of global processes by the TCS. Since dependency theory developed and enjoyed its hey-day in the late 1960s and 1970s, I have also discussed the relevance of using this approach to attain a critical understanding of the present phase of capitalism.
The argument is divided into four parts. The first part is an illustration of the role the TCS plays vis--vis globalisation, while in the second part the perspective of dependency has been applied to analyse this TCS-regulated globalisation. The third part of the argument examines the validity of the perspective of dependency, and is followed by the conclusion where I bring together the observations made in the three preceding sections, to prove the claim the title of this essay makes.
The processes of globalisation operate at multiple levels, and at each level the TCS tries to ensure that these processes serve to achieve its aim of profit-maximisation. In fact, components of the TCS operate at the transnational, international, national and socio-cultural levels to enable the achievement of this goal for the larger system. I illustrate this in the following discussion.
At the heart of the TCS are the TNCs. These are the central institutions because the most important decisions, with respect to what to produce, where in the world, etc., are taken by them (Sunkel and Fuenzalida 1979, p.71; Petras and Veltmeyer 2001; p.12). These corporations operate on the free market ideology. The processes of liberalisation that characterise the phase of globalisation, as well as the enhancement in technology and in modes of transport and communication, that globalisation enables, are made optimum use of by the TNCs to achieve the aforementioned goal. This is illustrated below.
Central to their strategy for achieving this agenda is the enhanced mobility of capital. This allows TNCs to move the processes of production to areas where the costs of production are much lower; thereby drawing these less developed areas into the structure of transnational capitalism, the implications of which I analyse in the second section of the argument. Capital mobility enables TNCs to bid for the lowest labour, social, and environmental costs, leading to a "downward levelling" of the minimum standards for the same (Brecher and Costello, 1994; pp.19-27). While these low protection standards enable the TNCs to earn big profits, the detrimental impact they have on the host country is obvious.
TNCs usually carry out the key technological processes in their home countries while the labour-intensive processes of production are subcontracted to their subsidiaries elsewhere (new international division of labour, analysed in section two). This is precisely what happens in the electronics, information technology and telecommunications industries where Japanese, US, Korean and European transnationals subcontract the labour-intensive operations of reprocessing and assembly to export processing zones in the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand and other developing countries. These subcontracted processes contribute less than 20% of the total value of the product; thereby resulting in not much profit for the subcontractors, though it yields great profits to the TNCs from cheap costs of production and from the "royalties and R&D (research and development) costs" that these corporations incur (Tujan, 1997).
TNCs also maximise profits through "price manipulation". They determine the "CMT (cut, make and trim)" of the supplier as well as the latter's share in profit. On several occasions these prices are lower than even the costs of production. This unfair expropriation of surplus from the subcontractors eventually results in the exploitation of the workers. Also, workers are very often robbed of job security and do not even enjoy the benefits offered under "various schemes like agency hiring, short term contracts, and casual hiring as piece rate workers, trainees, apprentices" etc. Also, the risk of losing their jobs prevents them from forming unions and thus, from securing the " benefits mandated by law" or gained otherwise through collective bargaining". Even where unions continue to exist they are marginalised. The Philippine Long Distance Company , for instance, keeps its union in control by "replacing the majority of the work force with contractuals" (Tujan 1997).
The global policies of liberalisation and deregulation have also led to a global free trade market. Free traders advocate the removal of all barriers to trade on the principle of 'comparative advantage' that is supposed to benefit all. 'Comparative advantage' implies that every country must specialize in those activities in which it is most productive, and then trade it to its own best advantage. However, this leads to unequal exchange between countries " 'selling capital-intensive (thus cheap) products for a high price and buying labour-intensive (thus expensive) products for a low price. This imbalance of trade expands the gap between rich and poor'" (Smith in Shah, 2005). Brecher and Costello argue, that with the increased power and reach of the TNCs the implications of "comparative advantage" have worsened still. They say that though "General Motors or Toyota can set up the same car factory with virtually the same productivity in the United States, Mexico, or China [...] 'comparative advantage' leads production to move where " the advantages of "cheap labour, poor environmental protection, and low social costs" are more readily available (Brecher and Costello 1994; pp.68-9). Free trade based on such "comparative advantage", then, does not lead to benefits for all but to profits for the TNCs alone.
Thus, one sees how the TNCs pull disadvantaged economies into the exploitative structure of transnational capitalism, to maximise their own profits at the cost of the latter's growing dependency and underdevelopment. However, the TNCs do not achieve this end all by themselves. Instead they are enabled and supported by international institutions like the IMF, World Bank and WTO, that also constitute the core of the TCS. These institutions of global governance help by regulating the dynamics of globalisation to create a global environment conducive to the strengthening of the TCS. However, in the discussion below I have restricted myself to illustrations that sufficiently elucidate my argument.
As discussed above, TNCs get their bargaining power from the presence of a huge number of weak economies. Most of these countries suffer from a major debt crisis which has been further accentuated by the Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAPs) dictated by the IMF and World Bank (Shah, 2005; Tujan 1997). The SAPs have been succeeded by the more 'democratically' formulated Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers. However, since the SAPs have been in the picture for longer than the latter, examining the former's impact might be more beneficial.
Some of the general conditions imposed by the SAPs on debtor countries are as follows: reduced government spending to reduce demand for capital inflows from abroad; liberalisation of imports to enhance the efficiency of local industries; export-oriented production for earning the much-needed foreign exchange; privatisation of state enterprises (Brecher and Costello 1994, pp.56-7; Shah 2005). Each of these conditions enhances the bargaining power of the TNCs by rendering the poor more vulnerable and dependent than before.
Reduction in government expenditure, for instance, has the foremost impact on funds spent on health care, education and other welfare activities. Reduced government expenditure on education ensures that the future citizens of the country shall remain jobless, or shall have to suffice with low-paid jobs; this leads to increasing desperation and dependence on whatever the TNCs and IFIs have to offer. Reduction in health care expenditure has even more devastating impacts. According to Ann- Louise Colgan , a research associate with Africa Action , "cutbacks in health budgets and privatization of health" have eroded advances that these countries had made before their governments ceded the power of economic decision-making to the IMF and World Bank, in order to qualify for their loans in the 1980s and 1990s (Colgan, 2002). This has resulted in the spread of AIDS and in the reduction of life expectancy by about fifteen years; thereby rendering a large part of the population unfit for labour-intensive work, which is what most of the population is compelled to do due to lack of education. Thus, the vicious circle reproduces itself, aggravating the problem of underdevelopment and dependency in these regions, which the TNCs exploit to make profits.
The SAPs also force countries into export-oriented production. However, according to the World Bank about fifty developing countries rely on three or fewer commodities for more than half of their export earnings, while about twenty of those countries rely on the export of commodities for ninety percent of their total foreign exchange earnings (Laidlaw, 2001). It is this production of commodities that prevents export-oriented production from yielding benefits to the respective countries, since commodities are cheaper than the expensive products imported by these countries for their survival; thereby leading to trade deficits and consequently, to dependency.
Thus, the very purpose for implementing SAPs in underdeveloped and developing countries gets undermined , for these programmes cause the reproduction of underdevelopment and dependency rather than leading to much improvement in the condition of these countries; thereby, creating fertile ground for the expansion and strengthening of TNCs.
However, while the IMF and World Bank help the TNCs in an indirect way, by creating conditions conducive to their growth , the WTO advocates the interests of the TCS, more directly. The WTO (like the TNCs) is based on the free-market ideology and is more powerful than the GATT , for it has " a legal and institutional foundation, backed by a dispute settlement system. Countries which do not abide by the trade rules are taken to court and can eventually face retaliation" (Kwa, 1999). "One notorious example of how the WTO upholds corporate power is the TRIPS agreement, which corporations are using to deny poor countries access to low-cost generic versions of patented medicines." For instance, India produces generic versions of AIDS drugs which South Africa imports for a fraction of the price it would pay for the patented drugs. But this has created an uproar in the US pharmaceutical industry which has used the TRIPS agreement to challenge this practice (Yu, 2005).
The global services sector provides another fertile ground for the TNCs to earn massive profits. "In 2004, the value of global exports of commercial services [monopolized by the TNCs] reached $2.1 trillion, a 16% increase from the previous year." This led the US and EU to aim at using the GATS agreement to further open up the services sector of Third World countries, for earning greater profits (Yu, 2005).
Therefore, it is established that international institutions like the IMF, World Bank and the WTO, do use their power for global governance to enable and better the functioning of TNCs, which are central to the system of transnational capitalism. However, the contribution of national actors, to this transnational system, cannot be ignored. In fact it is precisely this connection between the national government, TNCs and international institutions, that the previous example alludes to.
Since the TNCs are transnational institutions, they may or may not have one home country (since mergers and acquisitions are characteristic of this phase of capitalism). Yet, they rely on all the government(s) that have a stake in the former's development, for the furthering of their ambitions. Countries with the maximum stakes are usually the First World countries, that also have the greatest sway in the decision-making processes of international institutions. This makes alliances with these national governments highly essential to these transnational corporations. Governments of these countries (though not all people necessarily) also benefit from alliances with their TNCs, as is evident from the example on GATS, mentioned above. Thus the governments of rich nations and the TNCs enjoy a relationship of mutual benefits; each exploiting the opportunities provided by globalisation (and international institutions of global governance) to ensure the growth and stability of the TCS.
Other national institutions, like educational institutions also support the TCS by producing staff members for all the above-mentioned institutions that constitute the core of the TCS (Sunkel and Fuenzalida, 1979; p.72). For instance, in his critique of the americanisation of the World Bank, Robert Wade points out that most economists at the bank, irrespective of their nationality and other qualifications, possess a postgraduate degree from a North American university; thereby implying the crucial role educational institutions play, in the process of ideological reproduction, which is much-needed for promoting and justifying the existence of the TCS (Wade 2001; p.14). "[M]agazines, newspapers of worldwide circulation, news agencies, multinational advertising companies and television networks", also share with these educational institutions "the task of elaborating and diffusing the vision of the world that promotes the interests of the TNCs" (Sunkel and Fuenzalida, 1979; p.72).
The discussion till this point establishes the role the TCS' core performs in ensuring the stability and growth of the system, through the manipulation of institutions and global processes at the transnational, international and national levels. However, it is not just the dominant but also the dominated, that help to sustain the system that defines their subordinate status.
Here I am referring to what Sunkel and Fuenzalida call "transnational culture". They define it as the "cultural feature of the dynamics" of transnational capitalism that has led to "the creation of a homogenous market for consumption goods and services on a worldwide scale" (Sunkel and Fuenzalida,1979; p.73). Not only does it cover the dominant elites in the developing and underdeveloped countries (mentioned above as semi-periphery) but is also seen to impact the periphery (through the use of mass media, etc.), leading to their "partial adoption of these new consumption patterns[,] and [to] the distortion of the existing ones" (Sunkel and Fuenzalida, 1979; pp.73-4). The relevance of these patterns, with regard to the dependency argument, is obvious, and shall be elaborated upon in the next section of the essay.
The discussion carried out in this section thus establishes how the various components of the TCS enable the channeling of the dynamics of globalisation into the rapid growth of the core, and as an obvious corollary, into increasing the dependency and underdevelopment of the semi-periphery and periphery on the core. It is this channeling of the dynamics of globalisation by the TCS, into securing maximum profits for the core, even at the cost of increasing the dependency of the other two categories on the core, that makes globalisation a neo-colonial move rather than a set of free-flowing processes.
It has been indicated in the previous section that dependency and underdevelopment of the semi-periphery and periphery of the TCS are essential to the latter's survival as well as to the definition of globalisation as a neo-colonial move. Thus, in this section I elucidate this necessary facet of TCS-regulated globalisation using the theories of dependency.
Central to a dependency analysis of the TCS is the structure of the system. As has been mentioned above, the TCS is divided into a core of TNCs and other national and international institutions that support it, a semi-periphery that includes the dominant classes of the developing and underdeveloped countries, and a periphery that includes the remaining people of the less advantaged world. Incorporation into this structure is itself the most crucial reason for the dependency of the semi-periphery and periphery on the core (Frank 1971; p.34).
This incorporation is followed by the assignment of different tasks that constitute the production process, to the three strata of the TCS. This is called the new international division of labour. It is this that prevents the independent development of the semi-periphery and periphery, and increases their dependency. However, this dependency and underdevelopment is not the result of this division of labour alone, but is aggravated by the consumption patterns followed by the strata of the TCS, which eventually lead to the formation of a vicious circle of dependency and underdevelopment in the less developed countries. I elaborate on this in the argument that follows.
The decentralized process of production, that marks the TCS, is controlled by the TNCs. In the new international division of labour the latter carry out the crucial "tasks of technological and scientific innovations, overall strategic planning, and financial and manpower management" (Sunkel and Fuenzalida 1979; pp.74-5) while the periphery is assigned the tasks of actual production. Members of the semi-periphery, however, hold an intermediate position in the form of owners of means of production, the bureaucracy, and the likes.
Though Gunder Frank wrote in the late 1960s about the "international monopoly corporations", his analysis still holds ground and gives crucial insights into the relations of production shared by these corporations (both then and now), with the semi-periphery and periphery of the respective systems of capitalism. According to Frank, the "international monopoly corporation" made huge profits on relatively lower investments. This was because these corporations subcontracted various tasks of the production process to their subsidiaries ("medium and small manufacturers") in the "satellite economy", while retaining full control on the processes of production and allocation of profits (Frank 1971; p.327).This obviously led to the corporations' appropriating profits disproportionate to their investment in the production process, which in turn led the subcontractors to expropriate the share of the workers, resulting in a chain-like fashion of exploitation, as Frank puts it. This expropriation of surplus is what led to the dependence of the periphery on the core and confined the "satellite economy" to an extraverted development. As the illustrations in section one prove, these observations stand true for the TNCs as well, though Frank was analysing monopoly corporations. However, it must be noted that there is no semi-periphery here; for the subcontractors mentioned in this case were only small and medium manufacturers and not the " 'great bourgeoisie'", with whom these monopoly corporations carried out their next deals of capitalist expansion (Frank 1971; p. 328).
In the 1960s these corporations formed "mixed enterprises" with the industrial and/financial groups and the government of Latin America (satellite country to America here). In these enterprises the actual contribution of the corporations was the "technological package of patents, designs , industrial processes and the like, while they did not have to bring in much capital by virtue of accepting a "junior partnership" in the enterprise, initially (Frank 1971;p. 328). However, these organisations soon moved on to take full advantage of their technological monopoly, direct and indirect power over international institutions that funded the increasing balance of payment deficits in Latin America, and their financial strength, to extract a greater amount of profit from these "mixed enterprises" than their Latin American partners. By these attempts to expropriate more and more profits from the enterprise, these corporations (the core) forced the "'great bourgeoisie'" (semi-periphery) to increase "the degree of exploitation of its petty bourgeoisie, workers, and peasants" in order to squeeze out some extra profits (periphery). In this process members of the semi-periphery antagonised those of the periphery who could have helped it fight a political battle against the unfair appropriation of surplus by the core. This forced the semi-periphery to ally with the core and endure its extraverted development in the expectation of reaping some long-term benefits from the alliance (Frank 1971; pp.328-333).
By expropriating large amounts of surplus from especially the " 'great bourgeoisie'", the corporations deprived the Latin American economy of the chance for greater capital accumulation and investment, which in turn would have led to a more independent development of the economy. The deficits that this led to combined with the need for infrastructural development that was fast rising, compelled Latin America to accept loans from international financial institutions (IFIs) like the IMF and World Bank (IBRD). This, argues Frank, enabled "the incorporation through investment finance of Latin American economy into the structure of metropolitan capitalism". And the conditions the IFIs forced governments to accept along with this investment finance (discussed in section one) plunged the Latin American economy into even deeper crises; thereby, creating the need for renewed and greater dependence on these institutions (Frank 1971; p.339). Thus, Frank establishes how international monopoly corporations as well as the IFIs absorb the workers (periphery), " 'great bourgeoisie'" and government (semi-periphery) of developing and underdeveloped countries, into the structure of monopoly capitalism; thereby, using them for the growth of the corporations and the consequent strengthening of the system that enables this growth in the first place. This dependency analysis can certainly be applied to the TCS to gain a theoretical understanding of its workings, as discussed in the previous section. However, with one reservation. Though the role played by governments of core countries is implied in the work of Frank, he does not build much on it in his work. Thus, I shall use Wallerstein's world-system theory to bridge this gap, later in this section.
I shall now analyse the TCS through the structuralist school of dependency theory. Even though most of the surplus generated in the production process is appropriated by the core, a part of it does remain with the less developed country itself. However, instead of being saved and used towards increasing capital investment, this surplus is used for the "rapid diversification of the consumption habits of the ruling classes through the import of consumer products from the developed countries. It is this " 'consumption dependence'" , according to Futardo, that leads to the increasing underdevelopment of the less developing and underdeveloped countries ( Futardo in Hunt 1989; p. 208). For, these consumption patterns lead to an increase in the imports of consumer products, which in the absence of "capital accumulation" and " technological progress" , are paid for by expanding traditional exports and increasing exploitation. Also, domestic production units may be established for these consumer products, which leads to a massive infiltration of TNCs into the domestic economy, and the impact of that has already been established above.
However, these production units may also create jobs, though for the middle classes with the requisite technical know-how, while the masses get increasingly marginalised. This reduced purchasing power of the masses has a negative impact on the growth of the domestic market and on the scope for further investment (Futardo in Hunt 1989; pp.208-9).This weak growth of the domestic market further disables it in the face of foreign competition; thereby leading to a vicious cycle of underdevelopment and dependency.
" 'Consumption dependence'" is also the result of certain socio-cultural features of the TCS. The formation of a "transnational community" and "transnational culture" (Sunkel and Fuenzalida 1979; pp. 72-3), mentioned in section one, help to accentuate this kind of dependence, and the problems it leads to. Sunkel and Fuenzalida define the "transnational community" as consisting of all those people who possess such specialised knowledge as makes them indispensable to the production processes, and also such control over the TNCs and international institutions as allows them to appropriate the maximum profit from these production processes. All members of this community, belonging to the First , Second and Third World, share a common culture that includes consumption patterns, lifestyles, worldviews etc., which then explains the " 'consumption dependence'". Yet the transnational community is spatially divided; for, the top-most officials of the transnational institutions would stay in the developed countries, where the main headquarters of the core institutions are situated, while the elites living in the developing and underdeveloped world (semi-periphery), would perform the roles of "administering and implementing" the global strategies formulated in these headquarters. Due to these "spatial patterns" national and local resources are allocated to the formation of a "nucleus of modernity", wherein modern towns and cities are developed while the older sectors decay (Sunkel and Fuenzalida 1979; p.75).Though this "transnational nucleus" is not excusive to the developing and underdeveloped countries it has more serious implications for the same, since the gap between pre-existing societies and this nucleus is very large in these countries (Sunkel and Fuenzalida 1979; pp.75-6, 77-8).
While on the one hand the interaction of the "transnational nucleus" (semi-periphery) with pre-existing societies (periphery) renders the latter aspiring for that lifestyle, the growing gap between the two leads to dissatisfaction between classes and consequently to social unrest. In such times the role of the state is key to resolving the problem. However, the bureaucracy (semi-periphery), which constitutes a part of the transnational community and thus has special interests in maintaining the semi-periphery's growth at the cost of the periphery, uses its global and local influence to prevail on the government's decisions. It promotes the "transnational nucleus" as the right start for the development of the whole economy; for, eventually profits are bound to spill over into the periphery as well (Sunkel and Fuenzalida 1979; p. 77). However, as discussed above, this kind of dependent development leads to greater marginalisation of the masses and slackens the growth of the domestic market by reducing the purchasing power of these masses; thus contributing to the vicious cycle of dependency and underdevelopment.
The state of core countries also play a crucial role vis--vis the dependency of the semi-periphery and periphery of the TCS. Wallerstein's theory of the world -system proves this. His model of the world economy, is marked by a single economic system, and several political systems. These political systems are divided into the categories of core states, semi-peripheral states and the periphery. He argues that though overtime exchange became unequal due to the operation of "different wage levels" in different states, its unequal nature has been "reinforced by political interference on the part of strong states on weak ones". This hierarchy between the core states and peripheral ones is necessary to the reproduction of capitalism as a system ( Wallerstein in Hoogvelt 1997; p. 60). The significance of this analysis is that it merges the political with the economic; thereby confirming a convergence in the interests of the TCS and core states. Also, this alliance gives the above-mentioned definition of the term "neo-colonial" , strong political overtones.
Thus, this section has argued that by their very incorporation into the TCS and the consequent division of labour, the semi-periphery and periphery get locked into a circle of dependency and underdevelopment which further strengthens the core (as established in section one) and leads to the stability and growth of the TCS itself. It has analysed the economic, socio-cultural and political nature of the relationships the core, semi-periphery and periphery share with each other, and has established how "transnational integration" (between the first two categories), by worsening the degree of exploitation of the periphery, leads to "national disintegration" (Sunkel and Fuenzalida 1979; p.85).
Thus, while the previous section focussed on elucidating how the various components of the TCS enable the regulation and appropriation of the processes of globalisation to achieve the end of profit-maximisation, this section applied the theories of dependency to explain how those attempts to develop the core are sustained by the development of dependency and underdevelopment in the semi-periphery and periphery of the TCS.
A dependency analysis of the TCS offers a useful understanding of the system. The main reason for this is the critical nature of the analysis it offers (Cardoso 2001; p.80). Unlike the problem-solving theory of modernisation, dependency theory seeks to define the underdevelopment of the less developed countries as the effect of "the same historical processes that enabled the development of the developed countries in contemporary times (Hoogvelt 1997; p. 38). This vision of the world as one system, allows dependency theory to offer a more complete and yet critical account of the dynamics that sustain the TCS.
Dependency theory also does away with the claims to neutrality that neo-liberalism makes. This is significant to our project of establishing globalisation as a neo-colonial move. This ideology of neo-liberalism is predominant in the TCS and allows the core to exploit the semi-periphery and periphery; justifying it through neutralising terms like 'free-market' and 'comparative advantage'.
Most of the literature on globalisation sees "transnationality" as having led to the demise of the nation-state (Kiely 2007; p. 91) . However, the analysis provided by the application of dependency theory above, shows that the transnational system of capitalism cannot sustain itself without the support of international and national institutions, which help to regulate the forces of globalisation, that operate at various levels. Thus, by asking for a re-investigation of accepted 'truths', dependency theory does not just critique but also offers some new and constructive insights into the true nature of the system.
Finally, it is interesting to note that the theories of dependency emerged in the 1960s and 1970s, in Latin America as a critique of American capitalism. The theory lost currency in the post-cold war period but is being revived and reformulated now. This is because once again the US is being seen as an imperialist power and "warfare state", as Frank had named it in the 1960s (Frank 1971; p.325), using both the media of war and transnational capitalism to establish its supremacy in the world. The perspective of dependency acknowledges the relation between the political and the economic and thus offers a useful interpretation of the current scenario.
The system of transnational capitalism has a hierarchical structure comprising of a core, a semi-periphery and a periphery. And the paper has argued that this hierarchy is essential to the survival of the TCS. Therefore, it tries to maintain this hierarchy by ensuring, both the rapid growth of its core, and the dependency and underdevelopment of the semi-periphery and periphery on the core.
The application of dependency theory has proved that incorporation into the structure of the TCS itself begins the process of underdevelopment and dependency in the semi-periphery and periphery, though the complex relationships shared by the three categories of the TCS further reinforce this process. I also elaborated upon the internal structure of the core itself and the role each actor plays in sustaining the TCS. The core comprises of the TNCs, supported by international and national institutions, and these actors use their power at the transnational, international and national levels respectively, to channel the multiple and multi-levelled processes of globalisation into not only the rapid development of the core, but also into strengthening of the core's power and control over the semi-periphery and periphery of the system. It is in being regulated by the core of the TCS to achieve such ends, that globalisation becomes a neo-colonial move.