The aims of the experiment are to determine the HA (haemagglutinin) titre of a virus stock, to identify that virus on the basis of reactivity with known antisera and to determine the HI (Haemagglutination inhibition) titre of the specifically reactive serum by the combination of the HA and HI assays. Using haemagglutination property of certain viruses and end point dilution, the concentration or dilution of virus required to give the last positive haemagglutination, or the end point dilution was determined. This end point dilution gives the HA titre of the virus, which was 6400 HA units/ml and there was 2.88 x 10 10 virus particles/ml. Using this HA titre of the virus, a stock of diluted virus containing approximately 160 HA units/ml was prepared. As antibodies are specific, this precise haemagglutination prevention was used to identify the virus present. Similar to HA titre determination, the concentration or dilution of antibody required to just prevent haemagglutination was determined. This is known haemagglutination inhibition (HI) titre and from this, the HI titre of antiserum was 3200 HI units/ml. The virus was given was identified as influenza A virus.
Each virus has a protein coat surrounding the nucleic acid called a capsid, which in turn is surrounded by an envelope. Sometimes, the envelope can be covered by spikes, which are carbohydrate and protein complexes, projecting out into space from the surface of the envelope. These spikes exploit the presence of cell-surface carbohydrates, principally associated with protein (glycoprotein) and used them for attachment and thus entry into the host cell. When they attach to the surface of red blood cells (RBC), they cause agglutination of the RBC. This clumping of red blood cells to each other in the presence of certain viruses, bacteria, plant proteins, or antibodies is known as haemagglutination and the viral protein responsible is known as a haemagglutinin (HA). Agglutination is due to the presence of multiple binding sites on the virus and the host cell (RBC in this case) for each other. As this attachment, causing haemagglutination is specific and unpredictable, it can be used as a diagnostic tool. For example, influenza virus attach to red blood cells (RBC) to form haemagglutination, which can easily be seen with naked eye. Another method of virus identification is through a known antiserum. An antiserum blocks the attachment of the virus to the host cell and prevents haemagglutination. Just as haemagglutination is precise, antibodies preventing the attachments of the viruses to the cell-surface receptors of red blood cells (RBC) is specific and this property form the basis of the haemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay and can be used to identify an unknown virus.
The specificity of haemagglutination lies in the interaction between the virus and the host cell's surface. The virus binds to receptors on the host cell and as these receptors or domains differ in shape and complexity, a type of virus can only interact with certain host cells. This brought about this precise interaction. There are two main domains: a complex polypeptide motif or a simpler carbohydrate motif. In haemagglutination, it is due to binding to a carbohydrate motif.
Furthermore, the haemagglutination can be used to determine the original amount or concentration of virus or antibody in the stock. The original stock is serially diluted and the size of agglutination of the RBCs is compared to find the end point, where there is only a slight haemagglutination. Further dilution will results in inadequate amount of virus to cause agglutination. The amount of virus which just able to agglutinate a fixed number of RBCs is defined as 1 HA unit of virus and the concentration of virus per volume can be calculated and thus the HA titre of the undiluted stock determined. The same method is used to determine the HI titre, which is one HI unit of antiserum per reaction volume at which HA inhibition is last seen.
All the steps in the laboratory manual were followed. To all the wells 25l of blood from the same container was added.
In the determination of HA titre, the control (C) used contain 100l of PBS and 25l of blood but no virus. The first well (1) contained the 10-fold dilution of the original virus stock and the subsequent wells were 2-fold dilutions (2 to 12).
In the determination of the HI titre, 4 different controls were used and the original virus is diluted to contain approximately 160 HA units/ml. 50l of the original virus stock and 1950l of PBS were mixed to obtain the required 160 HA units/ml of virus. The first control (C1) contained 100l of PBS and 25l of the diluted virus but no antibody. The second control (C2) contained 100l of PBS and 10l of antibody X but no virus. The third control (C3) contained 100l of PBS and 10l of antibody Y but no virus. To the last control (C4), only 100l of PBS was added with neither of the antibodies nor the virus. All the X and Y wells contain 100l of PBS, 25l of diluted virus and 10l of the respective antibody.
From table 1, the 7 th wells in both row A and B (duplicates) contain the most dilute positive sample, the HA titre of original virus stock is therefore, 6400 HA units/ml. The first well is a 10-fold dilution, and the second well is a 20-fold dilution and the third well is a 40-fold dilution, therefore the seventh well is a 640-fold dilution of the original virus stock. Refer to the appendix for calculations.
From table 2, the 6 th wells in row X 1 and X 2 (duplicates) were seen to contain the most dilute positive sample. As the 6 th wells were 320-fold dilutions, the original undiluted antibody stock contains 3200 HI unit/ml. Refer to the appendix for calculations and the method for the contents of each well. As antibody Y did not inhibit agglutination of RBC, it is not the antibody for the virus provided. Therefore the virus was concluded as influenza A virus as it was known that antibody X contains the antiserum for influenza A virus.
The amount of virus just able to agglutinate a fixed number of RBCs is defined as 1HA of virus and at the end points (refer to table 1 and 2), there is a virus concentration of 1 HA units/ml. The end points were clearly observed in table 1 (7 th well) and table 2 (6 th well of X rows) and they r the wells where agglutination was just observed. If there were too many virus present, agglutination would take place and the whole well would be almost homogenously red. If too little or no virus were present, the RBCs will settle to the bottom of the well resulting in a bright pink/red spot at the bottom of the well. If little or no antibody is present, it will behave the same as the presence of numerous viruses and a homogenous red well would be observed.
In the HA assay, the 7 th well was taken as the end point as further dilution resulted in inadequate amount of virus to cause agglutination. This is shown in well 7 of table 1. From this, the original stock was calculated to contain 6400 HA units of virus/ml and therefore had 2.88 x 10 10 virus particles/ml.
In the HI assay, the 6 th well was taken as the end point as further dilution resulted in inadequate amount of antibody and thus cause agglutination of RBCs as the amount of antibody present fails to inhibit most of the virus from attaching to cell surface. This is shown in well 6 of X rows of table 2. Since antibody Y did not prevent the agglutination of RBCs, the virus was concluded as not being para influenza virus Type 3. In the 6 th wells of both of the row X, the end points were observed and further dilutions of the antibody suspension resulted in agglutination of the RBCs and therefore, the known virus was identified as influenza virus A.
During the transferring of samples across the wells, the pipettes used might not be very accurate, resulting in incorrect dilutions. For proper agglutination to occur the RBCs must be thoroughly mixed with the virus suspension in the wells and failure to do so will not result in haemagglutination. Furthermore, the viruses needed a rather significant amount of time to attach to the surface of the RBCs. If the RBCs were not given enough time to settle down to the bottom of the well or if the RBCs were lysed a cloudy pink suspension might be obtained instead. It was rather difficult to determine the end point as it was subject to personal options and thus the dilution factor of the end point would be different. As the wells were left for different amount of time, a comparative test among them would not be very accurate.
In conclusion, the virus was identified as influenza virus A. The HA titre of the virus was 6400 HA units/ml and there was 2.88 x 10 10 virus particles/ml in this original undiluted virus stock. The HI titre of antiserum was 3200 HI units/ml.