'In any discussion of the Reformation, the first name mentioned is invariably that of Luther. The first mass awareness at the beginnings of the 1520s that some great religious upheaval was under way was linked to this person." The extent to which Luther was responsible for this 'great religious upheaval' must be investigated. The issue of Martin Luther's importance to the Reformation has been a much discussed and heated topic among historians, particularly in the context of the movement's early years. The essay will analyse the impact that Luther's personality and ideas actually had on the Reformation in Germany by examining his theses and the effect they had on the German people. It will also examine the means by which his ideas were disseminated and the significance this had on determining the overall success of the Reformation. Also important is what can actually be considered to be the early Reformation and whether, in fact, the movement had stages as such. Many historians, such as the Catholic Church historian Joseph Lortz, have also sought to downplay Luther's influence by promoting the idea that conditions in Germany were already ripe for Reformation due to anticlericalism and a general religious malaise, as well as the influence of the humanists who, Lortz argues, laid the groundwork for the Reformation and, therefore, for the reception of Luther's ideas. This particular argument will be examined in trying to answer the question. There were also a large number of vital figures to which the Reformation owed a great deal such as other Protestant reformers including Ulrich Zwingli, Andreas Karlstadt and Thomas Mntzer. Ultimately, however, one man did stand above all others in helping to initiate the Reformation and contribute to its early success - Martin Luther.
The first and most important question to be posed in relation to formulating an answer is determining what actually constituted the early Reformation. The result will have significant bearing on answering the overall question. The problem of what represented the early Reformation has itself been long examined by historians. There is a general acceptance that the Reformation began in 1517 when Martin Luther's dispute over the selling of indulgences occurred and the Ninety-five Theses were produced in October. However, the end of the so called first phase of the Reformation is much disputed - many historians argue that it was marked by the end of the unsuccessful Peasants' War in 1525, while a number of others take the Marburg Colloquy of 1529 to signify the end of the early Reformation. Some dispute the fact that the Reformation had phases at all and instead argue that it can be fit into a wider context of religious change beginning in the fifteenth century and lasting far beyond the peace of Augsburg in 1555.
In discussing the Peasants' War, A.G. Dickens comes to the conclusion that, 'The first phase of the German Reformation thus ended in an atmosphere dramatically different from that of its inception with the Ninety-five Theses." This indicates that he believes the Peasants' War to mark the end of the early Reformation. Lortz's interpretation of the early Reformation is more clouded. He argues that Luther supplied 'the most essential nourishment... in its earliest years. This does not mean that the Luther of the second half of the twenties, and of the thirties and forties had nothing more of importance to say'. Although this helps to shape an argument for when Luther was most significant to the Reformation movement, it does not specifically state when he believes the first phase of the Reformation to have ended. The Protestant church historian Dorothea Wendebourg calls into question whether there was an 'early phase' of the Reformation as she maintains that it is hard to determine when the movement actually began.
However, this essay will argue that the early Reformation can be defined as the period from the issuing of the Ninety-five theses, when Luther was in outright public opposition to the Catholic Church for the first time, until the Peasants' War, which was defeated in 1525. The reason for the staring point of the period is obvious, as stated above, but the end was chosen because after the Peasants' War, the Protestant movement fragmented significantly around different leaders; thus entering a new phase of the Reformation. It was precisely because Luther initiated the movement in the first place, that the period where he was no longer in complete control must be seen as a break with the initial phase. Thus, this essay will use the Peasants' War to mark the end of the early Reformation in Germany. With this definition dealt with, we can now focus on the question in hand.
Some historians, such as the aforementioned Lortz, have sought to undermine the influence of Martin Luther by emphasizing that the situation in Germany was already unstable and that people sought reform - there was a 'mighty antipapal movement [in]... the late Middle Ages'. He argues that Luther was the prime beneficiary of the radical changes of this period, because the people merely needed a leader. He stresses that the demand for reform had become violent by the sixteenth century and an intense anticlericalism was held by the majority of the population. There was, in general, an enormous increase in church criticism and indifference to religion as indicated by increasing 'Absence from confession, irregular reception of the Eucharist, mechanical performance of religious activities, drift toward religious indifference [and] experimentation with new religious forms by devout people'. Complaints directed against the clergy commonly included their freedom from taxation, indulgence traffic and the selling of basic religious services. Lortz did acknowledge, though, that this hatred and apathy was partially due to the failure of the Catholic Church itself. In general, therefore, Luther 'was certainly not the first... to criticize the use of indulgences, the immorality of the clergy, and bad preaching'.
Lortz also speaks of a growing nationalist feeling, mainly due to the work of the humanists in the fifteenth and early sixteenth century which paved the way for the Reformation. They managed to stir up German nationalism which was primarily anti-Italian and anti-papal - vital factors in the strength of the Reformation. Lortz gives an example of the power of humanism with 'Hussitism [which] had torn away an entire country, Bohemia, from the western Church community and from the empire'. It is estimated that the Renaissance and humanism were at their peak in Germany at around 1450 and by the time Luther became prominent, 'The humanists had already waged an energetic campaign against monasticism." A German identity was fostered by scholars and literary men such as Ulrich von Hutten and Erasmus who were considered crucial in preparing Germany for the Reformation movement from which Luther was able to take advantage. Von Hutten displayed an intense anticlericalism and became increasingly involved in politico-ecclesiastical pamphleteering. He wrote in the vernacular, like Luther after him, in order to appeal to the masses. Lortz even argues that the vast majority of Luther's spiritualist theories had humanist origins - 'there was nothing new in Luther other than the gift of his invective." An example of this is that Luther increasingly referred to the Pope as the Antichrist as the Reformation progressed, but this idea had already become very popular in the previous century among the humanists. Bernd Moeller summarizes the overall situation - 'Without humanism, no Reformation' and Lortz argues that 'Great revolutions are possible only where [there are] serious vacuums'. It cannot be denied that the foundations for the Reformation were laid in the late Middle Ages.
However, while the effect of both the humanists and anticlericalism within Germany were important in helping to create the conditions from which the Reformation was able to flourish, it is vital not to over exaggerate their influence. The nineteenth-century Catholic Church historian Johannes Janssen argues that 'the half century before the Reformation [was]... one of the most spiritually sound and profound periods of German history'. Clearly, this can be seen as a vast exaggeration as it is in direct contrast with the evidence examined thus far, but the fact that Janssen is willing to make such an extreme argument indicates that anticlericalism in Germany was probably not found on such a wide scale as other historians have claimed and that it varied regionally. The most realistic explanation in determining the degree of anticlericalism and the effects of humanism on the Reformation can be seen in the argument of Moeller. He attempts to balance the opinions of Janssen and Lortz:
Moeller dismisses the idea of the 'Pulverfatheorie', or the 'Gunpowder-barrel theory'. That is, the conditions in pre-Reformation Germany were so anticlerical that only a spark was needed to light the explosive. He argues that the supposed anticlericalism of the pre-Reformation, in which various historians saw the crisis to be encapsulated, cannot be found in contemporary sources. However, as stated earlier, Moeller is also of the opinion that without humanism, the Reformation would not have been possible. Therefore, humanism and its associated anticlericalism did lay the seeds of the Reformation, but there was still much work to be done to transform the situation and develop a reformatory movement that would ultimately split the Church in two. Leadership of the highest calibre was needed.
Many historians have argued that Protestant reformers other than Luther were extremely important in the Reformation movement - 'For one thing, Luther's opponents became diversified. The 1520s were dominated by his conflict with Karlstadt, Zwingli, and the other "sacramentarians"." Luther often derogatively termed them 'the rabble' or 'fanatics'. Schisms within the movement obviously created a barrier to consolidation. The new groups created out of these schisms automatically decreased the significance of Luther in relation to the Reformation.
The importance of the reformer Andreas Karlstadt can be seen even in the very early stages of the Reformation. In was under Karlstadt's, not Luther's, leadership, that 'the town council at Wittenberg issued the first city ordinance of the Reformation'. Karlstadt became increasingly radical with time and he was significant in leading the extreme elements of the movement. He believed the bread and wine in communion were merely reminders of Christ, not symbols (Luther's view) and certainly not channels (the Catholic view). He also rejected infant baptism. Thomas Mntzer was even more radical than Karlstadt - he rejected baptism altogether and had a violent interpretation of the Scripture. Both were 'prophets of radical religion and social upheaval' and became pamphleteers in their own right in the first half of the 1520s. Mntzer rejected the Reformation slogan of 'faith'. He was an extreme spiritualist, represented the common man and was a 'religious and militant force through and through... [and] supported riotous revolution'. In 1523 he was successfully elected as minister in the Saxon town of Alstedt and his sermons regularly drew crowds of many thousands. He instigated the Reformation in the countryside and led the peasants' movement into battle against the princes, to be examined later. Overall, a passionate hostility developed between Karlstadt and Luther, as well as between Luther and Mntzer.
Rival forms of Evangelicalism, namely Zwinglianism and Anabaptism, also developed. These movements were independent but not completely unrelated to Luther's form of Protestantism. Although Zurich was the centre of Zwinglianism (under Ulrich Zwingli), its influence spread throughout southern Germany. Zurich itself had become a Reformed city by 1523. Zwingli was a humanist and was also more radical than Luther - he believed art and music had no place in religion. Zwingli held the view that the presence of Christ was spiritual in the Communion, while Luther thought Christ was physically and materially present. Another area of division between the two was that Luther wanted distance between the church and state, while Zwingli promoted a strong relationship between the Church and city council. Zwingli was also, like Mntzer, 'not averse to the use of the sword even for religion." The Anabaptists arose out of Zwingli's movement. They were, however, almost polar opposites. They wanted a return to primitive Christianity and felt that Christians should relinquish violence, private possessions and drunkenness. They were at work in cities such as Strasbourg as early as 1523. Conflicts began to rage between the various groups. For example, in Zurich Anabaptists were subject to the death penalty.
The Peasants' War of 1525 showed that Luther's ideas, although purely religious in nature, could be given a social turn. The Peasants' War generally lacked a clear program and coherent leadership. 'Some groups wanted a peasant dictatorship, some a classless society, some a return to feudalism, some the abolition of all rulers save the pope and the emperor." There was, in general, no co-ordination between the various bands. Only one person who could have led and united the movement - Martin Luther. The peasants felt themselves drawn to him. However, the manifesto that they drew up, The Twelve Articles, was largely criticized by Luther. In his eyes, it was a cover for a more revolutionary aim. He also disagreed with armed conflict. Mntzer led the war in Saxony anyway. The peasants were no match for the armies of the princes and the war ended in slaughter, with Mntzer himself captured and beheaded. Up to 100,000 peasants were killed in battles throughout Germany. Luther was seen by the peasants as a traitor to their cause and consequently, 'Lutheranism lost much of the productive power it would have enjoyed from contact with the true native soil." Luther simply did not believe that the vast majority of the peasants were motivated by religious reasons.
Clearly, therefore, Luther lost a significant degree of support when he himself failed to support the peasants' movement, which began to drift towards more radical Protestant alternatives such as Karlstadt and Mntzer, and even to rival sects including Zwinglianism and Anabaptism - 'threatened from the first by Radicalism as well as by conservatism, [Luther's] personal grip upon the situation steadily weakened." Towards the end of the first phase, it was clear that Luther's influence was waning, as the Reformation began to split into subdivisions.
Conversely, the fact that Luther was the only man who was considered able to unite the peasants' movement, merely underlines the fact that he was still unrivalled in terms of importance to the Reformation. Moeller gives the impression that the Reformation was almost purely Luther's movement. He argues that he had a large following and that in the earliest years of the movement, even those who would later become rival reformers, including Mntzer and Zwingli, had been taught by Luther and were united behind him. Nevertheless, they did break with him ideologically and by the middle of the 1520s, the Reformation's personnel were increasingly fractured. Moeller's argument strives to place Luther on a pedestal and proclaim him the leader of a movement behind which everyone was unified. In reality, as the movement evolved, different people became significant and the Reformation started to fragment around a number of important individuals - 'The European Reformation was not a simple revolution, ... with a single leader, [and] a defined set of objectives... [but] a series of parallel movements... [of] various sorts of people with differing perspectives." Overall, rival Protestant reformers became increasingly significant as the movement evolved, especially by 1525, but there was no doubt that Luther was still by far the most important single person to the Reformation.
Before going on to examine Luther's actual beliefs and ideas, it is necessary to briefly examine how they were disseminated throughout Germany. A case can certainly be made that without the distribution of Luther's theses, the Reformation would not have evolved into the great and powerful movement that it ultimately did. Dickens summarized the magnitude of its importance by stating, 'the mass media... altered the tenor of religious and social life for millions of Europeans and their descendants throughout the world.'
A huge wave of propaganda flooded Germany with the principal types being cartoons, tracts and pamphlets. 'The number of pamphlets issued in Germany in the four years 1521 through 1524 exceeds the quantity for any other four years of German history until the present." This is incredible considering the period involved. It is estimated that the total output of the German printing presses multiplied at least six-fold in this period. Total pamphlet production numbered millions of copies. They were often supported by woodcuts or engravings in order to simplify the message. Luther's enemies were often portrayed as animals, and later on, the Pope as the Antichrist. Luther was presented as a holy man with a holy cause - the exemplary Christian. Pamphlets attempted to depict him 'as a figure embodying the religious yearnings of many Germans during 1520-1'. He was identified with the furtherance of Christianity and his opponents as the antithesis. This propaganda sought to destroy the authority of the papacy and invoke secular beliefs. R. W. Scribner argues that visual means of propaganda were of far more importance than the written word - 'Given its ease of production, the popular woodcut has far more claims to being the first item of mass communication than the elite form of the printed book." There were perhaps 20,000 woodcuts in circulation in the early sixteenth century. Illustrations allowed a reader to be taken through the content of the salvation message of the evangelical movement. Perhaps Luther's most important contribution to the Reformation was the translation of the Bible. 'The German Bible is Luther's noblest achievement... For the Germans, [his]... rendering was incomparable." His completed meticulous translation of the New Testament appeared in September 1522.
The portrayal of Luther's ideas in simple terms allowed the German people to identify with him on a basic level, as the vast majority were illiterate, and of those who could read, they were almost certainly not on Luther's intellectual level. Indeed, literacy was restricted both geographically and socially, and was probably no higher than five per cent. Luther's teachings were often simplified in order to appeal to the common man in everyday life, with the aim of mass-appeal. He reduced Christianity from a vast array of principles to a few essential rules. Propaganda attempted to 'construct an ideological relationship between Luther and his followers, providing powerful affective arguments to justify Luther's break with the Church and to induce others to do the same'. It was carefully targeted at an intended audience and, therefore, contained little theological content, but instead was more intimate and spiritual. His works were also cheap and thus widely available. He often translated his own work from Latin into German with the broader public in view. It is important to note that Luther was the prime producer of the pamphlets, but a vast number of others assisted him. Printers risked not only their professions but also their lives in producing Luther's works. Yet, it is certain that the vast majority of printers favoured Luther and his allies. However, this was primarily due to the demand for Luther's teachings - many made great fortunes from publishing his works. In 1518, the total number of German books produced numbered about 150. By 1524 this figure was 990.
However, it is important not to get caught up in mere statistics. Scribner argues that 'the number of editions of a particular propaganda work may tell us about its popularity relative to other printed works, but little about its overall impact on the broadest range of the population'. This is an argument with which Wendebourg concurs: the reading of a pamphlet does not necessarily mean that the reader understands or agrees with its contents. Albert Ritschl originally put forward the theory that Luther was only popular because he was misunderstood by the German people. Euan Cameron confers with him - 'The fact of a Reformation tract being handed around might have had much more impact than its actual content; and that content might easily have been misunderstood, so that it would generate only a general awareness of the Reformation issues.'
However, overall, one can conclude that Luther had an enormous impact in Germany in the early years of the Reformation in terms of the amount of material he published and the amazing speed at which his ideas spread through German society, particularly in 1520 when he published his classic Reformation pamphlets. There was 'an astonishingly rapid, tempestuously advancing conquest' of Lutheran ideas into common life. Lortz argues that 'Book-printing made it possible for the first time, for all of Germany to fall under the influence of a single man - Luther in the early years of his public life'. It would, however, be unfair to judge the reception of his theories based purely on the volume of production and the speed at which his ideas were transmitted. It is time to examine the actual meaning of his ideas and the degree to which the early Reformation owed to Luther's ideas and personality.
Martin Luther was an extremely controversial figure. 'His followers hailed him as the prophet of the Lord and the deliverer of Germany." His most basic and, therefore, most important theory was the belief in faith alone. That is, faith in God alone would be sufficient to obtain salvation. Nothing else was necessary, especially the purchasing of indulgences (the remission of temporal punishment due to sin), of which he was extremely critical. He felt people were purchasing indulgences under false pretexts. This criticism of indulgences ultimately led to the writing of the Ninety-five Theses and consequently to the Reformation itself. His sermons were focused on the teachings of the Bible and he felt that Christians were not bound to anything that was not found in the scripture. He also thought that the clergy should play a reduced role in religion, as he sought to break down the distinction between laity and clergy. One of his fundamental beliefs was in the priesthood of all believers. That is, the clergy had not been sent by God as a separate, spiritual order, but were men required to perform special functions in Church and society. He favoured an individualist form of religion: every man must stand before God. This, in turn, was linked with the acceptance of Protestantism in urban areas - 'what was good for the soul of the individual was also considered good for the physical well-being of the city at large.'
Luther reduced the standard seven sacraments to just two, baptism and mass. Even these underwent radical transformation under Luther's guidance. This caused great outrage among the Catholic Church. However, Luther's alterations were not meant as an attack on priests - 'Luther really believed that the movement he had started was orthodox, that the papacy stood condemned as heretical." He had no desire to erect a new Church, but merely believed it was his divine purpose to cleanse the existing Catholic Church of false doctrine and misconduct. This can be seen in one of his early statements: 'I will honor the holiness of the pope... but I will worship the holiness of Christ and of truth." His concerns were principally religious, not ecclesiastical or sociological. His ideas struck a chord with the German people who had long felt grievances against the curia. It has previously been discussed that humanism was extremely influential in Luther's religious stance. However, there was one significant difference. Humanists tended to target particular popes because of their evil lives. Luther targeted every pope because it was the papacy, he believed, who were corrupting the church. His subsequent excommunication on 3 January 1521 marked his official break with the Roman Catholic Church. In essence, the Reformation movement owed its common identity to Luther's conflict with the papacy. Luther was held in high esteem as a man of the people and consequently such acclamation made Luther the head of the Reformation. He managed to build up a great deal of support within Germany, the most influential individual of which was Frederick the Wise, who became Luther's protector at Wartburg. By the time of Luther's hearing in Worms, his cause had become a popular movement. Quite clearly, it was Luther who initiated the movement and cultivated it in its early years.
With regard to his influence on the country of his origin, 'The claim is frequent that no man did so much to fashion the character of the German people." This was particularly so in relation to language and, of course, religion.
The question of why Luther and his ideas were so attractive to the German people must be asked. Dickens argues that 'one must... credit him with a charisma and a communicative power almost unique in the history of modern western religion'. He always took public opinion into account when preparing sermons and pamphlets. An important question, however, must be addressed. It is clear that Luther's ideas were widely distributed and read, and he became the most significant figure in the early stages of the Reformation, but did the masses understand his ideas? It is debatable whether they were able to follow his complex theological views. Dickens argues that Luther's ideas were accepted 'by an unclarity not wholly dissimilar to the Unklarheit said by certain modern theologians to have afflicted the late medieval Church'. However, it must be noted, as stated previously, that his ideas were simplified in order to allow a greater understanding by the masses. More importantly we must also question, whether it even mattered if the masses were able to comprehend his ideas. The reality was that he instigated a great religious movement, despite the fact that initially he had no desire to break with the Church. Does it, therefore, even matter whether his followers were unable to understand his ideas? To a certain degree, the answer must be no. His personality and ideas, whether understood or not, initiated the Reformation and were essential in its early development. The German people recognized that this man was highlighting their long term grievances against the Catholic Church. This was enough for them to support him in their millions.
Two of the most famous examples of Protestantism being accepted into large urban centres were with Strasbourg and Nuremberg. In both cities, it was the pressure from below, particularly from the lower and middle classes that forced the implementation of the Reformation, especially in the years 1524-1525. New Evangelical ideas of salvation were imposed upon the populations by Lutheran preachers. The city councils had to bow to demand and the Reformation was soon imposed in at least 50 out of 65 imperial cities according to Moeller. The Reformation was undoubtedly an urban event. Indeed, C. Scott Dixon states that, 'From the very outset, a relationship existed between the evangelical movement and the urban culture." This was because of the cities' social structures and class struggles, as well as their long standing anticlericalism and relatively high literacy levels - 'Reformers found fertile soil for their ideas in urban anticlerical and antimonopolistic mercantile sentiment." Once these new religious beliefs had established themselves in a self-governing walled town, it was impossible to wipe them out. They were accepted by virtually everyone and the Reformation became a democratic revolution. Luther's ideas changed late medieval religion in the most fundamental way.
Luther's personality and especially his ability to deliver speeches were vital to the early Reformation in Germany. 'Luther was... great in the sermons preached in the pulpit, the lectures delivered in the class hall, and the prayers voiced in the upper room. His versatility is genuinely amazing. No one in his own generation was able to vie with him." Luther began to think of himself as a prophet as he became aware that the nation was waiting for him to lead the people. His sermons were delivered with great vigour and were extremely influential initially in spreading the message of the Reformation - 'We are too much inclined to underestimate the social and political power of Luther's speech. This power was its very essence." Luther had a sublime power over words and was able to conjure intense excitement. Equally amazing was that Luther simultaneously became the most popular religious writer of his era.
Even Lortz, who displays an unfavourable attitude to the Reformation, admits that, 'In great measure the German Reformation is Martin Luther... Luther [was]... an original phenomenon of creative quality and power." Also important in terms of his personality was his sheer individualism as well as his speed of his doctrinal production and his enormous appetite for work. Perhaps most telling of all is Scott H. Hendrix's statement that 'Owing to Luther's dominant role at the beginning of the Reformation, an inquiry into his motive as a reformer is simultaneously an inquiry into the origins of the Protestant Reformation in general'. The first half of the sentence is important here - it is unambiguous, a fact, something than cannot be denied. Hendrix feels as if he has no need to support his argument because it is so widely accepted.
Therefore, in conclusion, the early Reformation in Germany owed a great deal to Martin Luther's personality and ideas. Despite the influence of humanism in the previous decade in creating anticlericalism and a national German sentiment, and the effect of other reformers on the Reformation, Luther was undeniably the single most important figure in its early stages. Although one could argue that without the widespread dissemination of his views, the Reformation would have been less likely to have survived, it is clear that without his theses it would not have even been born at all. Thus, Luther was hugely important in both initiating the Reformation and maintaining it in its infancy, both in terms of his ideas which had great resonance for the German people, and with his personality - especially the deliverance of his speeches which made him such an attractive leader. It is important to remember that it was purely because the nation's response to Luther was so intense, that he was forced to lead the movement - 'We know how Luther's words spread over the country with astonishing speed, how people seized upon them as if this was just what they had been waiting for." Without Luther's ideas and the subsequent response, the Reformation would never even have occurred.