In this paper I argue that the "war on terror" has prevented the US from establishing its hegemony in the East Asian region. Here I subscribe to the Gramscian idea of hegemony which refers to a state of absolute control achieved through the ready consent of the controlled. It is in the light of this definition that I establish the claim made above.
The argument focuses on three countries, namely, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines. I begin by examining the control US maintains in these countries through the support it provides to their military strength and internal counter-terrorism machinery. However, this control is insufficient if the US wishes to claim hegemonic status in the region. For this it requires to elicit the consent of these countries (people and government), and the second part of my argument deals with how the "war on terror" has prevented the US from achieving this end; thereby, keeping it from gaining hegemonic status in the region.
Ever since the cold war period the United States has been a crucial actor in East Asia. It has maintained its control in the region by providing military and monetary assistance to the countries in the region. Though the "war on terror" was prompted by the September 11 terrorist attacks, the US grabbed it as an opportunity to further strengthen the control it had been maintaining in East Asia. However, this paper argues that this strengthened control is not hegemony. Though the "war on terror" has enabled the strengthening of US control in the region, it has on the other hand prevented the country from establishing its hegemony in the East Asia.
It is important to mention here that I am using the Gramscian idea of hegemony in this paper. According to Gramsci, hegemony is a state of absolute control that is established and maintained through the " 'spontaneous' consent" of the controlled (Gramsci 2002; p. 61). Such a conception of hegemony emphasises that for control to be absolute, the controlled needs to be convinced as to the legitimacy of the control; for only then would the former " 'spontaneous[ly]' consent" to it (the control). In the light of this nuanced conception of hegemony I argue that the "war on terror" has had a negative impact on US' ambition to establish its hegemony in the East Asian region. For, though the war has enabled the US to maintain and even strengthen its control in the region, by necessitating the latter's support for building up the military strength and counter-terrorism machinery of East Asian countries, the "war on terror" has also served a severe blow to the legitimacy of US power and control; thereby, keeping the US from establishing its hegemony (or absolute control) in the region.
These two dimensions of control and consent, that constitute the Gramscian conception of hegemony, are what I analyse in the two parts of my essay. For the purpose of a closer analysis, I focus mainly on three countries of the region that have been crucial to the US' efforts to contain terrorism on the "second front" --- Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. In the aftermath of 9/11, the US increased its support to the internal security forces and military of these countries, in order to combat terrorism in the region. It is through these security cooperation arrangements, necessitated by the "war on terror", that the US automatically gained control in these countries. I elucidate this in the first part of my argument. And in the second part I analyse how this very war has prevented the US from establishing its hegemony in the region.
As early as in May 2001 the Council on Foreign Relations, in a memorandum to George Bush ('The US and Southeast Asia: A Policy Agenda for the New Administration'), argued that " '[t]he [Bush] Administration should preserve a credible military presence and a viable regional training and support infrastructure'" in the Southeast Asian region (Tuazon 2003). The "war on terror" was seized upon by the US to achieve these ends and thereby strengthen its control, as the case of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines evidences.
However, it is important to mention here that while the Philippines has remained a consistent supporter of the US-led "war on terror" from the beginning, the Indonesian and Malaysian governments have been critical of the war (Abuza 2003; p.189), though they have been providing practical security cooperation nevertheless. The causes for these different reactions to US power do not concern us here but shall be discussed in the next part of the argument.
The aim of this section, however, is to establish that by virtue of the support the US has provided for the strengthening of the military and internal counter-terrorism machinery of these countries, the latter have become increasingly reliant on the US to maintain this machinery; thereby, giving the US enough control in the region.
Soon after 9/11 the US granted US$ 12 million to Indonesia, for combating terrorist activities in the country, especially those of "terrorist financing and money-laundering" (Capie 2004; p.229-30). In 2003, shortly after the Bali bombings, the US granted another 12 million to train and equip a special unit of the Indonesian police force called Special Detachment 88. Since its inception this special unit has killed more than 200 suspected Jemaah Islamiyah terrorists, including Azahari Husin who was involved in the Bali and Marriott hotel bombings as well as in a foiled attack on the Australian Embassy. Also, working in close cooperation with the US FBI the Special Detachment 88 arrested 12 Indonesians who were suspected of the murder of two American teachers in the region, in 2002 (Dillon 2006). Special Detachment 88 is central to the country's counter-terrorism machinery today, and is completely reliant on the funds and training it receives from the US.
Though Indonesia and the US do not share the best of military-to- military ties, it is significant that the Navy SEALs have been training in Indonesia for years now (Rumsfeld 2002). Also, since soon after 9/11 the US has been benefiting from overflight rights in the country (Capie 2004;p.228). On the other hand, the Indonesian army (TNI) has benefited from raising of the arms embargo, in 2005, that the US had maintained against the former after it went on a "death and destruction rampage in the wake of East Timor's 1999 vote for independence" (Crispin 2006).
Even in Malaysia the US has supported the build-up of a strong counter-terrorism machinery. Central to this is the Southeast Asian regional counter-terrorism centre for training. This centre has already led to the arrest of several terrorists of the Jemaah Islamiyah and other terrorist groups (Capie 2004, p. 230; Daley, 2003). The US has also recognised the International Security Act (ISA) as a tool for combating terrorism in the country. This act permits detention without trial and thus facilitates the timely detention of terrorist suspects.
However, not just new developments but also some old, continuing practices (with renewed importance though) need to be mentioned here. For instance, since the 1980s, when military-to-military ties had been established between Malaysia and the US, the latter has been providing training to the Royal Malaysian Airforce. The Navy SEALs have also been training in Malaysia twice a year, while the American army special forces have been training in Malaysia's jungle warfare school (Aldinger, 2002; Capie 2004; p.232; Pan 2006). The two countries also maintain strong intelligence ties.
Thus, it is clear from the details mentioned above that by virtue of the security cooperation arrangements necessitated by the "war on terror" the US has gained great control in Indonesia and Malaysia.
But of the three countries the country that has received the maximum assistance in building up its military strength and internal counter-terrorism machinery is the Philippines. In 2001 itself it received more than US$ 100 million worth of assistance in the form of funds and equipment. Another US$78million were granted in 2003 for the military equipment and the training of soldiers. Philippines was also granted the status of a non-NATO ally; thereby, enabling it to receive additional American equipment and assistance. This gave the Philippines' resource-starved army the much-needed equipment and funds (Capie 2004; p.233). It has also enabled the military to strengthen itself to combat any future threats of encroachment in territories of the South China Sea, that the Philippines disputes with China. Thus, clearly this military aid is essential for the Philippines and that gives the US an indispensable position vis--vis the former.
Even more significant in this respect has been the sending of a Joint Task Force of 1200 US troops, in 2002, to fight the Abu Sayyaf group in the southern Philippines, though it was told to have been sent for training purposes. In 2003 the US decided to send more troops to the country, to assist the operations of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) (Capie 2004;p. 233). The former continues to support the latter in its fight against this terrorist group, though it is not directly involved in the process of fighting (Tarrazona 2007). Therefore, its established that Manila depends almost completely on US aid and support for the resolution of the problem in Mindanao.
Equally important to the US' domination in the region is the MLSA. In 2002, the US and the Philippines "signed a new Mutual Logistics Support Agreement" that granted the former the "right to stockpile essential equipment and supplies in the country". Though the US could not form any permanent bases in the region, this became a good way of maintaining at least its presence there.
Thus, it is clear from the preceding discussion that with the military and internal counter-terrorism machinery of these countries depending on the US for funds, equipment and training, the latter's hold on these countries has become quite strong. The "war on terror" has indeed strengthened the control of the US in these countries....but it has still not allowed it to establish its hegemony here.
This is because the element of " 'spontaneous' consent" is missing. The "war on terror" has served a sever blow to the legitimacy of US power and control. Though the second part of this essay argues this in detail, it might be beneficial to outline the basic argument I make in the next part.
I argue that the element of " 'spontaneous' consent" is missing at two levels (though they are not mutually exclusive) --- level of the people and of the government. That it is missing is manifested in the political manoeuvrings of the government. In the case of the people it translates into protests (for example, the rise in the appeal of jihad in protest to the "war on terror"), but is also visible in the impact it has on government decision-making. The cause for this missing " 'spontaneous' consent" at the popular level in these countries, is essentially US hypocrisy. At the level of the government, on the other hand, it is caused by the latter's tendency to act unilaterally, which the "war on terror" exemplifies, and the concerns of the people. Thus, though the two levels are not mutually exclusive, pulling them slightly apart to study enables a more complete understanding of the various ways in which the "war on terror" has prevented the US from establishing hegemony in these countries, despite having enabled it to gain major control in them.
The aim of this section is to establish the ways in which the "war on terror" has led to the refutation of the legitimacy of US power, and prevented it from gaining the " 'spontaneous' consent" of peoples and governments of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines; thus, keeping it from establishing its hegemony in these countries. While the argument that follows has already been outlined in the previous section, the structure still needs to be delineated. This section is further divided into two sub-sections. I begin by analysing how the absence of " 'spontaneous' consent" is manifested at the level of both the government and the people, and then move on to analyse the reasons for this missing " 'spontaneous' consent" in a separate sub-section.
Taking into account the Gramscian concept of hegemony, this paper argued that "war on terror" has prevented the US from establishing its hegemony in three countries of East Asia, namely Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.
According to Gramsci hegemony refers to a state of absolute control that is established and maintained through the " 'spontaneous' consent" of the controlled. Such a conception of hegemony stresses on the need for the controlled to be convinced as to the legitimacy of the control which thereby leads the controlled into " 'spontaneous[ly]' consenting" to the control. This element of " 'spontaneous' consent" is what distinguishes hegemony from power or control.
It is thus that I argued that the "war on terror" has not enabled the US to establish hegemony in the region but only control. The security cooperation arrangements that the war necessitated have indeed led the US to becoming indispensable to the above-mentioned countries through the support the former (US) provides to the military and counter-terrorism machinery of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines; thereby, enabling the US to gain control through the support provided.
The control gained thus established, I moved on to point out the sites of resistance at the level of the government and the people, to prove that the control is not absolute (hegemonic). Interestingly even the governments of these countries, through political manoeuvrings, try to resist more US intervention than suits the country's needs (and their own). Thus, while the governments seem to be cooperating with the US in the "war on terror" it is because of bilateral benefits (as explained in section one) , and not faith in the legitimacy of US power. The resistance of the people on the other hand is less ambiguous, though it not only manifests itself directly but also through its influence on government decision-making.
In this paper, I identified two main reasons for this missing " 'spontaneous' consent" amongst the peoples and governments of these countries--- the hypocrisy and unilateralist tendencies of the Bush II administration. I argued that by revealing these characteristics of US foreign policy the "war on terror" has served a severe blow to the reputation of the US and its growing power in the international arena; thereby, preventing it from gaining " 'spontaneous' consent" in these countries.
Thus, by laying out both sides I have argued that the "war on terror" has certainly enabled the US to gain control in Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines, though it has also, on the other hand, prevented the US from establishing its hegemony in these countries.