This paper argues that the human rights violations one witnesses in the international political system today, have a relationship with the androcentric nature of Realism, that predominates the field of international relations. The first part of the paper examines this linkage in a two-step fashion. To begin with, each concept and issue that Realism emphasises most, is linked to the value, which has traditionally bee associated with masculinity, from which the concept or issue draws its legitimacy and importance. Having established the androcentric nature of Realism, which informs the theory's priorities, the section illustrates how these prioritised concepts and issues have proven detrimental to human rights. The second part of the paper briefly revisits Realism's priority- list, from the perspective of IR feminists. It also discusses how feminist redefinitions of the concepts and issues emphasised by Realism, could enable the creation of a system of international relations which is, at least relatively, more conducive to the realisation of human rights.
Today, we are at a point in the history of the world where human rights have become highly imperilled, and the importance of human rights norms has escalated (Schmitz and Sikkink, 2001; p.2). While the 9/11 terrorist attacks exemplify one kind of threat to human rights, the US-led 'war on terror' in the middle-east, embodies another. This paper focuses on human rights violations of the second kind, which find states guilty of the abuse.
The state is at the centre of Realism, the predominant theory in the field of international relations. This paper argues that this theory is androcentric, and examines the ways in which the androcentric nature of Realism has led to a world order in which human rights violations are rampant. Feminist theories of IR have been used to facilitate this argument.
There are other possible approaches to investigating Realism's treatment of the issue of human rights. For instance, that of the Frankfurt School of Critical Security Studies, which emphasises on individual security and emancipation, and critiques Realism's limiting the notion of security to military terms alone (Booth, 2005: p.; 12-13).
Cosmopolitanism might constitute another viable approach, by virtue of its repudiation of Realism's state- centred approach, and its endorsement of the idea of a universal moral code that transcends state boundaries and state interests (Ann Kent in Jacobsen and Lawson, 1999; p. 205). However, I have chosen the critical lens of Feminism to examine if the traditionally accepted dichotomy between the 'masculine' and the 'feminine', as well as the superior status acceded to the former, has a link with what the Realist agenda prioritises.
This notion of 'masculine'-as-superior is seminal to social relations at all levels, and the construction and maintenance of international relations depends on these social relations (Enloe, 1990). Realism being a problem-solving theory (Booth, 2005: p.5 ; Tickner, 1997: p.619) reflects this gender-bias in the field, through the concepts it emphasises or ignores, and its definitions of the same. Considering these facts and that this theory predominates political thinking today, as mentioned above, I have chosen the perspective of feminism to analyse the relationship between the former's androcentric nature and the violation of human rights by states.
The argument is divided into two parts. It begins with an analysis of the relationship between the androcentric nature of Realism and human rights. It examines the concepts Realism focuses on, the specific values, traditionally associated with 'masculinity', that prompt and legitimise the theory's focus, and the human rights violations it leads to. In the second part of the paper, these very concepts and issues are revisited from the perspective of Feminist theories of IR. The paper also examines how each of these redefinitions, enables the creation of an international political system that is may be more conducive to the protection and realisation of human rights.
Being a critical theory Feminism believes that everything that is deemed 'natural' is actually "concocted" by someone (Enloe, 1990; p.3). Thus, Realism's emphasis on the state( its security and sovereignty), on the imminence of war, on the need for maintaining military forces, on objectivity and finally, on theory and abstractions, is not because these are actually the only important issues in international politics. The treatment of the issue of human rights by a Realism-driven international relations, compels one to question as to what leads the theory to focus on the above-mentioned issues, and this paper seeks an explanation in the androcentric nature of the theory.
For a more clear and systematic analysis, the following method has been adopted. I first identify the particular values, traditionally associated with 'masculinity', which underlie Realism's focus on each of the above-mentioned issues. I then go onto establish how the prioritisation of these issues and concepts, could lead (and in many instances, has led) to the violation of human rights.
To begin with, there is Realism's focus on the state and "disregard" for human rights (Booth, 2005; p. 7). The state acquires legitimacy for its actions from its role as 'protector' of its citizens. Traditionally, the role of 'protector' has been associated with men, and the valour to protect with 'masculinity', while women and children have been pictured as the weak, in need of protection. The role of the latter has only been to provide legitimacy to the actions of the former (Tickner, 2001; pp. 49-51). It is not surprising then, that Realism focuses on the state, that embodies the masculine quality of protection, while bringing human lives into political discourse, only to confirm the legitimacy of state actions. The theory's emphasis on the state's rights, even at the cost of human rights, is manifested in its preoccupation with the state's right to sovereignty, and with national security.
State sovereignty and human rights are typically seen as opposed to each other on fundamental grounds. It could literally be seen as the 'Peace of Westphalia' (1648) versus the 'Universal Declaration of Human Rights' (1948) (Donnelly, 2004; p.2). In the field of IR, this opposition often translates into debates concerning the issue of state sovereignty and humanitarian intervention; for, the latter implies intervention into a state's internal affairs, on humanitarian grounds, which breaches the right to non-interference that the principle of sovereignty entitles states to.
Scholars belonging to various theoretical schools of IR, have been debating this issue. For instance, the debate between the pluralists and solidarists of the English School. While the former vouches for non- intervention to ensure the state's right to sovereignty, the latter argues the case for human rights, acknowledging a universal solidarity between human beings, and allowing state sovereignty only a secondary position (Bellamy, 2003; p. 321). On the contrary, the 'Welsh School' of Critical Security Studies (which draws on the Frankfurt School's approach) and writers on Third World politics, problematise this debate by shifting the focus from 'rogue' regimes that abuse the rights of their citizens, to structural violence that threatens many more human lives (Bellamy, 2003; pp. 328-9).
However, the theory that predominates the field of international relations, clearly prioritises state sovereignty. Moreover, it does not even recognise any higher body or focus of loyalty (Booth, 2005; pp. 7-8); thereby, not permitting the establishment of transnational decision-making structures, which could, for instance, prevent sates from using their right to sovereign rule to violate the rights of citizens. Both these points put together make the Realist preoccupation with state sovereignty, appear a serious threat to human rights. The example of China's treatment of its ethnic minorities in the western part of the country, might help to illustrate this threat.
China's massive economic benefit strategy, which was ostensibly promoted for benefiting the rural ethnic groups in the western regions, is in actuality excluding and marginalising minority groups such as Mongols, Tibetans, and Uyghurs. According to a new report by Minority Rights Group International (MRG) and Human Rights in China (HRIC), the strategy merely masks the increased repression of these ethnic minority groups. Systematic violations of civil and political rights, like assimilation through population transfers, militarization and resource extraction, accompany their exclusion from the top-down policy of economic development, adopted by China.
In such circumstances, the rhetoric of protection, which legitimises the state's right to sovereignty, falls flat. And, in the absence of a transnational body that could protect the rights of these minority groups in China, state sovereignty becomes a clear threat to human rights (HRIC and MRG, 2007).
China's is not a one-off case. The Muslim minority in the Philippines, which has a Catholic majority and a Catholic ruling party, endure similar human rights abuses as well. This is especially true for twenty-four per cent of the Muslim population , that lives in Mindanao, southern Philippines. Residents of the island have been accusing the Catholic-majority government of cultural and economic repression, for years now (Zelnik, 2003). They allege the Catholic- majority government of trying to "reshape the indigenous society of Mindanao in their own image", just as the Spanish and then the American colonisers had tried to do, before them (Dosch, 2007; p. 89). Furthermore, despite being the richest in terms of natural resources, the region of the country is marked by poverty, and high rates of underdevelopment. The economic disparity between the Muslim and other regions of the country, has also sparked great angst against the government's policies, among the country's Muslims. In addition to this, the villagers of Mindanao, have accused the government's forces of pillaging their homes and villages; thereby, compelling them to seek refuge elsewhere (Zelnik, 2003). Thus, once again it gets established, that Realism's absolute focus on the state and state sovereignty, offers no solutions to such situations, where the state no longer remains the protector of its citizens, but instead makes unfair use of its right to sovereign rule in the land, to rip its citizens' of human rights.
Realism's focus on the state also results in its restricting the definition of security to national security. Moreover, in the Realist jargon, the 'nation' is literally seen as an "abstraction", a "dehumanised term". Such an understanding of 'nation', encourages indifference to the lives of those that constitute it (anonymous ex-foreign services officer in Power, 2004; p. 235). This restriction of security to the 'nation', and to a dehumanised nation at that, makes Realism's conception of security, pose a threat to human rights. For, this traditional understanding of national security allows the state to evade discussion on other threats to the health and life of a huge section of its population. Environmental racism in the United States, practiced against the nation's poorest, coloured citizens, provides one such example (Kashef, 1999). Furthermore, the supreme importance given to national security, could itself lead to the violation of human rights. For instance, in the wake of the 9/11 terrorist attack, about six hundred people were detained without trial, by US authorities, on suspicion of involvement in the conspiracy, that posed a serious threat to the country's security set-up. This detention without trial was a direct violation of article ten of the Declaration of Human Rights, yet , it could be justified in the light of the emergency the attacks entailed. However, estimates reveal that even until 2004, five hundred and forty detainees, of the six hundred detained immediately after the attacks, continued to face indefinite detention, at Guantanamo Bay, without any charges having been brought against them. The post-9/11 emergency, cannot justify this gross violation of human rights, committed on the pretext of maintaining national security (BBC, 2004).
Thus, from the abovementioned discussion of state sovereignty and national security, it is clear that Realism's absolute focus on the state, could pose a serious threat to human rights. Undoubtedly then, the theory's 'masculine' bias threatens human rights, by informing the theory's list of priorities (as discussed above).
A corollary to the above-mentioned, limited understanding of security, or even of national security, is the theory's almost obsessive interest in strategizing and in development of military capabilities. This obviously needs to be seen in the context of the Realist conception of the international system, wherein the system itself is seen as anarchic, while the states are assumed to be self-interested constituents of the system. It is thus, that war is assumed to be imminent in the international system, while peace and cooperation are not considered obvious possibilities. Hence, a Realist-derived security agenda exerts great emphasis on maintaining and enhancing the state's military capabilities, as well as on strategising the use of these capabilities (Tickner, 2001; p. 40). I shall now interrogate this focus on the imminence of war, and on the maintenance and use of military force, to uncover the values, traditionally associated with 'masculinity', that legitimise this focus. I shall then illustrate how Realism's ( or Realist - derived Security Studies') focus on war and military capabilities, could be detrimental to human rights.
Wars are perceived to be imminent in the anarchic international system, both because the system is a self-help one, and also due to the self- interested nature of states. In other words, it is not only the threat from other actors of the international system, but also states' ambition to maximise their power, that keeps conflict and war, imminent in the international realm. The capability for self-help has traditionally been assumed as lying with men alone (Tickner, 2001; p. 52); for weakness has always been associated with women and children, who therefore seek protection, as explained above. The quest for power is another reason for Realism's focus on war. According to Keohane, Realism perceives power as the "ability to control" (Keohane 1989; p.246). This coercive aspect of power is captured by the term " potestas", which refers to a coercive and organised masculine power (Elshtain, 1994; pp.254-6). Thus, both self-help and coercive power are masculine-gendered concepts. It is not surprising then, that Realism subscribes to these concepts (simply reflecting the masculine bias in the social and international realm), which in turn become the reasons for imminence of war in the international system.
The concept of "potestas" also explains Realism's focus on strategising and regulation of the state military force. As mentioned above, " potestas" refers to coercive and organised masculine power. And, it is precisely organisation of coercive power, to optimise control, that strategising and regulation of the military forces are concerned with; thus, the theory's obsessive interest in military activities.
The field of international politics exemplifies Realism's focus on war, and the need to be prepared for it. However, this emphasis could be detrimental to human rights. And, I use illustrations to substantiate this claim.
There is an on-going debate over the actual reason for the United State's war on terror, especially concerning its extension into Iraq. While the more readily accepted answer would be, 'to rid the world of the threat of terror', the more controversial one deems the war to be aimed at conserving and strengthening Pax Americana, in the twenty first century, mainly through the use of military force. Secret official documents of the US, such as the 'Defence Policy Guidance' of 1992 and the 'Project for a New American Century' (PNAC, 1997), themselves admit to the latter ( Tuazon, 2003). However, whether to secure the world from the threat of terrorism, or to further strengthen its stance in the international arena, the US-led war in Iraq, has negatively impacted the human rights of people not only in the war-torn country, but also in the US itself.
The economic strain the war has subjected Americans to is only too well known. However, along with its economic resources, the country's military resources have also been invested into the offensive act; leaving the country quite vulnerable against unexpected disasters. This became evident when Hurricane Katrina hit the city of New Orleans. Even after forty- eight hours, no guards were sent to the city, to rescue the survivors. As two guardsmen of the National Guard later explained, this was because a major section of their unit was in Iraq, and the remaining members were not enough to manage a catastrophe of that scale. Thus, a war, the necessity of which is debatable, could actually encroach upon resources needed to protect people from threats to their life (Bradshaw and Slonsky, 2005).
The imminence of war in the international system, necessitates the need to be prepared for it. The need to maintain large armies has forced the recruitment of children into military forces. According to UN estimates, approximately two hundred and fifty thousand children are presently working as child soldiers in twenty different conflicts in the world. In almost twenty countries, governments themselves recruit children as soldiers. According to Ishmael Beah, former child soldier in Sierre Leone, recruitment of children as child soldiers "limits them from knowing themselves as human beings" (Human Rights Watch, 2007); thereby, ensuring the future of this dehumanised system. This is but one example of the several atrocities governments subject their people to, in order to ensure a strong military force, both for offensive acts and the defence needs
Thus, it could be established beyond doubt, that the Realism-led international system's focus on war and in maintaining strong military forces, either for defence or offence purposes, could pose, and as the examples prove, does pose a serious threat to essential human rights.
Realism also emphasises on the concept of objectivity and makes a claim to it. As the others mentioned before, this concern of Realism's is rooted in the androcentric nature of society and the international system, that the theory reflects and reproduces. Ever since Western philosophy's objectivist metaphysics has been in place, objectivity has been prided for being a 'masculine' quality (Peterson, 1992; p.13).
Like all theories based on the positivist model, Realism defines objectivity as a "perspectiveless gaze" (Peterson, 1992; p.12). The theory does not recognise the constructed nature of all that is considered 'objective'. Its blind subscription to such a definition of objectivity, reduces the latter to a tool that could be used by the powerful states, to evade laws. This is precisely what has happened in the case of the US' treatment of the human rights issue, especially since the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
The US has log been a supporter of human rights. It has vied for these rights to be universally accepted, irrespective of historical and socio-cultural contexts; thus, claiming for these rights, the status of 'objective' truths. However, disclosure of the plight of people imprisoned in the Guantanamo Bay detention centre, for example, has found the US itself, guilty of abusing the rights of those detained. Yet the country has evaded the law by classifying those detained as "enemy combatants". This has allowed the former to maintain its 'objective' commitment to human rights, while stripping the detainees off rights that the prisoners of war, or those that civilians, are entitled to (Roth, 2003). Thus, it is evident, that the impossible definition of 'objectivity' which Realism subscribes to, could be manipulated by those who have the power to objectify. This in turn, as shown above, could lead to a gross violation of people's fundamental rights.
Finally, Realism focuses on theory and insists on keeping it separate from practice. Theory has been associated with the 'masculine' capability to "transcend" while "contingency" has been associated with femininity, in Western philosophy's objectivist metaphysics (Peterson, 1992; 12). Thus, theory which is marked by its abstraction and separation from actual lived experience, has been traditionally associated with masculinity, and is thus, emphasised by Realism.
This focus on theory and abstractions, without acknowledging the actuality being talked of, poses a grave threat to the issue of human rights. Carol Cohn's 'Sex and Death in the World of Defence Intellectuals' explains how.
In the world of defence analysts, the language used is, what Cohn terms, "technostrategic". The point of reference in this language is not human life or suffering, but weapons of mass destruction. Abstractions such as the term, "collateral damage", are used instead of mass murder. The sight of incinerating cities is elided by the use of the rather composed term, "countervalue attacks". This "clean language" (Cohn, 1992; pp. 690-1), which initially hinders one from thinking of the death, damage and suffering, that the attacks entail, subsequently becomes a transforming experience. Having got accustomed to the language, one enters into a new mode of thinking as well, where weapons become the point of reference, rather than human beings, as in the language itself (Cohn, 1992; pp. 711-12).
Thus, Realism's emphasis on abstractions, and on keeping theory separate from practice, allows Realists to be oblivious to the human rights abused through every issue and concept it prioritises in the field of international relations (as discussed in this section of the paper). It is this oblivion to human life and suffering, this lack of acknowledgement of it, that embodies the greatest threat that Realism and Realism-driven international relations, pose to the issue of human rights.
This section of the paper has argued that Realism's focus on certain issues and concepts in the field of international politics, is informed by the androcentric nature of societal and international relations, that the theory both reflects and reinforces . It also goes on to prove how this priority-list leads to the violation of human rights in international politics; thereby, using the androcentric nature of Realism to explain the violation of human rights in the international political system. Having identified this connection, the next section of the paper briefly revisits the concepts and issues discussed above, from the perspective of Feminist theories of IR. Also, it examines how these redefinitions could enable the creation of an environment, relatively more conducive to the realisation of human rights.
Before beginning my argument here, it is important to reiterate the point made in the introduction to this paper. Feminist theories of IR do not offer the only critique to the missing emphasis on human beings, in Realism. However, since the androcentric nature of the theory constitutes one of the pivotal reasons for the theory's oblivion to human life and human rights, Feminist theories of IR offer a good lead to begin rectification of Realism's gendered priority-list; thereby, bringing humans into the picture of international relations, which is essential to their rights being acknowledged and guarded.
Feminism begins this task by revisiting the relationship between the state and its citizens. As discussed above, the latter is brought into political discourse, only to confirm the legitimacy of state actions; the role of the state being to protect its vulnerable citizens (especially women and children) from threats lurking in an anarchic international system. It is this legitimacy that grants states the position of key actors in international politics. However, Tickner urges one to not accept the rhetoric, but check for oneself if state actions are really motivated by the intention to protect citizens from external threats. She does this by shifting the focus from the rhetoric of states to the actual plight of individuals. She argues that women and children are amongst the worst-hit when wars are fought (and they are not always fought in defence, as discussed above). While women suffer from the increased economic and care-taking burden, as well as atrocities such as war-time rapes, children suffer death and injury. According to the 1994 report of the Save the Child Fund, 1.4 million children were killed in wars while 4 million got injured by bombs and landmines, during the decade preceding the report (Tickner, 2001; pp. 49-51).
This picture of women and children suffering, undermines the legitimacy of, and denaturalises the image of the state-as- protector. It compels one to acknowledge that if human rights need to be protected, the focus needs to be broadened to include the individuals, whose lives are directly affected by decisions made at the national and international levels. The personal and the political cannot be separated.
The concept of national security has also been redefined by Feminist theories of IR (much like critical security studies), to mean human security. Like the latter, it too defines security as protection from all forms of violence: structural, physical, ecological and other forms (Tickner, 1997: p.624; 2001: p. 62). Such an understanding of security is much needed to not only prevent the violation of basic human rights, but also of those that enable human development.
Feminists also take issue with the definition of power as the ability to control. According to them, power is not a unitary concept. Elshtain sees this lack of unity in the concept of power, as possessing the potential for change; the overhauling of " potestas" (coercive, organised masculine power) for " potentia" (unorganised feminine potential) (Elshtain, 1994; pp.354-6). Keohane uses Hannah Arendt's definition of power as the "ability to act in concert", to argue that such a redefinition of the concept could enable one to look at areas of world politics, where collective effort could be channelled towards the achievement of common goals (Keohane, 1989; p. 246). Thus, a feminist understanding of the concept of power enables the usage of power for the realisation of human rights, rather than restricting it to being used for justifying war and aggression alone.
Objectivity is another concept, that Realism emphasises, and Feminists redefine. The latter rejects the definition of objectivity as a "perspectiveless gaze", as well as the claims to neutrality that this definition makes (Peterson, 1992; p.12). Instead, feminists define objectivity on the lines of Evelyn Fox Keller's concept of " 'dynamic objectivity'" (Keohane, 1989: pp. 247-8; Murphy, 1996, p. 527). According to Keller, dynamic objectivity " 'uses consciousness of the self in the interest of a more effective objectivity'" (Keohane, 1989; pp. 247-8). Such an understanding of objectivity, does not make faulty claims to neutrality, but instead acknowledges the partial status of every stance taken. Thus, feminism does not believe in an objectivity, but in objectivit(ies), and this approach to the concept ensures that even the powerful would not be able to sell their version of the 'truth', as the only obvious or natural one (the opposite of which could be quite detrimental to the issue of human rights, as seen in the previous section).
Since feminism believes that everything is a social construct, it denounces the quality of transcendence that Realism upholds through its emphasis on abstractions; the emphasis in turn translating into a preoccupation with theory as opposed to practice. However, Tickner argues that theory cannot be seen as separate from practice, for both mutually affect each other; thereby, problematising the dichotomy (Tickner, 2001; p.64). Enloe goes a step further to argue that practice must become the starting point for theory (Enloe, 1990; p. 201). Such an insistence on making the actual, the basis for formulating theories, would help to avoid the violation of human rights; for, focus on actuality would lead to an emphasis on the lives that theory-backed policies, directly affect.
Having discussed the importance of acknowledging those values that have traditionally been associated with women, it is also important to acknowledge that this change cannot be achieved simply by adding women to the ranks of policy-makers. As Foucault argues, human agency needs to be directed towards changing social structures rather than institutional policy (Salla, 2001). The bias has to be rectified, and the acknowledgement made at the level of social relational itself. For, as seen in the previous section of the paper, it is some value, that society has traditionally been associating with masculinity, and the higher status granted to masculinity itself, that underlies Realism's androcentric nature. This androcentric nature of the theory, in turn reflects in Realist- derived national and foreign policies, and is likely to have a detrimental impact on human rights (as argued above). Thus, to rectify this bias and create an international political system more conducive to the realisation of human rights, values that have traditionally been seen as not- 'masculine', need to be acknowledged at the level of society, first, and consequently at the level of the international, for the bias to be rectified in Realism, and Realist-derived policies.
This paper has argued that there is a connection between the androcentric nature of Realism, and the rampant violation of human rights in the Realism-predominated system of international relations. The issues and concepts that the theory prioritises, draw upon values that have been traditionally associated with masculinity, and are upheld in society for the same reason. These priorities of androcentric Realism are reflected in the national and foreign policies formulated by Realist policy-makers, and have been proven for embodying a likely threat to human rights.
The Feminist theories of IR have also been used, to highlight those values that have been ignored by androcentric Realism; acknowledging the importance of which, could enable the creation of an international political system more conducive to the preservation and realisation of human rights. However, it may be concluded that to rectify this bias, human agency has to be directed towards changing social structures first; for, it is these hierarchies that get reflected in the international sphere as well.