To develop practical, efficient and flexible routes to 1,2-diamines using the four membered diazetidine ring as a building block.
To develop efficient methods for the synthesis of 1 and 2.
To use asymmetric lithiation/electrophilic substitution reactions of 1 to prepare functionalised diazetidines and then deprotection and reductive cleavage of the N-N bond to provide enantiomerically enriched acyclic diamines
To investigate the cycloaddition of 2 in Diels-Alder reactions and other cycloadditions including [3+2] and [2+2] processes to provide functionalisable precursors for products containing a vicinal diamines unit.
Diazetidine 1 has not been reported in the literature. There have been several reports on the synthesis of related compounds.
Firl and Sommer have reported the reaction of dimethyl azodicarboxylate and phenyl vinyl sulphide to give a mixture of the [2+2] and [2+4] cycloadducts (scheme 1).1 Using di-tert-butyl azodicarboxylate we hope to make the Boc-protected diazetidine. Reductive removal of the SPh group could be affected by Bu 3SnH to yield the diazetidine 1.
The nitrogens in 1 are expected to adopt a pyramidal geometry,2 orientating the Boc groups anti- to each other. Enantioselective deprotonation with sec-BuLi/(-)-sparteine,3 directed by the C=O bonds of the carbamate should give organolithium 3 which is expected to undergo substitution with a range of carbon based electrophiles. Reductive cleavage of the N-N bond should provide enantiomerically enriched 1,2-diamines (scheme 2).
The [2+2] cycloaddition is thought to proceed via a dipolar intermediate,1 hence thermal reaction of ethene with azo compounds cannot be used to give diazetidine directly.
More recently Miao and Xu have reported on the synthesis of chiral 3-substituted 1,2-diazetidines via an intermolecular cyclisation,4 taking advantage of important work by List on catalytic asymmetric -amination of aldehydes (scheme 3).5
This cyclisation is shown to be general to a range of carbamate protecting groups and alkyl substituents at the 3- position. Should this method work for substrates unsubstituted at the 3 position it will provide a more efficient route to our target 1,2-diazetidine.
Another approach to diazetidine has been explored in the conformationally locked system 4.6 Irradiation (>280nm) produced the stable [2+2] cycloaddition product 5 in 70% yield. Although our interests are in the formation of rather less substituted diazetidines, a photochemical approach will be explored in addition to the standard ionic chemistry.
The common techniques employed by the organic chemist will be used in this project. Reaction monitoring will be done primarily by thin layer chromatography and 1H NMR. GC/MS will be used where possible.
Column chromatography on silica gel is expected to be the primary method of purification. Recrystallisation will be used where necessary. Thought will be given also to more time efficient techniques such as elution through exchange columns or other specific methods to separate the desired product.
Due to the thermal lability of 2,7 low temperature manipulations will be necessary. This will bring new experience of these techniques.
Product characterisation will be done by 1H and 13C NMR, electrospray MS, IR spectroscopy, UV/vis spectroscopy, and HRMS where necessary. Where proof of purity is required CHN analysis or 1H NMR following silica gel chromatography will be used.