My work involves the synthesis of sugar functionalised polymers. These are made from aldose monomers such as 5-benzyl-5--D-glucopyranosyl-1,3-dimethylbarbiturate 1 which are formed from alkylation of the sugar-barbiturate sodium salt 2.
Reaction monitoring and indeed the first stage in product characterisation is done by Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC). Any new material formed in a reaction will have a specific R f value with a given solvent system. TLC will show any major by-products of the reaction and their relative polarity, in essence, how 'pure' the intended reaction product is. The method is inexpensive and provides results quickly.
Many of the reactions conducted require extractions with several solvents to isolate the product. When the reaction is novel, TLC and 1H Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy are used to determine which components of the reaction mixture have partitioned into which solvents. If TLC shows a clear partition, and the simple proton spectra allow us to identify the species expected in each solvent, whether it be starting material, product, or by-product, this is normally sufficient and efforts are concentrated on purification of the product.
The desired product is usually purified by column chromatography. TLC is used initially to determine the species' progress through the column, and then 1H NMR and Correlated Spectroscopy (COSY) of the collected fractions allow us to identify the species present. Proton spectra with automatic moisture suppressant treatment are useful at this stage as removal of solvent from these monomers is difficult due to their amphiphilic nature [1].
Exact assignment of spectral peaks in the 1H spectra of species such as 1 is difficult as the proton signals for the sugar and the benzylic CH 2 overlap. In order to characterise species such as these, the tetra-acetate derivative 3 is formed. This spreads the pyranoid ring proton resonances over a greater range (3.0 - 5.8 ppm).
The 1H spectrum is studied in detail to determine the size of 3J coupling constants in the sugar, which are indicative of the relative configurations of the stereogenic centres present. Their size provides evidence for the trans-diaxial conformation of protons found only in the pyranose ring form. The 3J
H1-2 coupling constant size of ca. 10 Hz is indicative of the  configuration of the alkyl barbiturate at the anomeric centre.
13C NMR spectra also aid characterisation. For example, C-5 of the barbiturate holds no protons but it resonates at ca. 58 ppm, characteristic of the 5,5-disubstituted barbiturate [2]. 1H - 13C COSY (HMQC) and the longer range HMBC spectra are used also at this stage to assign with confidence all signals in the proton and carbon spectra.
A great amount of previous work has established NMR spectroscopy as the primary tool for product characterisation in this field [1-5].
The lactosyl derivative of 1 is water soluble and was extracted from its reaction mixture along with the reaction by-product NaCl. The apparently high yielding reaction showed only the intended product by NMR. This example highlights the inability of NMR to detect non-protic impurities and the care that must be taken when interpreting spectra.
Next, low resolution EI Mass Spectra (MS) are taken of the products. After confirming the mass of the molecular ion, we can assess if the fragmentation pattern is as predicted. For example, 1 fragments as expected to give a peak at m/z = 117 for benzyl ethene. Mass spectroscopy as a standalone method has limitations too: a mixture of unreacted barbituric acid and 1 may produce a spectrum similar to that from purely 1. NMR would however be able to differentiate between the samples as the two methyl groups in the unreacted acid are equivalent whereas in 1 they are magnetically inequivalent. So only in conjunction with NMR data can this technique be used to elucidate structure.
Elemental analysis (EA), in this work specifically CHN analysis, is a good indicator of purity of a sample with a known structure. Unfortunately, compounds such as 1 have an unusually high affinity for solvents such as DMSO we use in their synthesis and removal of the last traces of these is problematic, complicating the results.
Measurement of melting point can be another measure of purity. Melting points for species similar to 1 and 2 have been reported as ranges over 6-9C, owing to the problems of removing solvent. The additional problem of the ability of 1 to auto polymerisation at temperatures above 70C also makes this problematic.
For publication in the leading journals in this field, 1H and 13C NMR along with MS data for the molecular ion, and CHN analysis are all required. In the near future, and after thorough drying, CHN analysis will be carried out on 1 and 2 as will melting point determination to complete this data set. Also, given that the tetra-acetate derivative  2 is crystalline, it would be informative to determine the crystal structure to have some idea of the relative orientation of the barbiturate and alkyl moieties.
In summary, NMR is the primary tool used for product characterisation, with MS and EA providing supplementary information. Infra-red Spectroscopy is not used due to the complexity of the spectra obtained.
References
(1) Wulff, G.; Clarkson, G. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 1994, 195, 2603-2610.
(2) Bojarski, J.T.; Mokrosz, J.L. Adv. Heterocycl. Chem. 1985, 38, 229-297.
(3) Wulff, G.; Clarkson, G. Carbohydrate research
 1994, 257, 81-95.
(4) Martinez, M.B.; Mata, F.Z.; Ruiz, A.M.; Perez, J.A.G. Carbohydrate research
 1990, 199, 235-238.
(5) Kim, S.-H.; Hoshiba, T.; Akaike, T. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A  2003, 67A, 1351-1359.