There are several online databases available to the research chemist. They range from computerised versions of literature collections (Beilstein) to dedicated internet databases such as the Web of Knowledge (WoK), and those used by SciFinder.
My work involves the synthesis of sugar functionalised polymers. These are made from aldose derivative monomers such as 5-benzyl-5--D-glucopyranosyl-1,3-dimethylbarbiturate 1 which are formed from alkylation of the sugar-barbiturate sodium salt 2.
Before starting my project, I performed a search for the most recently published work by my supervisor. Initially, I chose to use the Web of Knowledge site to search the Web of Science for papers. Entry of "Clarkson G" as author gave 24 papers of which only some were relevant to my field. The search was refined by adding "sugar" in the topic field which returned one paper. I know now that there were two relevant papers that should have been presented. Even without checking the 'title only' box, the search failed to show the other paper on sugars which is a continuation of the work [1,2]. Not content with only one search result, I chose to use SciFinder also as I was already familiar with the searching interface. Searching by author I entered "Clarkson" and the initials in the appropriate fields and found work from my supervisor. I decided to narrow down the search using the refine option, selecting only articles published in the last 12 years and with "sugar" as their topic. Both papers were returned.
The first practical work I carried out was the synthesis of the sugar-barbiturate sodium salt 2. I performed a graphical search in Beilstein including D-glucose and 1,3-dimethyl barbituric acid as reactants. I received 5 hits and selected the least synthetically demanding to follow in the lab [3]. The useful 'Litlink' option allows the user to access the paper from which the reaction is taken. In this case, the paper could be retrieved but in some other searches the paper had to be found manually through Google Scholar or from the publisher's website. After familiarising one's self with the Crossfire commander interface, which is initially confusing; and the workings of ISIS draw, Beilstein makes it easy to perform structural searches. The options available allow substructure searches and 'generic' atoms to be input into a structure to represent one of any number of atoms or groups. Search history is also recorded automatically which is useful for comparison of search results. These features contribute to making Beilstein the preferred choice for graphical searching.
After synthesis of several aldose monomers of the type 1 we decided to investigate the synthesis of N-Alkylated barbiturates in a view to using them in future monomers. A search was performed in Beilstein with structure 3 as a product in a reaction search. This returned 132 hits so the search was narrowed by using structure 4 which gave 24 hits. The results page includes a wealth of reaction information, such as reaction conditions, yield and solvent used. This is in a well layed out format that makes it easy to compare the benefits of each reaction, unlike in SciFinder where normally one has to scroll though several screens in order to do this.
SciFinder is however a very useful tool for the scientist. Further in my studies, when I needed a deeper understanding of my field, I used SciFinder to get the references cited in one of Guy's papers. Although very useful and time-saving, the references were returned not in the order cited but in a random order which was disappointing.
In order to help determine the direction in which I wanted the project to proceed, I made a forward in time citation search on the same paper. 21 references were returned in SciFinder. I had been told that the Web of Knowledge also allows provides this information along with the original reference search result. I found the paper and was informed that it had been cited only 18 times. I was surprised by this discrepancy, as WoK boasts the 'Science Citation Index Expanded' which we are told fully indexes all the major journals. I rested on the belief that this difference may be due to the frequency with which the databases are updated. This, along with my previous experience of WoK and SciFinder has made SciFinder my first choice for any text-based search. I think the use of SciFinder scholar would be encouraged as the primary research tool if the University acquired a greater license for its use.
I have not used ISIS/Base so far in my studies because I have only had specific reactions to research and I have found all the necessary information from the other major databases. In summary, I believe that Beilstein-Crossfire is the best available tool for graphical searches, but SciFinder is the preferred tool for any other search type.