Synthesis of -chiral amines is important in modern chemistry. They are inherently useful in the synthesis of new compounds, and form components of many widely prescribed drugs. Flomax (Tamsulosin) (1) prescribed as an -blocker hypotensive agent is one example of such a drug.
Reasearch in this field before 2002 determined the most efficient way to carry out the addition of organic groups to amines was to synthesise the imine precursor and use a dialkylzinc reagent with a chiral catalyst. Although highly enantioselective, harsh oxidising, reducing or acidic conditions were necessary for cleavage of the protecting group to afford the -chiral amine [1]. Such precursors used included N-aryl- and N-sulphonylimines.
Further work by Boezio et al. in 2002 showed that use of an N-phosphinoylimine precursor (2) with a diphosphine ligand (Me-DuPHOS) (3) in the presence of a copper(II) triflate catalyst gave high yields and good enantiomeric excesses on reaction with diethyl and higher diorganiczinc reagents. The diphenylphosphine protecting group could be cleaved under mild conditions (HCl, MeOH, rt., 2h).
However, the addition of dimethylzinc to produce a methyl substituted -chiral amine required at least 10eq. of Me 2Zn and 10mol % catalyst loadings. Lower numbers of equivalents gave low yields and poor enantiocontrol.
Boezio, Charette and Ct concentrated their research on designing a ligand for this catalyst system that would overcome this problem.
They observed a rate acceleration for the addition of dimethylzinc to the N-phosphinoylimine benzaldehyde derivative in the presence of monodentate, and semi-labile bidentate phosphine ligands. After screening several ligands they discovered that Me-DuPHOS monoxide (BozPHOS) (4) was an effective ligand for the transformation. Their results were impressive compared to those reported the previous year:
They found the catalyst system was quite general for the addition of diorganozinc reagents to N-phosphinoyl protected amines. Methyl, ethyl, iso-propyl and even functionalised dialkylzinc reagents could be used in the reaction giving high yields (>84%) and high enantioselectivities (>90%).
Monodentate phosphine and phosphine oxide ligands were synthesised which both gave high yields but no enantiomeric control. The borane adduct of Me-DuPHOS, a mono-protected intermediate in the conversion of Me-DuPHOS to BozPHOS was found to have little catalytic activity in the reaction. It was hypothesised that the enantiomeric control was due to the cooperative binding of both phosphine groups on the ligand.
The research presented here represents a significant step in this field. The preparation of methyl substituted -chiral amines was impractical and expensive before this work was carried out. An improved ligand has been presented for the copper catalysed addition of dimethyl and a range of other dialkylzincs to N-phosphinoylimines.
One major limitation of this system is the availability of the N-phosphinoylimine precursor. This has to be prepared from the aldehyde before reaction. Whereas the protected arylimine precursors reported here are stable, alkyl ones are sometimes inaccessible and those that can be sythesised suffer from instability. Indeed, more recent work in this area has used this catalyst system and focused on preparation of the N-phosphinoylimine precursor in situ in an effort to overcome this problem [2].
The supporting information gives details of experimental procedures and spectroscopic data for each reaction. Unfortunately, no conclusive evidence is given and no attempt is made at a proposed mechanism for the catalysed reaction in this communication, or in previous work [1]. It appears that little is known about the interaction of Cu(OTf)2 with the ligand in this reaction, we are merely told it is used in preference to other metal compounds such as Zn(OTf)2 because it has been shown to work. Computational studies of the reacting transition states would be welcomed to elucidate what nature of the catalytic interactions.
The American Chemical Society's flagship journal is the Journal of the American Chemical Society (JACS). It is well read by chemists; with more articles cited than any other journal in 2004 [3]. JACS communications are designed to be concise reports of work that the authors feel should be delivered with some immeadiacy to a general audience. This paper is easy to read and conveys the necessary information clearly and concisely in the style expected in JACS. However, it reports merely on improvements in a field of synthetic chemistry, i.e. enantioselective amine synthesis, and one has to ask will this be of interest to the majority of the readership of the journal? I would expect a paper such as this to be published in a more specialised journal such as the Journal of Organic Chemistry.
In summary, this work represents a significant advance in this field. Although the catalytic system proposed has its limitations, further work has overcome these. This paper's publication is well justified, although a more thorough investigation of the reaction would be welcomed.