Sketching the thorny concept of discourse is a challenging task. Popular use of the term and its many definitions has imbued the concept with multiple meanings and connotations. However, for some, "the meaning, scope and application of discourse" is relative to the different "theoretical systems" in which it is embedded (Connelly, 1993 in Howarth, 2000: 3). This is evident in Val Gillies article.
E.g., Gillies adopts a critical realist tradition of social research to guide her analysis of the discursive constructions used by working-class women to explain/justify their smoking behaviour. This is the first (and principal) element in her approach to discourse analysis and implies that Gillies views the events and processes of the real world (such as the inability to stop smoking) as a product of interaction between a set of independently existing objects with inherent properties and powers (i.e., addiction discourses) with people (Bhasker, 1997; Kaboub, 2003). She takes a constructivist ontological position (the second element) to explore the socially constructed nature of this reality (e.g., smoking addiction) that subsequently determines ones behaviour (e.g., explanations and justifications that the inability to stop smoking is due to nicotine dependence) (Gillies, 1999: 68). In this conception, Gillies views discourses, their subsequent meanings and the actions they produce as being "structured or constructed by agents" (such as those individuals from the medical and psychological institutions) (Schwandt, 1994; Sparkes, 2002). These in turn structure the existing social reality about what smoking addiction is, what it entails/consists of, and its causes and consequences (Bhaskar, 1998).
The emphasis on language (the third element) helps to "unravel the elisions" by which these "discourses have power over people" such as those who smoke (Collier, 1994: 4). One might argue that Gillies views "language" as the key ingredient not only in the construction and constitution of (smoking addiction) discourse, but also in the transmission and reception of the knowledge about the discourse (e.g., smoking addiction) (Jaworski and Couplard, 1999: 4). I.e., Gillies regards language as the primary site for negotiating meaning, attitudes, beliefs and perceptions as opposed to viewing it as a neutral medium through which stable, concrete or relative cognitive structures can be attained. This element in turn shapes the methodology used in Gillies discourse analysis. E.g., semi-structured interviews and subsequent transcriptions allow Gillies to expose how language permeates "human affairs" (Duranti, 1997: 37) and shapes cultural meanings (Edwards, 1997: 67) about smoking addiction. The social determinants of these cultural meaning are also identified.
As Gillies discourse analysis also exposes how language and meaning are used by "the powerful to deceive and oppress the dominated", and "stresses the centrality of human meaning and understanding in explaining the social world" (e.g., reflexivity and agency as exemplified by the opposing position of addiction and self-control in smoking behaviour), her work can also be viewed as being vaguely "Marxist" (Howarth, 2000: 4).
Taken collectively, Gillies appears to be challenging claims about the supposed truth of addiction as defined by whatever the scientific community agrees it is. E.g., Gillies believes that the publicly expressed version of addiction with its arbitrary concepts/conventions, such as nicotine dependence has been intersubjectively agreed upon by social agents (Weiss, 2001). Hence, truth claims about addiction, from Gillies perception, are instead "fallible statements" about the real (Schostak, 2002) and are better understood as practical adequacy; this is in terms of the extent to which it generates expectations about the world (e.g., a knowledge claim that smoking generates the possibility of nicotine dependence or stress relieve) and about results of our actions (e.g., the location of smoking in a disease model which perceives it as a physical problem in need of treatment through anti smoking campaigns). Hence Gillies ontological position within critical realist social tradition is concerned with not only understanding which conventions about social reality exist, but also in determining what it is about the social world that makes them works.
However, the believability of Gillies claims is reduced by the biological explanations for "the physical, behavioural and physiological dependence of nicotine" (see Benowitz, 1996; Pangal. 2003) and effectiveness of "nicotine replacement therapy" in easing "these dependencies" (Benowitz, 1993). In addition, the generalisability of Gillies claims is compromised as she substantiates her claims from a sample of 4 participants. Moreover, the validity of Gillies claims is also jeopardised. E.g., since she is making or attributing meaning to her participants' perceptions and actions, not only is she engaging in an act of construction, which is neither "neutral" nor "value free" but her discourse analysis is simply "making inferences about inferences" (Jaworski and Couplard, 1996: 13). Withstanding this however, discourse analysis is a useful method; it offers a means of exposing or deconstructing the social practices, which constitute "social structure" and the conventional structures of social life (Jaworski and Couplard, 1999: 6). Hence discourse is implicated in "expressing people's points of view and value systems", many of which are "pre-structured" in terms of what is "normal" or "appropriate" in particular social and institutional settings (ibid: 8).