"Sport has long been considered the generic preserve of males" (Pederson, 2002: 303; see also Hargreaves, 1994). The prevalence and extent of this hegemonic masculinity within the sporting domain has meant that women, from all ethnic backgrounds, have faced a number of barriers in their bid to participate in sports (Hargreaves, 2000; see also Tirone,al. 2000; Taylor, 2002). A review of the sociology of sport literature reveals that the mass sports media is largely responsible for reinforcing the establishment of such constraints through their disproportionate and often biased coverage of sport (references). For example, researchers have found that, when compared to the coverage of sportsmen, the sport media systematically "stereotyped, trivialised, and under-represented" sportswomen at all levels of sport (Pederson, 2002: 305; see also Salwen and Wood, 1994). Consistent with this view, researchers stipulate that the sport media, through their photographic coverage of athletes create, perpetuate, contributed to, reaffirm and strengthen hegemonic masculinity (Pederson, 2005; see also Creedon, 1994).
This study performed a content analysis of newspaper photographic coverage in order to determine whether this "coverage bias" (essentially against women) is evident in Britain. The study utilised "hegemonic masculinity" to focus on the "amount and type of newspaper photographic coverage given to male and female athletes" (Pederson, 2002: 306; see also Duncan and Brummett, 1993). As such, in keeping with the proposed research question "does the British sports media portray a coverage bias?" the following hypotheses were established: (a) male athletes/sportsmen will receive more photographic coverage compared to female athletes/sportswomen; (b) male athletes/sportsmen will receive more prominent photographic placement than female athletes/sportswomen, and (c) male athletes/sportsmen will receive photographic cover that portrays them in "action" compared to female athletes/athletes
A content analysis of the 60 photographs, randomly drawn from a sample population of 296 sports photographs, reveals that through their "biased" coverage, the media show sport to be the generic preserve of males. For example, this study found that male athletes received more photographic sport coverage (75%) when compared to female athletes (25%) across 56 newspapers. This difference is illustrated in Table 1.
Consistent with the latter view, it is also evident that more male sports athletes received prominent coverage e.g., front page coverage both above (31%) and below the crease (22%) of the main newspapers, in comparison to female athletes who received no front page coverage in newspapers. A similar, yet slightly less prominent difference was also revealed in the sports section of each newspaper. For example, compared to 7% of female athletes (1/15 female photograph), almost half of the male athletes (47% or 21/45) photographs received front-page coverage in the sports section of newspaper. This finding is in keeping with previous literature, which suggests that the sport media works to reinforce and perpetuate hegemonic masculinity in sporting contexts (Kane and Disch, 1993). These trends are illustrated more clearly in figure 1.
There was also a clear biased portrayal of male and female athletes. For example, whilst 71% of male athletes photographs' showed them "in action" or "on the pitch", no such photograph portrayed female athletes in this light. In stead, the larger majority of female athletes photographs showed them "posing" either in (60%) or off the sports setting (40%). Only 4% of male athletes were shown "posing" off the sports settings. This overwhelmingly stereotypical portrayal of females sitting pretty and men "in action" inculcates an ideology which considers sports to be "off limits" to females thus contributing to the establishment of barriers for females to participate in sports. (Creedon, 1994)
In conclusion, it is plausible to assume that the British print media largely provide inequitable photographic coverage of male and female athletes. As a result of such findings, researchers often stipulate that through its interpretation of events, and subsequent creation of social reality, mediated sport is presented within certain ideological discourses, which reflect existing power structures (Pederson, 2002: 304-307). Despite this however, one cannot overlook the strict limitations on the inferences the researcher makes within content analysis. E.g., inferences about motivation or intent cannot be made, nor can the researcher infer what the effect of seeing such content would be on a viewer. Likewise, since content analysis is only an analysis of what is in the text (what is presented to him/her), the researcher is limited to making inferences about the unconscious bias or unintended consequences of a text (Berg, 1998). In such instances, it would have been more feasible to employ a combination of both quantitative and qualitative techniques to provide the reader with a more in-depth understanding of this phenomenon (Selltizal. 1959 in Berg, 1993: 224). Moreover, since the analysis of data included a determination of whether there is a difference (i.e., a proportional and disproportional coverage), it would have been better to use the chi-square test, the most commonly used statistical analysis in content analysis (Riffe et al., 1998).
Bar chart illustrating the prominence of photographic coverage given to male and female sports athletes
Insert bar chart: using this table: