This paper will examine the historical and legal context of the minority rights of the Anglophone population in Quebec, and its conflicts with the other national minority in Canada, the Quebec Francophones. The paper is divided into three sections: the first section will briefly give the necessary historical and legal background to the establishment of the minority rights of both the Quebec Francophones and Anglophones. The second section will examine theory of consociational democracy within the context of the situation in Quebec. The third section will examine how the legally enshrined rights have been interpreted in relevant case law, both domestically and internationally.
Will Kymlicka has argued that a group that is a national minority is allowed more entitlements than other cultural groups in the country. However, Kymlicka fails to explain what happens when two national minorities conflict. In such a conflict there can be only one solution - compromise. Over the years, Quebec has acclimatized to the idea of compromise, if only because a refusal of compromise has led to fervid legal battles and very negative media attention. However, the recent temperament of accommodation has not led to a fair balance between the two national minorities.
Minority rights are constructed as a method of protecting those with less power in society. However, when looking at minority/majority relations in terms of power, one has to wonder if there is ever an equitable solution. Some argue that power is a zero sum game: if one group gains power, another loses it. "Relations of dominance and non-dominance determine who defines norms and practices and who must follow them; who is important and who is not; who defines the parameters of the debate and who does not; who is valuable and who is not. These are the profound and longstanding inequalities of the world..." Others have convincingly argued that compromise can rule society. Power games will still occur, but the society is generally balanced.
Arend Lijphart, in his theory of consociational democracy provided strong argument for compromise and how it could work even in the presence of power dynamics. "He defined consociational democracy as 'government by elite cartel designed to turn a democracy with a fragmented political culture into a stable democracy.'" It allows the leaders of each sub-group in society to represent their issues and provides institutional constructs to guarantee effective and fair negotiations and accommodations. However, there are a number of requirements for consociational democracy to work in an efficient manner. It is generally seen in situations where the society is in entrenched conflict over ethnic or religious issues. One of the more difficult requirements, at least in the case of Quebec, is the determination of those in power "to avoid secession or partition of the country ... and so [to] make use of procedures for accommodating the interests of their followers and devising consensual solutions to problems." Another problem area for Quebec is that it also requires a that "subcultures are treated with equal respect, even if they are not strictly equal in size." It can be argued that in the brief period between the Quiet Revolution of the 1950s and the rise of QF nationalism in the 1970s, this was the model that was in operation. "Proportionality was usually maintained, with the relatively small anglophone group receiving at least its fair share of most benefits ... Fundamental decisions affecting the interests of the minority were usually made after private negotiation with its representatives." The point at which consociationalism failed was the rise of the nationalist movement - and the decision to abandon compromise. Ian Lustick's model of control would adequately describe the model that Quebec chose to follow once in the grasp of the nationalist fervour. This model describes a system where "the dominant group controls the authoritative allocation of resources and gives its own interests priority over those of one or more subordinate groups. There is little bargaining between groups, except in situations where the system is breaking down." Essentially, where power again becomes a zero-sum game where one side must lose for the other to gain.
Over the years, there have been significant changes to the legislation that governs minority language rights in Quebec. Since its creation, some of the provisions of Bill 101 have been relaxed. There is no longer a requirement for parents to have been educated in English in Quebec; now, education at the primary level anywhere in Canada will suffice. The laws governing English on commercial signs have been relaxed as well, likely a direct result of the decision of the United Nations. However, the QA population continues to clash with the QF majority, particularly in regards to rights concerning language in education.
It cannot be denied that the QA are one of the better treated minorities in the world. However, for violations of minority rights to take place in a country that is recognized as a world leader in the protection of minority rights is unacceptable. The basis to a solution is respect between the linguistical minority and majority in Quebec - respect that has sadly been lacking through much of Canadian history.