Calvinism was by far the most successful brand of Protestantism in the second half of the sixteenth century as illustrated by its rapid spread throughout the continent into countries such as France (where the Calvinists were known as 'Huguenots'), Germany, the Netherlands and Scotland as well as vast areas of eastern Europe. 'It was 'an international movement which threatened to disrupt and destabilize the established order of western Europe'. For example, in France in 1562, it is estimated by the historian Alister E. McGrath that based on the number of affiliated churches in the country, Calvinists had a 'total membership in excess of two million out of a national population of twenty million'. This figure is extraordinary considering France was almost entirely a Catholic country until very recently before this period, and the fact that Calvinism was just one brand of Protestantism made its influence even more astonishing. This essay will analyse and explain why Calvinism was so successful, not just in France but all over Europe.
This was primarily attributable to a number of highly important factors such as the spread of Calvinist writings due to a vigorous publishing programme, the missionary zeal of John Calvin and his disciples from Geneva in trying to further the movement, the resilient structure of the movement meaning it was capable of surviving, adapting and flourishing underground, and finally the death of Calvin which allowed the movement to break its links with Geneva. It is important to analyse the effect of Calvinism on a particular country and this essay will use France as a case study.
In addressing the question, it is important to examine the impact of the spread of Calvinist writings throughout Europe as a starting point when analysing why this brand of Protestantism came to be the most important in later sixteenth century Europe - 'Calvin's influence on... European vernacular cultures was... profound." This was primarily due to the vast number of editions that were translated into a huge variety of languages by admirers of his work who wanted to ensure that a steady stream of his writings were available in their own language. For example, 'The first Dutch translation of the Institutes appeared in Emdem in 1560, the work of the exiled Ghent jurist Jan Dyrkinus." Many translators worked with the French editions of Calvin's works, which he had produced himself in order to make easier the spread of his ideas to his homeland rather than merely restricting his writings to the Latinate, scholarly community - 'Translation flourished and many works were repeatedly reprinted.'
However, despite the fact that Calvin was French himself, 'By far the largest market for Calvin's writings in the later part of the sixteenth century was not his native France but England." This shows how widespread Calvin's theses actually were, illustrating their vital importance in the growth of the movement. Calvinism was also highly influential in the Netherlands and Germany, particularly in urban areas. Documents and printed material disseminated along trade routes, finding a willing readership and a taste for more. The fact that the Calvinist movement was dominant along trade routes (and often spread through commercial contacts) proved that its appeal lay among those involved in trade, such as artisans and merchants.
The reason why the spread of literature was so important was that the movement had many intellectual supporters who were involved in the printing and bookselling trades - 'The financing of this work... has been generously provided by a number of men and substance, who have not sought their own particular profit, but merely to serve God and the Church." They were extremely active and helped to spread the message of Calvinism, particularly to the middle classes and artisans. Indeed, Calvin's career had brought him into contact with a number of major printers in Strasbourg, Basle and Geneva, which meant that Calvin's work was spread rapidly and in large quantity throughout Europe. Thus, 'A deliberate effort was made to raise public consciousness about religious and political issues, and to internationalise and indeed universalise the episodes involved.'
Therefore, Calvinism's extensive publication programme and distribution of ideas, ensured that his religious theses were widely spread, greatly contributing to the movement's success in later sixteenth century Europe.
Another factor which was highly influential in leading to the success of Calvinism was the missionary zeal of the movement, both in relation to Calvin himself and to his disciples from Geneva. After 1555, when Calvin's position in Geneva was solidified, he turned his attention to spreading the movement to France. These early years of Calvinism were very important in laying down the foundations for change - 'In retrospect the years 1556 and 1564 could be seen to have been the golden and expansive years of Protestant Reform." He saw the movement as posing a challenge to the existing structures, practises and doctrines of the church - a far more radical programme of reform, which was not bound to a local situation, but possessed the ability to transcend geographical, political and cultural divides.
He often worked in conjunction with his followers who helped to spread the movement throughout Europe, and particularly to France where they slipped across the border unnoticed and set up an underground network in order to help the spread of Calvinism. These disciples were Protestant refugees who had fled their own countries to move to Geneva in the first half of the sixteenth century, but when they returned to their own lands, they propagated Calvinism. They 'carried the precepts of the reformer and the practice of his church back to their homelands'. This was highly important in contributing to the movement's success. They soon started to set up Calvinist churches, for example in Paris in 1555, and the movement began to flourish. Indeed, 'The little groups that had sprung up throughout France, meeting regularly for prayer and mutual edification, were gradually transformed into disciplined bodies with regular church structures." Calvin's Genevan followers provided pastors for the new churches. They laid the foundations for the movement which grew so quickly that the demand for preachers became too high for Geneva to cope, so ordinary Frenchmen took on the role instead.
Thus, the passionate enthusiasm of Calvin and his Genevan disciples was absolutely critical in leading to the movement becoming the most successful brand of Protestantism in the second half of the sixteenth century.
The structure of the movement itself was a highly important factor in ensuring the success of Calvinism in the second half of the sixteenth century. It proved capable of surviving as an underground movement, and was particularly resilient because of its structure and discipline which Calvin had specifically designed for this very purpose. He recognized the great importance of ecclesiastical organization and structuring in terms of the progress of the movement. Systematization was key to the movement, and in particular, the emphasis on the doctrine and especially predestination which was vital to providing a religious identity to Calvinism, especially as it was very similar to Lutheranism at a doctrinal level. Previously, Lutheranism had been the most successful brand of Protestantism in Europe, but with his death in 1546, it declined in popularity and was weakened through internal dispute. Calvinism was the main beneficiary of Lutheranism's fall. Where Lutheranism was seen as 'cautious and conservative, Calvin appeared bold and forward-looking'. This made it far more appealing to the masses and contributed greatly to its success.
Calvinism was also able to adapt and modify its ideas to suit local conditions: there was a need to 'be selective in relation to his ideas in order to address new situations and opportunities'. It adapted itself to a variety of circumstances, whether in relation to national churches, city environments, receptive state powers or hostile state powers - 'In different parts of Europe different aspects of Calvin's teaching would at different times seem more or less appropriate and applicable." This was particularly apparent in relation to the French aristocracy, who were not initially receptive to Calvinism. However, with the failure of the French economy in 1557, the aristocracy looked to Calvin's theses, as the 'economic disincentives to conversion to Calvinism no longer had the influence they once had'. By 1562, Calvinism had become hugely influential all over France and the complete reformation of France seemed a distinct possibility. The movement developed theories which went beyond the recommendations coming out of Geneva, although they were inspired by Calvin's proposals. This flexibility and adaptability was vital, as it helped greatly in terms of attracting support in different localized regions. Indeed, 'international Calvinist tradition certainly owed its greatest successes to the fact that in moments of crisis and opportunity it chose to ignore the more legalistic scruples of its founding father'.
Therefore, the structure of the movement, as well as its ability to adapt, was very significant in its spread throughout Europe in the second half of the sixteenth century.
It is important to look at an example of where Calvinism was able to thrive in order to understand the processes which led to its success, and the country in which Calvinism had most influence in Europe in the later sixteenth century was his native France. McGrath argues that, 'Without Calvin, French Protestantism would have been... prone to introspection and internal dissent, lacking any real political power." He was able to give the movement advice and inspiration. The foundation for his massive influence in France was the publication of the Institutes of the Christian Religion in French in 1541. Consequently, radical reforming programmes were available in France in the vernacular. There was eventually a move to prohibit the publishing and selling of Calvinist literature, but this only forced the movement underground, in which, as stated previously, it was able to prosper successfully. French booksellers seemingly took the cause to heart and refused to remove the books from their shelves and Paris was flooded with Calvinist literature.
The majority of Calvin's support came from the artisans and intellectual middle classes. It is important to analyse why it was so appealing to this sector of society. It was largely due to 'lending religious dignity to social values and productive activities which were deeply embedded within the more dynamic middle sections of French society'. However, it is essential to note that the movement initially had little influence among the aristocracy, largely because of its anti-aristocratic work ethic, and also permanently among the peasants mainly because its intellectual demands were too complicated for the largely uneducated peasantry.
Nevertheless, the effect of Calvinism in France cannot be overestimated as it led to the Wars of Religion as the Protestants fought the Catholics between 1562 and 1598. This shows how much of a threat Calvinism became to the Catholic Church in France in the second half of the sixteenth century.
Perhaps strangely, one of the most important contributions to the success of the movement was the death of Calvin himself in 1564 - 'In death, as in life, Calvin proved self-effacing. Yet with his death, his influence upon the world proved to have only begun." This allowed Calvinism to break its highly restrictive links with Geneva, meaning that it could spread unhindered throughout the rest of Europe. It allowed the movement to develop independent of its founder and, and thus establish its own character. Indeed, by 1591 Calvinism had made huge gains throughout Europe, and its gains here seemingly coincided both with its declining influence in Geneva and the death of Calvin.
As stated previously, his disciples were highly important in the spread of the movement. This was particularly the case after his death -
Thus, the death of Calvin was one of the most significant factors in contributing to its success because the movement was able to break with Geneva and develop itself without further restriction.
Therefore, in conclusion, there were a number of highly important factors which led to Calvinism becoming the most successful brand of Protestantism in the later sixteenth century. These include the enormous and rapid spread of Calvinist literature which helped to make his ideas well known, the structure of the movement itself including its organization and ability to adapt to the different conditions in different regions, the missionary zeal of both Calvin and his followers to help spread the movement and finally the death of Calvin himself in 1564 which allowed the movement to develop on its own without the highly restrictive links of Geneva. France is probably the best example of where Calvinism had the most influence as illustrated by the huge number of churches and followers of the movement shortly after its introduction to the country. However, it was not just a success in France, but all over Europe - 'By the end of the third quarter of the sixteenth century Calvinism was established as an international religion, convinced of its ability and right to cast society in a new mould.'