This paper will examine the construction of women's sexuality in the context of the HIV/AIDS crisis, and its effects on social and economic well being of women. The paper is divided into three sections: the first will examine the construction of women's sexuality and how it relates to power. The second will examine the exclusion of women living with HIV and definitions of empowerment that could help. Finally the third section will examine a recent initiative in Calcutta, India and how it follows the principals laid out in Nelly P. Stromquist's definition of empowerment.
One cannot begin to discuss the issue of women and HIV without a profound understanding of power and sexuality. Women's sexuality has only recently become a subject of discussion in social and medical circles. This is principally the result of recent feminist works that have illustrated the limitations of discussing women's sexuality exclusively from a reproductive or biological perspective. Women's sexuality is constructed and interpreted by social and cultural norms. The world over, there is an assignation of morality to women's sexuality that is absent from discussions of the sexuality of men. "A review of how female sexuality is presented in Western European culture shows that archetypes of women represent them as either good or evil: 'The good woman will be represented biologically as virginal (i.e. pure, innocent, and nave) ... The evil woman is seen as a whore; she is scheming, ambitious, and a clever seductress.'" Women who contract HIV/AIDS are often immediately constructed as "the whore". In the developed world, it is often assumed that women have been promiscuous in order to contract the virus. In some developing countries, "families usually regard themselves as 'pure' and think that sickness or other misfortunes must have been introduced by an outsider, i.e. by the woman brought in from elsewhere, who, especially if she is foreign, constitutes an ideal scapegoat."
In terms of constructing sexuality, "scholars generally agree that sexuality is a social phenomenon based on prescribed arrangements and sexual scripts that provide guidelines for gender-appropriate behaviour." Such guidelines, traditionally designed by men, have yet to be acceptably updated despite the increase in the economic and social standing of women in the recent decades. The result is that the social interpretation of women's sexuality continues to assign them a lower social standing. Beth E. Schneider and Meredith Gould noted their article discussing women's sexuality that,
With masculinity as the baseline, tools for safe sex have been designed from a male perspective. Condoms, in particular, are the most promoted means of protection and are touted as a "simple" protection method. Feminist research has brought the realization that power has a great effect on the practicality of this "simple" solution: "... male condoms are not under women's control. Further, women's status in society, her autonomy in her sexual relationship, and her personal history of disempowerment all affect her self-efficacy in general ..." It is interesting to note the correlation in the Western world between the advent of the birth control pill, which gave women power over their own reproductive capacity, and their rise in economic and social status. It indicates that power over one's reproductive and sexual capacity allows for increased self-confidence and independence.
One of the other difficulties of using a male understanding of sexuality as a baseline is that one misses the context within which women make decisions about sex. "Condoms represent mistrust in relationships, and women define steady relationships as those in which there is trust. For some women, this can mean defining your relationship as steady because you are faithful although your partner may not be, or engaging in unprotected sex even if your partner is HIV-positive."
Poverty is deeply intertwined with the powerlessness spawned by the traditional construction of women's sexuality. When women are forced to rely on men for economic security, and survival, their ability to make independent decisions about their sexuality is removed. "Most HIV-positive women have been infected by their husbands. This underlines the problem of women's self-protection: even if she knows that her companion or husband has other sexual partners, it is difficult for her to demand the use of a condom during intercourse..." For women living in areas where female genital mutilation is a requirement for marriage, they must run the risk of becoming infected in order to secure a husband and economic security.
There is a vicious circle involving the poverty of women and their contraction of the HIV virus. For women who are poor, whether because of failed marriages, or a lack of education and employable skills, there is always the sex trade. When all other choices for earning a living fail, this work is always guaranteed. However, to work in the sex trade is to incur the risks of HIV/AIDS and other STDs. Women who do become infected, particularly those who were economically impoverished to start with, become ill - often faster than the norm as they cannot afford or access health care. When they can no longer work, they are back to square one. Hortensia Amaro summarizes the situation very succinctly in her article on women's sexual health: "women's lower power and status, sexual violence against women, and gender role stereotypes prevent women's control of their own bodies."
For the very reasons listed in the previous section, women's sex is often used as a reason for excluding women from benefiting and interacting with society. In the case of women living with HIV, this exclusion is compounded.
However, it is not only the cultural and communal society that has excluded women. More dangerously, the medical community has a history of conveniently forgetting to include women in their research. With their exclusion from research and clinical trials, "it is not surprising that women have also been ignored in the development of appropriate diagnoses, treatment and prevention of HIV/AIDS." As the numbers of women becoming HIV-positive have risen dramatically in the past twenty years, the medical community has been forced to alter their approach. However, a gendered perspective is still rarely taken in research. More often than not, women are often lumped into male-oriented testing and research. Gendered factors, both socially and biologically, are frequently missed in such research. One example is in the area of prevention research, where the focus has been on the male condom as an uncomplicated and simple risk-reduction method. As discussed above, this is a risk reduction method that is not in women's realm of control. An additional that has been vastly under-researched is the female genital mutilation (FGM) and the transmission of HIV. The medical side-effects of FGM are only beginning to be examined in detail, but a focus has not yet been given to women contracting HIV through such rituals.
Another tactic of exclusion is the feeding and reproduction of myths about women living with HIV. The main myth regarding women and HIV/AIDS is that they are drug users or prostitutes. The myth is replicated the world over, in both developed and developing countries alike. This myth was created in large part by the basic assumptions over women's sexuality.
Approaches to the AIDS crisis have been and continue to be grounded in this constructed sexuality. They have traditionally either been male-centred, i.e. condoms as a method of risk reduction, or have been disempowering, women treated as vectors of disease and labeled as promiscuous. There are, however, alternatives to these types of strategies. One such alternative is empowerment through education.
One of the largest criticisms of the concept of "empowerment" is what it means to those being "empowered" and who it is actually "empowering". The word means many different things to many different groups and individuals. Nelly P. Stromquist has proposed the following definition as a positive and clear definition:
In order to truly empower women, particularly women living in a health crisis such as HIV/AIDS, a strategy must incorporate all of these areas. Stromquist has also suggested that the reality of oppression must be understood by those being oppressed. "Awareness of the existence of oppression at the personal level requires recognition of oneself as a victim in particular circumstances or in recurrent social transactions." This is of particular relevance for women living with AIDS. The majority of women living with HIV have experienced some level of oppression and abuse. If they acquired the disease through "risky" sexual behaviour, one must question why they were taking such risks. Perhaps because of the social construction of their sexuality? Or perhaps because society has left the primary method of risk reduction (male condom) in the hands of men, and out of the hands of women. If they contracted the virus though sex trade work, one must question what forces were at work for them to "choose" that line of work. Even if they freely chose to become a sex trade worker, one must question the amount of free choice involved when one's economic or social options are limited. If they contracted the virus through their spouse, why were they unable to protect themselves - because of the construction of sex being a husband's right in marriage, or because of an inability to refuse to have unprotected sex? While painting a woman as a victim can be argued to be disempowering, it can also be argued that it is necessary to realize the limit of control over one's actions and whose hands actually hold the control. Only when one establishes their oppressor (whether a person, a social trend or governmental policy), can one strategize to circumvent or challenge it.
The question of what "prostitution" is in the 21 st century is complicated and exceeds the complications of different terms. While prostitution is traditionally thought of as an economic transaction where one individual (usually male) purchases the sexual services of another (usually female), in the new millennium, prostitution can encompass so much more. In South Africa, sex can be exchanged for many other necessities than money, and in a much different relational context than traditional notions of prostitution. Mark Hunter has argued that "sexual networks" have developed which link men and women in relatively mutually beneficial arrangements. "The sexual networks serve to widen women's ability to make claims on resources and are not simply instrumental exchanges of sex for money: some partners can co-habit, gifts are often enacted in terms of men's 'provider' role, claims can be made through evoking 'love' and participants frequently discuss sexual pleasure and physical attraction." Essentially, they become relationships of inter-dependency, rather than just business relationships. While this would not fall under the traditional definition of prostitution, it still includes as its foundation a payment in exchange for sex.
In the HIV/AIDS crisis, there has been a great focus on sex trade workers and the role they play as vectors for the disease. This has had the negative result of stigmatizing them even more, but has also had the positive effect of attracting much research and funding to their situation. Governments have often tried to use punitive effects to force safe sex on sex trade workers. However, these heavy-handed strategies often neglected to recognize the multiple underlying issues that guide, and coerce, women's decision about risk reduction. Such issues were described in the Cambodian context as "political conflict, poverty, migration, open borders with countries with AIDS epidemics (Thailand and Vietnam), prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), thriving commercial sex industry and low levels of HIV prevention knowledge and practice." Suggested strategies included forced medical checks on sex trade workers, which would have the effect of violating their rights to their dignity and their bodily integrity. Other similar strategies have been increased enforcement of laws against prostitution, which often has the effect of forcing sex trade workers into even riskier locations and arrangements to be able to continue their work.
The priority issues facing sex trade workers, whether involved in traditional understanding of prostitution, or those involved in less formal arrangements is the ability to negotiate condom use. As discussed in previous sections, the power in a sexual relationship, whether for business, love or both, is generally in the hands of men. This is a result of both the patriarchal nature of society and the male-defined understanding of sexuality. "The ability to negotiate safer sex suffers because of unequal physical, economic and social power." At the same time, however, because of the transactional nature of prostitution, there is often room to negotiate. This seems to suggest that sex trade workers are, in fact, in a better position than wives and girlfriends who have no leverage to negotiate condom use. It leads to one question about the nature of the power dynamic between a sex trade worker and her client: is the power in the hands of the men because they can walk away from the transaction, thereby denying a woman the money she needs to survive? Or does it lie in the hands of women who can terminate the transaction and deny the men the service they desire? Research seems to suggest it is a bit of both:
A recent initiative in the Songachi red light district in Calcutta, India has had great success. The initiative was targeted in Songachi because of its alarming increase in HIV incidence rates. The women were described as generally being from poor rural backgrounds, and of limited education. "Some were lured to the city by corrupt 'middlemen' with the promise of gaining employment. Others fled from a violent home or were abandoned by their husbands or boyfriends." Most had experienced oppression from a young age. They were also targeted by the local police who demanded pay-offs or free sexual services in return for not arresting them. The brothels were also often involvement in making "arrangements" with the local police.
The initiative was built on the premise that these women had long since had power over lives stripped away. "Practitioners argue that oppressive situations, power differentials between genders and asymmetric role-taking reduce the self-esteem of women and make them more vulnerable to exploitation. Social isolation, economic dependency and stigma are often seen as key factors that perpetuate their state of powerlessness."
The strategy mirrored the criteria laid out in Stromquist's definition of empowerment. After conducting a survey among the sex trade workers to determine their needs, the initiative began by inviting women in the sex trade community to act as peer educators. These peer educators acted in a way that helped the workers to understand the dangers and risks around them. "They realized their limited control over the corrupt police officers, abusive pimps and customers, and their lack of education. The project staff helped the sex workers to interpret social inequalities and evaluate the impact of powerlessness upon their ability to effect change." This demonstrates an exploration of the cognitive dimension in Stromquist definition. The next element in the definition is the psychological dimension and the building of self-esteem. The Project not only focused on teaching the sex trade workers about safe sex and offering free health care, but also taught basic literacy, skills in parenting, negotiation, and invited professionals in to discuss the workers' rights. The project opened a social/cultural community centre and provided support to workers that were fleeing abusive brothel owners or pimps. "The education, skills-training and resource mobilization helped the women to move from a situation of despair and helplessness to one of action and activism." As the women gained more confidence, they began to see their potential both as individual and as group.
The political dimension of Stromquist's definition was demonstrated by their increased political involvement with their community. The women presented a united front to the brothel owners in order to convince them of need for the use of condoms. "If any brothel owners or pimps refused to allow their employees to use condoms, the peer educators and other working women visited the establishment en masse ... If sex workers were arrested and denied bail or the policemen requested a bribe for the release of a sex worker, the women picketed outside the police precinct." The women also expanded their sphere of influence to include lobbying political for better protection of minors and for the legalization of prostitution. The final dimension of Stromquist's definition of empowerment, the economic dimension, was evidenced in the latter days of the project. It dramatically exceeded the expectations of the project planners. The women organized a collective committee, the Durbar Mahila Samanwaya Samiti (MSS) which established a cooperative for providing small loans to women, a store that sold local crafts made by former sex trade workers, and provided support to women who wanted to leave the sex trade. All of these projects helped contribute to the financial independence of women who may have never experience such a thing in their lives. The empowerment achieved by the project was all-encompassing and touched on many different areas of their lives. However, it still had its roots in education, roots reflected in one of the future goals of the MSS: to create schools "for their children where they can learn without the stigma or harassment they experienced in local public schools. They believe that education is the link to their economic and social wellbeing and ensures a better quality of life for their children and family members."
Studies are proving time and time again that sex trade workers want to practice their trade safely. However, they are without the tools to negotiate for their safety. Often they do not understand the power dynamics around them, only that they are being compelled to do something they don't want to do. Education is the only key to helping provide the workers with the tools they need to protect themselves. It must be education imparted in a manner that follows Stromquist's definition of empowerment; the women must be active participants in its design and implementation.
The manner in which women's sexuality is constructed affects options, the personal freedom and the safety of all women. However, with initiatives such as the Songachi Project, guided by education and empowerment, women's options are increasing. The escalation of these options, however, continues to be reliant on the work of women to change society's understanding of women's sexuality. Only in reconstructing such understandings and equalizing the power balance in sexual relations, will women be able to safeguard their own safety and well being.