In 1937, accompanied by many renowned Latin American writers of the 20 th Century, Pablo Neruda participated in the Second International Congress of Anti-Fascist Writers in Valencia. This congress aimed to inspire writers to engage with the conflict that threatened a divided Spain and reflect their passion for humanism and liberation in antifascist poetry. While Neruda began writing his collection of Spanish Civil War Poetry, Espaa en el Corazn, in 1936 when the violence commenced, his attendance to this congress demonstrated his dedicated involvement in political affairs. Furthermore, Neruda was a well-travelled diplomat who had been put in charge of a number of honorary consulships, which amplified his interest in international politics. In 1924, he travelled as a consul to Madrid where he remained at the heart of the conflict for the first few months of its progression. In Llegada a Madrid de la Brigada Internacional, Neruda describes the sounds 'travs de los cristales mojados de mi casa', confirming his central location at the outbreak of war. His experience of the Civil War is elevated above any historian as he witnessed the devastation with his own eyes and suffered the personal loss of close friends such as Federico Garcia Lorca. This experience led him to produce poetry that, not only exhibited his reaction to the Civil War for future generations, but was significant to the lives of republican civilians and soldiers who had access to his poetry during the warfare. The Spanish Republican Army reprinted Espaa en el Corazn with a dedicatory note which explained that 'Soldiers of the Republic made the paper, set the type, and operated the press' for this publication. Their great efforts demonstrate the significance of Neruda's words that spoke directly to them, nourishing their minds to inspire their bodies to persist in their struggle for freedom. In a 1937 interview, Neruda refuses to categorise his stance in the battle:
Neruda certainly expresses an unwavering dedication to the common man, liberation and unity in his Civil War poetry. He progresses from a state of solitude in the first two volumes of Residencia de la tierra to the creation of a voice that speaks both for a people and to a people in the third. In an interview with Robert Bly, Neruda explains how his experience of the war marked a severe change in his poetry:
It simply was not possible for Neruda to continue writing poetry without addressing the masses who were troubled by a conflict that soon became an international issue. In order to explain the shift in direction of his poetry, Neruda published Explico Algunas Cosas (Neruda, Espaa en el Corazn, pp.10-15) which assesses the change within Spain at this time.
This poem is divided into the past and present where Neruda expresses nostalgia for a time before the outbreak of Civil War and details a world of chaos and devastation attached to the conflict. The poet prepares to deliver everything that is happening to him, which is highly effective as he highlights himself as a single representative of the masses, suggesting his suffering can be multiplied by the thousands of civilians affected by this brutal war. Neruda begins in the present tense by voicing his readership who will wonder why his poetry has undergone such drastic development. While the poet's use of 'preguntaris' could be a polite address to a single person, Neruda addresses his wide readership here as a unit to commence a sense of community. The poet then shifts to the past tense to describe the flowers that could be found in his pre-Civil War poetry:
A literal description of flowers creates a warm image of colour and beauty that has been lost in divided Spain. Neruda returns to this image later on by describing 'la casa de las flores' where 'todas partes estallaban geranios' and tells that ruins of 'metal ardiendo' have now replaced these attractions. While the extinction of the abundance of 'lilas', 'amapolas' and 'geranios' from Neruda's words effectively conveys the bleak image of present Spain, Neruda also metaphorically alludes to the flowers of poetry. The poet suggests that he has sacrificed the use of intricate devices that decorate his poetry in favour of a more realistic bluntness in his words, which better conveys his thoughts to the people. When Neruda describes his house of the past, he doesn't idealise this object by comparing it to the present situation, but emphasises its normality. It was nothing more than a house among 'campanas', 'relojes' and 'rboles' in Madrid in an ordinary place and time. While there is a temptation to nostalgically elevate this house from the norm, Neruda prefers to emphasise that stable ordinariness must be appreciated as it will be missed when it is disturbed. Neruda continues his description of his house by expressing that one could see 'el rostro seco de Castilla' from his windows. While this could simply refer to the framework of Spain that meets its destruction in the Civil War, it is possible that Neruda alludes to a famous statue that symbolises the culture, traditions or history of Spain such as the statue of goddess, Cibele, or the great bullfighter, Antonio Bienvenida, that can be found in the capital city. Perhaps Neruda identifies these permanent historical exhibitions as a symbol of the severe impact this war will have on Spanish history, eternally staining the success of the country.
Neruda then moves from speaking of inanimate objects to live animals and humans whose beating heart and capacity for emotion better evoke the pity of the reader. He explains that his house was full of 'perros y chiquillos', inspiring the reader to feel pathos for these sensitive and emotive figures who may be lost to the sacrifices of the war. Later on in the poem, Neruda returns the children but, like feared, the children have been killed and only 'la sangre' remains. Neruda begins to construct a simile in these lines that he cannot finish: 'la sangre de los nios / corra simplemente, como sangre de los nios'. Neruda decides that there is no comparison for the slaying of children and the reality is enough to evoke a reaction from the reader. As the child provides the future of a nation, Neruda suggests Franco has sacrificed a hopeful future by insisting a fascist regime upon the people that they feel compelled to rebel against. Neruda then lists victims of the war including Federico Garcia Lorca who was assassinated. He refers to Ral (Gonzlez Tuon), Rafael (Alberti) (Costa, The poetry of Pablo Neruda, p. 95) and Federico with first names only and uses the non-polite pronoun, 'te', suggesting he knew them on a personal level and has suffered a personal loss in their exile or death, in the case of Lorca. In particular, his question to Lorca, 'te acuerdas' is tragically rhetorical as he will not be able to answer his friend 'debajo de la tierra'. His question to Lorca is more developed, however:
Neruda's reference to 'balcones' symbolises the freedom of earlier days, while 'la luz de junio' is a bright image of happiness and clarity in the Spanish nation. Here, the use of flowers becomes more obvious as an allusion to poetry, suggesting that Lorca created beautiful works but his inspired voice was smothered in death. Following this metaphor, Neruda cries out to his lost friend with, 'Hermano, hermano!'. This desperate, sorrowful epithet highlights both a personal loss and the camaraderie among the grieving community.
The poet uses a device common to his Civil War poetry by attaching pre-revolutionary days with an abundance of food such as 'aglomeraciones de pan', 'pescados hacinados' y 'aceite'. This abundance suggests that, formerly, the citizens of Spain were fully nourished but now have an unsatisfied 'boca de sed' as mentioned in Maldicin (p.3). Neruda's choice of 'pan' and 'pescados' interestingly hints at the story of Jesus feeding the five thousand with loaves and fish, although Neruda is not openly religious. It is possible that the poet appreciates the sentiment in this biblical tale of sharing amongst the people and operating together as a community. However, Neruda also connects these images with 'latido' and 'palpitante', suggesting that perhaps the story of their nation does not hold the miracle of Jesus, but rather the stretching of limited resources among the working class people has driven them to poverty. The imbalance of wealth between the opposing forces is frequently highlighted in Neruda's poetry. This subject provides the inspiration for Almera, which threatens 'el banquero', 'el coronel' and the 'ministros' with a 'plato de sangre silenciosa' (pp.32-34) for thickening the divide between the classes and cutting down the poor.
Neruda suggests he was ill-prepared for the approaching conflict by his repetition of 'y una maana', which introduces a lengthy description of the unexpected scene in brief, quick-paced lines. Suddenly 'las hogueras' brought danger and devastation and the people were consumed, like the food he previously mentions. His repetition of 'y desde entonces' suggests that this abrupt combat affected the people for a great length of time and scarred a generation.
Neruda targets the perpetrators of the violence who are responsible for introducing 'plvora' and 'cuchillos' into their peaceful nation. He repeatedly condemns them as 'bandidos', composing an alliteration of plosives that adds an accusatory bite to this title. By identifying the nationalists as 'bandidos', Neruda effectively portrays the fascists as a people who have thieved the nation of its harmony. Esenwein explains that 'for some, (the war) was a contest between Christianity and Atheism' and this attitude is portrayed for the first time in this work. Neruda accuses Christians of an unforgivable hypocrisy for supporting the 'bandidos con frailes negros' who are killing innocent children. The poet highlights the Christians' disobedience to their own commandments which instruct them not to kill but to love their neighbour. Neruda expresses that these treacherous men are worse than 'vboras' as even these ruthless creatures are not as cruel as the enemy. Neruda introduces the 2 nd person pronoun to directly command the fascist forces to 'mirad Espaa rota' with an imperative. He demands that the enemy observes the terror they have caused before promising a repayment:
This carefully designed threat it severe, frightening and full of intent. Neruda suggests that every violent action from the nationalists is being observed and counted and they will receive just punishment for every single blow that is incurred. By terminating the life of a child, they give birth to a bullet that will hunt them down and deservedly return to them their fatal penalty. While these retaliations from the republicans would be equally brutal, Neruda defends their actions as a resistance to oppression. This idea is expressed more directly in Batalla del Ro Jarama where Neruda celebrates the men from Madrid 'de corazn dorado por la plvora / como un pan de ceniza y resistencia' (p.30). The poet is able to attach 'plvora' with a 'corazn dorado' because their cause in defending a people from a dictatorship is noble. However, Neruda is no stranger to designing fit punishments for the guilty as particularly blatant in his poem, El General Franco en Los Infiernos. Neruda decides that only a hell with corridors of 'trozos rojos de seso' and where he is forced to eat 'silenciosa pus y sangre' (p.40) would be vile enough to accommodate such a blood-thirsty, treacherous dictator.
Neruda uses the final stanzas of Explico Algunas Cosas to remind the reader of his aim in writing this poem: to explain why his poetry has undergone such radical change. He repeats the hypothetical question from his readership and triples this incredibly evocative response with varying syntax: 'Venid a ver la sangre por las calles'. By dividing this phrase into two lines and foregrounding 'la sangre' in its first repetition and continuing to 'por las calles' in the last, Neruda places particular emphasis on the symbol of death and the location of this devastation. These lines invite the reader to witness the atrocity for themselves, like he has done, and comprehend why his verses no longer concern 'los grandes volcanes de su pas natal'. The simplicity in the final stanza is extraordinarily effective in accessing the reader and conveying the desperate reality of the Spanish Civil War on its people.