Alfonsina Storni dedicated her younger years to feminist movements. As a journalist, she strongly urged the government to grant women the vote and wrote many essays and articles on women's rights as unwed mothers, in the workforce and in education. These aspirations are immersed in her poetry where, as perceived by Rachel Phillips, she sought to 'gradually transcend her sex and circumstances and discover the human possibilities within herself'. Storni's early poetical works undoubtedly portray a greatly ambitious woman who, not only dares to challenge society's expectations of her in her choice of lifestyle, but promotes her feminist ideas to the female public in the hope that they will perceive her as an inspirational leader. Her poetry illustrates a woman who resents society's creation of polarity between men and women and is keen to dissolve this imbalance by promoting feminist awareness. I have chosen to discuss three examples of her poetry which chronologically span three of her earliest books in order to measure any change in the direction of her argument from La inquietud del rosal, published in 1916, to Irremediablemente in 1919.
Although it is widely agreed that Storni's earliest work, La inquietud del rosal, is stylistically weak, Sidonia Carmen Rosenbaum appreciates its success at opening 'literary doors to women in the Argentine' and admires Storni's bravery in revealing 'a spirit unafraid, undaunted by the many prejudices which the free expression of feminine sufferings, yearnings, feelings still evoked'. The inclusion of La Loba
 in this collection certainly displays her success at breaking out of restricting social patterns. She proudly publicises that she has 'un hijo fruto del amor, de amor sin ley', without exhibiting any fears of early twentieth-century Argentina's response to this information. Rosenbaum clarifies that 'society did not forget - or forgive' and that it was this hostility that caused Storni to suffer great solitude throughout her life (Rosenbaum, Modern Women Poets, p. 221). Her solitude can be seen to have inspired this poem, as Storni illustrates herself as an independent woman battling against her enemy, 'La vida', and enduring throughout her diversions from 'el rebao'.
By choosing 'la loba' to represent herself, Storni displays her support of feminism by specifically boasting an independence that unusually belongs to a woman. She convinces the reader that she is no less capable than a man in defending herself because she, too, has 'una mano / Que sabe trabajar y un cerebro que es sano'. She is confident that she does not require male protection as she is competently equipped with her own skills and intellect. She warns the 'pobrecitas y mansas ovejas del rebao' that she is prepared for battle as her 'dientes son armas de matar'. This suggests that Storni is prepared to attack any who dare to criticise the way she has chosen to live her life. She emphasises that these choices demonstrate bravery as now she must walk 'sola' throughout life with no accompanying support from society. Storni is keen to mock this society who "laugh and point" at her who dares to depart from the tedious routine of life on the 'llano'. She seeks adventure 'a la montaa' and does not envy 'las otras' who are constrained by society's expectations like a 'yugo al cuello'. She laughs to herself in response to their mockery because she can percieve that straying from the norm produces a liberty which has punctuated her life with vibrancy. While they may pity her, she is satisfied that their lives are more pitiable than her own. Unfortunately, Storni recognises that this liberty comes at a price. She acknowledges that her rebellion forces her to detach herself from a society who doesn't understand her. While this poem provides a protestation of her independance, Storni does not convince the reader that she is completely content with this unfortunate side effect of her rebellion.
T Me Quieres Blanca
 displays anger towards men for replacing a woman's individual personality with an idealised invention. Storni compares the desirable woman with 'espumas' and 'ncar', whose colourlessness suggests a meaningless, chaste and harmless existence. These comparisons also attach women to nature, which supports traditional romanticised visions of femininity and symbolises the reproductive use of the female. While 'corola' and 'azucena' illustrate women as delicate and beautiful, 'espumas' attaches them to the sea, which, in conjunction with the moon, is intimately linked with the menstrual cycle. Storni is keen to disassociate herself with this image of the ordinary woman:
While biographical information indicates that Storni did not reject her reproductive capabilities throughout her brief lifetime, she is determined not to be defined by motherhood or to be primarily employed by this occupation. She challenges images commonly attached to femininity by expressing that the flower is literally unrelated to her. She displays a desire that men perceive meaning in her existence, rather than admire her for her beauty, and emphasises that she is not a delicate creature whose fragility needs to be protected. Storni clarifies this idea in her essay entitled, "Modern Women" where she expresses that 'in the struggle for existence there is no truce, no sex, no pity, no flowers'. The poet only perceives regression in such narrow perceptions of women.
In the fifth line of this poem, the speaker explains that, 'sobre todas', chastity is expected of her, which angers her above all else. It becomes clear that, in writing this poem, Storni particularly aims to challenge the double standards of men who expect women to be chaste and innocent, while they hypocritically feel at liberty to activate their own carnal desires. Gabriel von Munk Benton explains that, although men may feel betrayed by women, T Me Quieres Blanca tells 'the tragedy of the individual who is betrayed not by a human being but rather by his or her illusions, hopes, expectations'. The speaker does not use this poem to argue that she should be anything but chaste, but rather that sexually indulgent men are in no position to judge or dictate a woman's sexual activity. Therefore, she stresses that women, too, have passions and warns male partners to expect to be dealt the same fidelity, or infidelity, that he practices. While descriptions of the ideal woman simply exhaust variations of 'blanca', the male indulges in rich 'labios morados', he is 'vestido de rojo' and displays 'negros del Engao'. Storni establishes white as the colour of constraint by describing 'el esqueleto' as the only structure suppressing his immoderation. His blackness displays impure, sinful behaviour, while red indicates passion. Storni locates this image in 'los jardines', perhaps representing the Garden of Eden where the devil similarly seduced Eve, progressing to her lascivious behaviour with Adam. In celebrating Bacchus, Storni suggests that the male participates in unrestrained drunkenness and banquets indulgently on 'frutos y mieles'. These examples of his gluttony indicate his excessive sexual appetite.
T Me Quieres Blanca undergoes a dramatic shift in direction as the speaker's choice of verbs progresses from 'querer' to 'pretender'. The beginning of this poem sees the repetition of 'me quieres', which emphasises the passivity of the woman who is directed by her lover's impositions. While the objectivity of the female remains in 'me pretendes', this verb suggests that, rather than demanding his ideal, the male now struggles to obtain it. The speaker begins to gain more control, displayed by the insertion of her mockingly sympathetic 'Dios te lo perdone' and the extensive list of imperatives directed at her silent listener. While she maintains her role as speaker throughout the poem, it is not until now that she displays domination. She advises men to reconnect their senses with nature: to 'habla con las pjaros', 'bebe de las rocas' and 'duerme sobre escarcha'. Having rejected the association between femininity and nature, these instructions become difficult to comprehend. Perhaps Storni asks the man to put himself in place of the woman in order to better understand her social constraints, or promotes a new relationship with his foundations in the hope that his unreasoned perception of women will be renewed. Nevertheless, her advice certainly encourages her listener to replace his fantastical imaginings with ideas grounded in reality. Storni outlines the entanglement between 'el alma' and 'las alcobas' as an error developed by men. She suggests that the separation of love from lust would improve men's treatment of women, as women would then be appreciated outside of their beauty and eroticism. Storni summarises that a man who follows all of this advice would become a 'buen hombre', but she disallows her listener to depart from her poem with such contentment. The final lines see the return of 'pretender' accompanied by a new, aggressive tone by the formation of an imperative:
Storni concludes this poem by constructing a warning to those who dare to maintain their illusions of women. Through ending with this threat, the speaker displays power over the male, creating some hope that the genders will begin to understand each other and move towards equality.
Peso Ancestral
 documents Storni's educational journey into the lives of men and women, generations before her, in order to locate the origins of women's oppression in history. She learns that the female's capacity for emotion convinced men of their weakness. However, the poet indicates her realisation that the tears, which have now become a justification to treat women as inferior, are a product of women's painful experiences. These revelations suggest that there has never been a time when women were treated as equals with men. Storni echoes these sentiments in her essay:
She evaluates that, since the beginning of time, efforts have been made towards a progression where men and women share a balance of power, which has never been fully achieved. Rosenbaum reminds the reader that Storni's '"fight for freedom" rather than individual is collective' (Rosenbaum, Modern Women Poets, p. 212). While this is a feature of many of her poems, the transcendence of her single voice to a plurality of voices has particular significance in this poem because an example of one woman's present experiences are deeply rooted in the lives of centuries of women before her.
Storni locates disparities between the behaviour of men and women in order to target complications within their relationship at the source. This poem details a dialogue between two women: the narrator and an individual who discusses the emotional strength of her 'padre' and 'abuelo', who are adopted as male representatives. This connection reminds the reader that, while these genders can be divided by differences in behaviour and lifestyle, they are intimately related. Therefore, although women may be familiar with the 'dolor de siglos' and 'no han llorado los hombres', there is hope of a resolution in their compulsion and necessity to reproduce. Rachel Phillips discusses the effect of women's emotion on their creative output, which was commonly criticised for simply delivering 'excessive harping on sentimental themes'. However, Phillips demonstrates a feminist perspective by defending her gender in response to these critics. She asks, 'what else could the poor creatures write about?' (Rachel Phillips, Alfonsina Storni, p. 3). Storni echoes this defence by emphasising that male pride is only possible because they have never tasted the 'veneno' that women have had to drink. This argument shatters the pitiable, weak image of femininity and inspires less admiration for the male of 'acero' who demonstrates his strength through a cold, unsympathetic persona. This poem demonstrates how a past has shaped the present and has the power to dictate the future if men continue to govern society. Storni appeals to women to assist her in challenging this damaging cycle of oppression, as she cannot support 'todo su peso' alone.
When Storni first introduced her poetry to Argentina, her hopes could be considered to be a little nave. La Loba voices a woman who achieves the freedoms and capabilities of a man by breaking out of her social restrictions and asserting her independence. However, by the time Storni writes T Me Quieres Blanca, she begins to demonstrate an understanding that men are instrumental in the evolution of female independence as women, neither individually nor collectively, can achieve social acceptance without the transformation of men's perceptions of them. Peso Ancestral realises the extent of the feminist problem and appeals to women to interrupt the degrading cycle which has restricted their live for centuries and, without their support, will continue to do so.