The prevalence of preschool children reporting mental health problems is rising and is now at an estimation of 13% (Squires & Nickel, 2003). Early identification of behavioural and emotional problems predicts better developmental outcomes (Guralnick, 2001). From the biopsychoscial standpoint, there are three important reasons for the case of early detection. Firstly, research by psychobiologists have found that brain development is affected by the quality of relationships developed when young and that these experiences can affect gene function and organization of the mind which can have long term effects (Shonkoff and Phillips, 2000). Secondly, once there has been development of a social or emotional problem, it is very hard to change or correct it. A positive relationship has been found between the incidence of childhood social and emotional problems and delinquency and subsequent criminality (Walker & Sprague, 2000). Thirdly, the externalities of criminal behaviour such as cost of running a penitentiary are very high. A lot of tax money goes to running such facilities when it could be put to better use such as building more hospitals. Therefore grounds for early prevention of social and emotional problems are justified (Dishion et. al., 1995).
The common behavioural and emotional problems faced in infancy are sleeping, excessive crying, feeding, reactive attachment disorder and temper tantrums. These problems are also reported to have a comobodity with each other. The focus on these problems is their implications for their consequences on behavior dysregulation (Papousek, 1998). However, due to the richness of quality of literature and the constraining variable of essay length available, the scope of behavioural and emotional problems for this essay will only focus on sleeping and excessive crying .This essay will explore both problem and provide an analysis of the core concepts of lack of self-regulation and the long and short term consequences the infants will face. A critical discussion on the treatments for the disorders will also be covered.
Sleep is an essential daily process of infant life and the prevalence of sleep problems in children younger than 5 years old is approximately 25% (Davis et. al., 2004). According to the DSM-IV, sleep problems can be categorized into two major dimensions: dyssomnias and parasomnias (American Psychiatric Association, 1994). Dyssomnias refers to disorders of initiating, staying asleep or excessive sleepiness in the day time (Mindell, 1999). Dyssomnia disorders include Primary Insomnia, Primary Hypersomnia, Narcolepsy and Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder. Parasomnias refer to the interruption of sleep after sleep onset by behaviours or physiological events. They include sleep disorder of arousal, partial arousal and sleep stage transition. The core reason behind sleep problems is a lack of self-regulation of the infant: an inability to fall asleep on his own and self soothe if woken up mid-sleep.
The adverse effects of sleep problems on infants can be classified into short and long term consequences. Short term consequences of sleep problems include symptoms of hyperactivity, short attention span, irritability and low tolerance for frustration (Dahl, 1996). The emotional and behavioural problems often subside and show improvement when the sleep problems are identified and rectified therefore providing evidence for the link (Dahl, 1996). Another short term effect present in sleep problems is increase in injury. Children who report inadequate amounts of sleep are at a higher risk for injury and the risk increases with the number of hours the children are continuously awake (Valent et. al., 2001).
Short tem consequences of sleep deprivation provide grounds for an association between sleep problems and long term consequences of developing Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Psychological research on sleep problems has found an association between ADHD and sleep deprivation. A study by Owens et al (2000) found that children suffering from ADHA reported a higher incidence of sleep problems and average amount of sleep duration than children not suffering from ADHD.
Long term consequences of the role of sleep on development have also been discussed. Research has discovered that growth hormones which stimulate tissue growth and protein anabolism (Steiger, 2007; Vigneri & D'Agata, 1971) are released close to sleep onset and is sleep dependent. Sleep deprivation suppresses its secretion and therefore sleeping problems could have a negative long term effect on infant's development (Steiger et al., 1987). Research has shown that there is a comorbodity between infant sleep problems and developing difficult temperament (Carey, 1974; Dahl, 1998), psychopathology and behaviour problems (Wolke, 2003; Dahl, 1998; Scher, 2005, Sadehal. 2002).
Unexplained excessive crying in infants, also known as colic, is a disorder often associated with bowel related discomfort. It is defined by the "rule of three" which classifies colic by reports of crying that take place for 3 hours per day, at least 3 days per week and for at least 3 weeks. The prevalence of excessive crying during the first 3 months of infant life is estimated to be round 21% and the persistence of this beyond 3 months is 39% (Wurmser, 2001). The reasons for infants' lack of self regulation can be categorized into lack of regular daily routines, overstimulation (too many activities resulting in over-tiredness) and understimulation, inappropriate interpretations of reasons for infant crying, disallowing the infant to calm himself down without interference and a lack of positive reinforcement of good behaviour through positive parent-child interaction. Excessive crying has a high correlation with abnormalities in sensory perception (low pain perception, limited attention span, hyperactivity, tactile defensiveness) and the development of anger problems (Maldano et. al., 1992).
The current debate is surrounding the effects of excessive crying and the developmental consequences associated with it. The focus of the consequences of excessive crying is actually on the parents and not the child. Excessive crying has minimal influence on a child's development. The major influence is on the parents' behaviour and actions towards the child which in turn affects the child's development. Therefore, the consequences of excessive crying are a product of indirect influence. The excessive, unexplained, inconsolable crying that parents witness in their infants can be a great source of distress. A study by McDonoughal. (1998) found that an estimated 65% of parents interviewed reported strong concerns and worries about their infant's excessive crying. These results depict the level of stress parent's face when dealing with infants with excessive crying problems. The effects of excessive crying on parents have been associated with a range of psychopathological disorders such as postpartum depression, child neglect/abuse, prenatal anxiety and family conflict. Mothers in particular tend to present with frustration, exhaustion, depressiveness and low self efficacy (Hofacker and Papousek, 1998). These negative emotions may affect the mother's competence in supporting healthy infant behaviour such as self-soothing and optimum sleeping habits. As a result, healthy mother-child interactions are disrupted and this might hamper the child's cognitive development (Papousek, M., 1998).
Evidence for a link between infants with excessive crying, behavior problems and perceived vulnerability as age 3.5 years old have been found (Forsyth & Canny, 1991). Rautoyaal. (1995), as cited in James-Robertal. (1998) found a higher incidence of temper tantrums and sleeping problems in infants with colic than in non-colic infants.
Additionally, a longitudinal study on Bavarian children by Wolke and Renate (1998) revealed that the gestational period of the infant influenced the effects of excessive crying behaviour and the associated parental distress at age 5 months. The results indicated that pre-term infants displayed a higher likelihood of developing behaviour problems with attention and aggression. In contrast, full-term infants reported little relationship to behavioral problems. The longitudinal analysis of the infants showed that preterm infants have higher ratings of neurological problems and cognitive deficits. The implications of the study is that more research has to be conducted into the gestational periods in order to make a justified conclusion about the effects of excessive crying on behavior problems; especially as the other studies did not include the gestational period as a variable.
The common principle behind sleep and crying problems is that the children lack an internal control and therefore in order to treat the disorders, the development of external regulation is required. The setting of regular routines and clear daily predictions of actions combine to provide external regulation. On the other hand, the level of external regulation has to be controlled to prevent substitution of the child's development of internal regulation. For sleep problems, one common mistake parents make when dealing with their children is that there tends to be excessive involvement in bedtime and rewarding behaviours. The problem with this is that it provides a dominating external regulation and does not allow the child to develop internal regulation and a method of self-soothing and instead encourages a dependence of the child on his parents/external regulation. For excessive crying problems, as long as parents continue to provide an excessive external regulation, in the form of too much soothing and attention when child is crying, the child will never learn to regulate internally and stop crying on his own.
Cognitive - behavioral treatment (CBT) is commonly prescribed to assist parents with correcting their children's sleep problems. The treatment involves helping parents or caregivers develop an optimum type of interaction with their infants to encourage healthy sleep patterns. There are two main components to the treatment. The first one involves a reconstruction of parental expectations, interpretations and emotions towards their child's sleep and behaviour problems. The second component concentrates on implementing a new approach towards their child in an effort to change the child's learned responses, expectations and behaviour (Sadeh, 2005).
A variety of extinction methods have been suggested in solving dyssomnia problems such as settling and night-waking. Standard extinction works on the basis of completely ignoring the child after bedtime. However, if there are any compliance difficulties faced by parents, there will be a higher chance of relapse (Kuhn & Elliott, 2003). Graduated extinction is a modified version which is a more gradual method of extinction that allows parents to make minimal contact with the child after bedtime. Scheduled awakenings is a method that requires parents to wake their child a short time before the child's spontaneous awakenings. The child is then encouraged to resume sleep and gradually the time between each awakening is lengthened. This method appears very harsh to parents and suffers from a low compliance rate (Sadeh, 2005). Another method is faded bedtime which operates by allowing the child to sleep at their natural fatigue cycle. As the child is allowed to follow their body's natural tendency in relation to exhaustion or energy, the assumption is that there will be a smoother bedtime process for the child. However, there has been very limited research as to the effectiveness of this method. Parental presence or co-sleeing is a method that assumes that separation anxiety of the child from their parent is the cause of sleep problems. Therefore, following that logic, by reducing the anxiety, the child should have an easier set off to sleep. Parents are encouraged to sleep with their child for a specific period of time (7-10 days) in which no contact can be made after bedtime (Sadeh, 2005).
The efficacy of CBT in curing sleep problems was illustrated by a study on the treatment of nighttime fears by Graziano & Mooney (1980; 1982). 17 children were treated using the CBT method and compared to a control group of 16 children. The results showed a significant improvement in quality and quantity of sleep and this improvement was maintained for more than 2.5 years later.
Evidence from previous research has showed that parental's cognitions towards their child's sleep-related behaviour affects their interactions with their child (Wolke & Kuertjiens, 1998). Therefore, a change in sleep related behaviour should correspond to a positive change in parental's believes and expectations. A problem with CBT is that it requires a radical change in behaviour which is often interpreted as neglectful, abusive and inappropriate by parents and as such, their negative beliefs about the method affect its efficacy (Morrell, 1999). Furthermore, there is a high likelihood of lapse by parents due to their negative believes about it and this increases the chance of relapse by the child.
Treatments for excessive crying in infants operate on the basis of providing facilitators (regulation) to help the infants calm down on their own, therefore exercising self-regulation. Infants are prone to over-tiring and when they are at that stage, they are unable to self regulate. By ensuring that the infant gets plenty of rest and a healthy balance of stimulation, parents are preventing a loss of control for the infant. Regular daily routines such as sleeping, eating and nappy changes introduces a dependable external regulator. A common mistake made by parents and caregivers is a lack of tenacity and continuity when implementing a particular soothing technique. The infant's development of a sense of security (regulation) can take some time and by exposing the infant to a variety of techniques, instead of proving comfort, the parent would have effectively undermined any comfort the soothing techniques were supposed to provide. Parent-child interactions are very important as facilitors of regulation development. An infant depends on its care-giver for basic survival and providing a comforting stable constant presence for the infant will encourage a sense of confidence to the infant and provide an external regulator. Positive parent child interactions also play a reinforcement role and therefore parents should reinforce good behaviour displayed by the child through positive interactions. (Wolke, 2003)
A limitation of the literature available on sleep problems is that it studies might suffer from unaccounted external factors such as parental influence in development of sleep problems. There is literature on parental depression and its affect on children's cognitive development but there is no significant research on sleep problems that effectively manages to remove parental influence from the development of behavioral problems and pathology. In order to obtain concrete evidence for the pathological inducing sole effects of sleep problems, more research has to be carried out.
The methodology used in studies on children's sleep and excessive crying problems often consists of parental reports and consistent recording. The problem with the methodology is that parents may not be objective when observing and recording their child's behaviour and sleep problems. Parents may be affected by their relationship to the subject (their child) and therefore have observational bias in that they will see what they want/choose to see. Additionally, the objectiveness of all recordings made is questionable as well as reports are written by the parents themselves and they may not freely admit if they were unable to adhere to the techniques strictly. Therefore, the reliability of such methodology is debatable.
An issue that has not had researched into is the long term effects of treating sleep and excessive crying problems in infants. Most follow-up studies only follow up to 12 months (Mindell, 1999) after the successful treatment. Presumably the problems associated with excessive crying and sleep problems have been solved successfully but the long-term effects should still be studied. Furthermore, research into the possible existence of critical periods, of which non-treated sleep problems can cause permanent and long lasting damage, should be carried out. This is particularly important for parents and pediatricians to know in order to ensure the healthy upbringing of a child.
In summation, the cause for infant behaviour and emotional problems is a lack on internal regulation and an overdependence on external regulation. This is often the fault of the parents or care-givers as their methods of handling the infants unwittingly hindered the infant's ability to develop self-regulation. Therefore, the basis for treatment of the disorders is merely to assist the infants in finding ways and methods to develop their own internal regulation and an independence from external regulation.