As the term "child soldier" is not defined explicitly in the GCs or the APs, it is useful to consider the widely adopted interpretation promulgated by the Cape Town Principles, which gives the following broad definition:
Estimates suggest that approximately 300,000 children are serving as soldiers in current armed conflicts around the world. This participation is widespread, with documented use of child soldiers in over 30 ongoing or recent armed conflicts in almost every region of the world, particularly Africa and Asia.
The roles undertaken by child soldiers may include, among others, participation in actual combat, involvement in the abduction and training of other children, sexual and domestic slaves, "porters, cooks, spies and [planters] of land mines". It is not uncommon for children to participate in an indirect manner initially and then progress to a more direct, active role in the hostilities, often necessitating the use of extreme violence against others. Various commentators have identified reasons for the attractiveness of child soldiers to, in particular, dissident armed groups in non-international armed conflict, many of which centre on the ability of child soldiers to be easily manipulated, exploited and controlled by army commanders.
Recruitment of child soldiers occurs on both a voluntary and involuntary basis. In many countries, child soldiers are forcibly recruited through abduction or physical coercion. Further, it is often the case that the apparent distinction between voluntary and involuntary recruitment is blurred, with many commentators arguing that any "free choice" in this regard is strictly curtailed in reality, particularly in highly charged conflict situations where children are often displaced and look to armed forces or groups for structure and protection. Research into the underlying reasons for the involvement of children in war, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, has revealed the significance of extant adverse economic, social and cultural circumstances at a national and local level.
In addition to their contribution to the armed conflict and commission of atrocities, it is generally recognised that children themselves suffer grave human rights violations including "physical, mental, and sexual abuses ranging from their abduction and forced recruitment, to drug abuse and rape" during and following their recruitment.