Current research in relation to housing around the world estimates that 1.1 billion people live in inadequate housing conditions in urban areas alone and that 100 million people are homeless. Further, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Adequate Housing has reported that the housing and living conditions around the world are deteriorating.
Over recent decades, numerous human rights legal instruments in relation, either directly or indirectly, to housing and living conditions have been negotiated at the international level, demonstrating the willingness of the international community to focus attention on the various manifestations of the housing crisis. In addition, the United Nations and other international organisations have increased their focus on the international right to housing and the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ESCR Committee) has arguably devoted more attention to this right than to any other within its ambit.
However, despite the existence of this established international legal standard, it is clear that a significant gap persists between the theoretical human rights norms and the realities of many local communities. As is often the case in relation to many human rights, "[t]here can be no doubting that the oft-cited gap between law and practice...is sadly alive and well when it comes to housing rights." In an attempt to narrow this gap, housing rights advocates around the world have pursued a variety of human rights strategies in domestic settings, such as community mobilisation, political campaigning for domestic legislative reform, advocacy before regional and international bodies, and legal challenges before courts of all jurisdictions.
This essay focuses on one aspect of the legal approach, namely the use of the international right to housing in domestic courts, and examines the potential for this strategy to effect practical benefit for housing conditions at the local level.
To this end, the scope of the international human right to housing will be outlined in the first section of this essay. Secondly, the extent to which the international right to housing is regarded as justiciable, and the basis for judicial reluctance in this regard, will be considered. Finally, the benefits of, and challenges to, the adoption of this legal approach as a strategy for the amelioration of inadequate housing and living conditions will be evaluated.
The human "right to housing" refers to the body of international, regional and national law which elucidates the general and specific regulation of the dimensions of the right to adequate housing and living conditions for all people around the world.
At the international level, numerous treaties and related documents recognise the right to housing, outline its relevant components and describe its obligations. In this regard, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the first human rights standard to recognise housing rights, states:
The most significant articulation of the right to housing at an international level, Article 11(1) of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) states:
Responsibility for monitoring State party compliance with the Covenant rests with the ESCR Committee. Its General Comment 4, intended to interpret and define Article 11(1) of the ICESCR, is widely deemed to be the most authoritative interpretation of the right to housing.
Notably, the ECSR Committee states that "the right to housing should not be interpreted in a narrow or restrictive sense which equates it with, for example, the shelter provided by merely having a roof over one's head or views shelter exclusively as a commodity.". In this regard, the ESCR Committee notes that article 11(1) must be understood as referring not just to housing but to "adequate housing", a concept which includes each of the following factors: legal security of tenure, availability of services, materials, facilities and infrastructure, affordability, habitability, accessibility, location and cultural adequacy.
The right to housing has been reaffirmed either explicitly or implicitly in a number of additional international human rights instruments, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The purpose of this essay was to examine one of the human rights strategies applied by housing rights advocates in a domestic setting, namely the use of the international right to housing in domestic courts, in order to consider the potential for this strategy to effect practical benefit for housing conditions at the local level.
The discussion above reveals that this approach has yielded some very successful outcomes and, even in circumstances where the actual legal outcome was not favourable, the strength and authoritative nature of the international human rights regime lends weight to the legitimacy of housing rights in local settings generally. This is particularly enhanced when combined with a complementary social mobilisation movement in relation to the particular issues.
Accordingly, housing rights advocates would be wise to consider this as a central strategy, where appropriate in the circumstances, but at the very least, a significant component of their wider housing rights campaigns.