Midland Metro is a modern tram system that can run both separated from other traffic and safely on streets with other traffic and pedestrians. Developed as a higher quality mode of public transport than the bus, it is fast, reliable, convenient and easy to use.
Midlands Metro is in the public transport industry. It s owned by The West Midlands Transport Authority (Centro) and is under a 23 year concession to Altram L.R.T. Ltd., who have a Design, Build, Operate, Maintain contract
Altram has a SIC code of 6010( Transport via railway). There are 119 companies with this SIC code.
The table below shows the performance of Altram amongst its peers
The other companies with the same SIC code as Altram, do not operate within the same area as Midlands Metro, and therefore are not in direct competition with them. Consequently, a concentration ratio or Hirschman-Herfindal Index, would not give an accurate scenario. The main source of competition are motorists .In terms of public transport in the West Midlands, buses account for 95% of all public transport usage; Travel West Midlands having a monopoly of about 80% of the market share. There are other medium sized bus operators such as Pete's Travel, Birmingham Coach Company. Furthermore there is heavy rail; with Central Trains taking 80% of the market.
This is a difficult one to measure. Midlands Metro is owned by Centro, who also have stakes in the bus and rail companies. But according to the figures, Travel West Midlands has a monopoly of 80%. There are other medium sizes companies in the market; therefore the type of competition in this market is oligopoly. As mentioned above, Centro, own bus, rail and the metro.
Therefore there is a degree of collusion, as the ultimate aim is to get more people using public transport. Centro's reports always include the three forms of transport. In addition their future plans are for all the forms of transport.
LRT is in the question mark stage of the BCG matrix. There are some people like MP Alistair Darling who do not support it. However LRT has been proven to get people out of their cars in a way buses have never done. It is the belief of many that it is the way forward to beat traffic congestion. And it is on its way to becoming a rising star.
Demand for the service is fairly elastic. It is generally accepted that the cost of public transport goes up every year; but if the cost of the metro costs much more than all other forms of transport, customers would look for viable alternatives, and the demand for the service would fall
Altram is operating at loss every year. Profit margin for 2003 was -19.34%.Profit is generally low among tram companies across the country, although the bus companies seem to be making profits. Travel West Midlands, the market leader, made profits of 32, 611, with a profit margin of 16.09%, raking first among companies of similar turnover to it, in 2003.
Efficiency wise, LRT operates dynamically. There is a lot of funds put in to devise better vehicles and tracks, and a better quality of service. Midland Metro has the following core competencies:-
Is faster :- The "rapid" nature of the mode is attributable to the high-performance acceleration and braking characteristics of modern trams and is very attractive to road users. The existing bus route that parallels Midland Metro Line 1 is takes 79 minutes.
It offers a higher capacity;
It offers a smoother ride;
Its precise path makes it more acceptable in pedestrian areas;
It appears to have a better image among customers;
It attracts more passengers who might otherwise travel by car;
Being electrically powered, it reduces pollution in the city
There are numerous barriers to entry. These are
I would propose a strategy of differentiation focus strategy. This strategy creates a competitive advantage within the niche-which in this case is providing LRT. With this strategy, they have a chance to increase revenue as well as develop customer loyalty. As there are high capital costs, revenue has to be maximised to increase profitability.
Below is a SWOT analysis for Midlands Metro
Midlands Metro has good prospects for the future. It has proved so popular with users that they want to expand the system in order to bring the benefits of a Metro system to even more people in the West Midlands. They want to achieve this by adding three more lines, creating a network of trams in the West Midlands.
I would recommend that the entrepreneur should acquire the company because, starting a new rival company would require a huge capital outlay, financial capacity to lobby for government approval, because it is a time consuming exercise. Whereas with acquiring the company, all the groundwork has been done, and it would just be the case of restructuring the company to suit the entrepreneur's company ethos.