When I first learnt that I was going to be doing a huge piece of coursework that counted for half of my module, I was ecstatic. When I learnt that we did not get to pick our group members, to say I was displeased was an understatement. I personally do not like working with people I do not know and whose work ethics, I had no knowledge of. I remember our first meeting like it was yesterday, I was very pessimistic. All my doubts seem to be coming true, when our nominated group leader called me to say he was running late. I remember thinking, if he cannot manage a simple task like turning up to a meeting on time, how can he manage a whole group?
I quickly managed to turn things around so that I was voted team leader, as I wanted. I felt that as team leader I would have control in the group and I would have more say in the way our team was run, little did I know then. I did not realise that as team leader, the onus was on me all the time to ensure that the team had something to present at all times. People relied on me to share out the tasks, and then wait for me to chase them up about it.
As a team, we worked very well together. We met in a non-academic setting to get to know each other better .We became friends and not just a group of people who were forced together for a common goal. Also, as we took our strengths finder tests, we were able to understand each other better and compensate for areas each of us as individuals were not too strong on.
I noticed that in certain areas we were quite similar. Initially we got started really early, met, decided on a business idea by the third meeting, by a democratic process I am quite happy to say. But we all struggled halfway through because we all had one or two more group projects going on at the same time and they had more pressing deadlines. So we let things slack until one week before the elevator pitch, when we all did some intense work, and discovered almost all of us like working under pressure. I really enjoyed being stressed before the pitch and then seeing it all come together. I was a bit worried when we did not get plenty of questions, and I felt that I had failed my group. I was concerned that we were not well prepared.
On hindsight, I should not have let things slide in the weeks preceding the upper level pitch, and made sure we stayed on track, and not done things last minute. We repeated the same thing for the business plan, leaving everything to the last minute as well. But it was through the amount of time we spent together that we also were able to realise the different skills people brought into the group, like good IT skills, attention to detail, oratory skills and so on. We had to make decisions sometimes on the spot, but other times we would go away and make individual decisions that affected our areas of concern, and then bring it to the group for approval.
I really enjoyed the experience of working in a team. I realise that most engineers would be working in a team on most projects. It has taught me invaluable skills such as diplomacy, helped me exercise patience, also I have been able to practice leading a group of my peers and trying to get the best out of people by concentrating on what they are good on rather than what they lack.
Academically, I have gained so much from doing this project. First of all, at the upper level pitch, I was able to practice my presentation skills. I was a bit nervous because we were the first group to go, and I felt slightly disadvantaged because I like learning from other peoples mistakes, rather than making mine, but I realise that in the real world, especially as an entrepreneur with a new idea of my own, I would not have the opportunity to "learn from others mistakes" per se. I would have to be independent and be brave enough to take risks.
Also as the team leader, even though for the business plan every-one had been assigned tasks according to there area of strengths, I still had to cross-check everyone's work to ensure they were not doing it in isolation. This gave me an opportunity to really understand what goes on in every aspect of a business plan. I feel now, that I could write a marketing strategy and a financial forecast for a company with my eyes closed. I feel really privileged about that though, because in this small way, I am able to almost have an experience of what real entrepreneurs go through. They have to be familiar with all the key aspects of their business. They would not be able to say "that's X's area of expertise"; but have to be totally immersed with all areas, and know crucial data at their fingertips. I noticed this when watching the 'Dragons' Den' programme. The entrepreneurs, that more often got the seed capital where the ones who could justify their ideas with good market data, and sound financial forecasts, and sold the money making potential of their idea rather than just the idea.
Overall, I have learnt not just how to work with teams, but work well with teams; I have learnt how to manage a group of people, without alienating any of them. I have also come away with some sound academic knowledge about the environment an entrepreneur works in. I have learnt about the business planning process. I have learnt to work to tight deadlines. But more especially, I have learnt a lot about myself as an individual over the twelve weeks of the assignment, through the strengths profile, which has resulted in a greater self-awareness.