As the demographic transition takes place around the globe, its effect is also felt on infant and child mortality rates which have dropped significantly in the past few decades (see table 1).
As we can see from the table, India has managed to reduce its Child Mortality Rate at quite a rapid pace. However, it is still much higher than the average Child Mortality Rate for high-income countries and significantly higher than the average for middle-income countries.
The need to work towards reducing the infant and child mortality rate was felt by the government of India and it announced a new approach towards Reproductive and Child Health in 1996.
The paper follows the approach of Murthy, Dreze and Guio (1995) in which the authors attempt to disentangle the effects of different health care practices, socio economic and demographic factors on three indicators of development: total fertility rate, child mortality rate and the relative survival chances of male and female children. This was done through a cross sectional analysis of data from 296 districts in India. The data was obtained for 14 of India's 15 most populous states (excluding Assam where the 1981 census was not conducted) for all variables except poverty. For measures of poverty the authors used the Sen index of rural poverty as estimated by Jain, Sundaram and Tendulkar (1988), based on the 27 th round of the NSS (1972-73).
Apart from this there have been a number of papers that attempt to find determinants of childhood mortality. However, most of them faced the problem of limited availability of quality data especially at the district level. Hence they were based mostly on NFHS (National Family Health Survey) state level data. An NFHS report by Pandey at al (1998) "Infant and Child Mortality in India" and Claeson et al (1999), are examples of such studies. They use hazard regression models to estimate the effect of variables while controlling for the effects of other variables.
Section 2 of the paper presents the data and methodology used in our study. Section 3 is where we build the model for cross sectional estimation by Ordinary Least Squares. The section consists of variable selection and testing and correcting for deviations from the Classical Linear Model assumptions. We shall then analyse the results of our estimation in section 4 and finally conclude in section 5.
Following the adoption of the new RCH approach by the Government of India there has been a particular effort to collect data on health related factors at the district level. Thus data is available on many more variables for 520 out of the 596 districts in India and we can expect an econometric analysis to give us more accurate results. As previously stated, we shall follow the approach of Murthy, Dreze and Guio and use cross sectional analysis to identify factors that seem to be the most significant in influencing infant and child mortality. The data has been combined from two major sources: the Census of India, 2001 and the District Level Household Survey conducted by various Regional Agencies and coordinated by the Indian Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS- Mumbai, 1998-2002). Using data from these two surveys, Ram, Shekhar and Mohanty of the IIPS produced revised estimates of some RCH variables. Table 2 gives the original list of variables used in our analysis and describes the source of each variable
We shall compare our results with those of previous studies as we go along.
Equations 1 and 2 present the model we are estimating. The results of both regressions are then presented in table 4.
EQUATION 1:-
EQUATION 2:-
Note: * coefficient significant at the 10% level of significance
** depicts coefficients significant at the 5% level of significance
*** depicts coefficients significant at the 1% level of significance.
The rest of the variables are insignificant.
On the whole the same variables are seen to have a significant affect on both, infant mortality as well as under-5-mortality and in the same direction.
We have tried to disentangle the individual effects of social, demographic, nutritional, economic and health care behavioral factors on Childhood mortality in India through a cross sectional analysis of data from 520 districts in India. Results from this analysis may be questioned on several grounds.
Firstly we have not been able to include some variables on which data was not available but which have been proved to be relevant in earlier studies. This might have caused some omitted variable bias in our results since they are likely to be correlated with other independent variables. These include female labour force participation, separate male and female mortality rates and literacy among mothers.
Secondly, the error terms in our model may be spatially correlated, i.e. their value at any point in space might be correlated with the values of surrounding points. I have tried to correct for this by including more variables to take care of the correlation between error terms. I have also tried to include state and region dummies into the equation to take care of spatial correlation. The results were similar to ones above. However, if spatial correlation is still present it would give us unrealistic standard errors and show some insignificant variables to be significant.
If we overlook these problems with our model, our analysis can yield some interesting policy prescriptions. Previous research has already laid stress on direct government interventions in Reproductive and Child Health and we shall not repeat that point, although two things are worth mentioning. One is the importance of antenatal care and the other is the quality of health care facilities provided by the government. The increased likelihood of child mortality among severely undernourished children implies that the state should identify them and allocate resources to save them. Such a focused strategy would be much more efficient in reducing the incidence of infant and child mortality and helping India achieve the targets set in the Millenium Development Goals, which seem far fetched going the current rate. Despite the fact that child marriage is illegal in our country, it is still highly prevalent in rural settings. Our analysis shows that increased proportion of girls married at the less than 18 years increases the infant mortality rates. Strict law enforcement and spread of awareness about the ill effects of child marriage are required. Secondly the study shows that social deprivation can be a very important factor influencing childhood mortality. Hence, measures need to be taken to improve the social standing of females, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. There is also a need to address the living conditions of slum dwellers in urban areas. Measures such as reservations that have been taken over the years to uplift the backward classes have clearly not had their impact on the lowest quartiles. The government then probably needs to review its strategy tackle deprivation among backward classes.