Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) has been used as one of the favourite model organisms for developmental studies. Embryogenesis of  C. elegans extensively relies on maternal effect genes for intrinsically asymmetric cell division and cell-cell interactions. In this review, the early embryogenesis of C. elegans, from the establishment of Anterior-Posterior polarity initiated by sperm entry to the asymmetrical cell divisions and different cell lineages induced by a variety of cell fate determinant is summarized, some of the molecular mechanisms carried out by the crucial maternally expressed cell fate determinants underling these processes are described.
In C. elegans, the abilities to produce pharynx (compose a muscular and glandular organ used in feeding) are owned by the descendents of ABa and EMS. In addition, EMS descendents also have the ability to produce intestine (Figure 10)
In C. elegans, germline development is located to posterior germline blastomeres (P 1, P 2, P 3, P 4) during each asymmetrical division. (Figure 13) These cells contain maternally loaded P granules, which contain proteins implicated in RNA binding. The ability to determine germline fate is mainly possessed by two genes: pie-1 and mex-1.
Four Notch pathways are involved in C. elegans during embryogenesis. (Figure 20) The first two, which are described here, are mediated extensively by maternally-expressed GLP-1/Notch, the other two require LIN-12/Notch (and less GLP-1/Notch).
Embryogenesis in C. elegans is extensively regulated by maternal effect genes from the initial A-P polarity establishment to the lateral asymmetrical cell divisions and cell fate determination. Embryogenesis employs a variety of intrinsic factors as well as intercellular signaling pathways, such as the PAR proteins for the initial axis set up and maintaining, SKN-1 for the inducing of the pharynx and intestine cell fate, PIE-1 and MEX-1 involved in determining somatic and germline lineage. As well as the Notch pathway mediated by GLP-1 in AB descendents. All of these distinct, while interrelated, processes that are crucial for the correct development of the C. elegans sharing a same feature - they rely significantly on maternally expressed cell-fate determinants.