It is important to stress that the majority of people within Europe had 'little interest in or concern for the new worlds overseas revealed by the great discoveries of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The manners and customs of exotic peoples excited few'. However, there was a significant minority within European societies who did concern themselves with thinking about voyages, discoveries, the extra-European world and its peoples. It is this important sector upon which the essay will primarily be focused. In order to address this question, it is necessary first to examine the underlying beliefs and assumptions that the Europeans held of their extra-European neighbours, before going on to examine whether these were actually borne out upon initial contact. Urs Bitterli gives a useful definition of the term 'contact' - 'By cultural contact is meant an initial, short-lived or intermittent encounter between a group of Europeans and members of a non-European culture... Such contacts are characterized not only by their casualness and limited duration, but also by the rudimentary forms of communication between the representatives of the cultures concerned." It is also essential to investigate whether these values and attitudes altered still further with increased long term propinquity with the extra-Europeans. This essay will argue that there was a conflict in the portrayal of extra - Europeans, as the Europeans were anxious to express the fact that they shared some basic similarities to reassure themselves that they were not dealing with totally unknown quantities. This can be seen in terming the majority of natives as pagans in order to create a common identity with which they were already familiar. They were also anxious to convey that there was a common humanity and that all humans were biologically linked as seen in their interest in the genealogy and background of the extra-Europeans. Meanwhile, conversely, the Europeans were also determined to set the natives apart from themselves and depict them as inferior in order to allow the conquest of their territory and the exploitation of the natives. It is this unusual paradox which the essay will address.
There is much evidence to suggest that non-European peoples were assimilated rather quickly into the consciousness of the Europeans. It is important to examine why this was the case. It may have been due to fear owing to a lack of connection with Western traditions. A useful example is when the Europeans first came into contact with Native Americans - 'The discovery of new lands therefore brought encounters with peoples vastly different from what the Europeans had seen, read about, or even imagined." Consequently, the first chroniclers had to produce a new term to describe them and the concept of the 'noble savage' was created. That is, the Native Americans were extremely friendly and pacifist but lacking laws, a society and a religion. This was indeed vastly different to anything the Europeans had expected to come into contact with, but the creation of the term 'noble savage' was important, because the common denominator was the belief that the natives were unquestionably part of a common identity. Perhaps, due to the great magnitude of inventions permeating through Europe around the time of overseas exploration (such as gunpowder, the compass, telescope and microscope), its people were 'fertile in ways for absorbing new ideas as well as new men'. The easiest way to form a common identity with the extra-Europeans was to label them as something that made sense to the Europeans in their own world. Consequently, the non-Europeans were 'assimilated immediately and unselfconsciously as pagan people... [as] paganism was the most inclusive, unambiguous category of otherness'. The prime reason for labelling extra-Europeans as followers of paganism was in order to give them a familiar identity. Literature on the topic was so extensive that different peoples from Asia, Africa and the Americas could easily be embraced - the idealized image of Native Americans was that they were 'primitive and friendly pagans'. Perhaps most importantly, the fact that the extra-Europeans were considered to be pagans meant that they could be converted to Christianity - 'Newly discovered peoples were fitted into the Christocentric world view by being classified as pagans in need of conversion." This belief was held in order to reassure the Europeans that they had nothing to fear upon meeting such a variety of extra-Europeans across the globe during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries - 'they had to reassert the identity and unity of mankind'.
In terms of classification, Europeans did not take much interest in categorizing extra-Europeans. For example, they did not differentiate between American Indians and ancient Egyptians. Instead of comparing the physical appearance of different extra-European peoples, the Europeans examined other characteristics. In this case, the American Indians and the ancient Egyptians had in common: a belief in gods, superstitions, rituals and artefacts - 'Establishing that commonality was the first step towards assimilation." The easy comparability of heathen gods and customs was down to one common source - the devil. The Bible states that Satan authorised paganism. However, the devils' religion, like true religion, was always the same, and thus meeting the devil in extra-European lands was not a cause of great concern as proved by the idiom 'better the Devil you know...' Michael T. Ryan argues that, 'If you can't meet an old friend in a strange country, an old enemy is the next best thing." Thus, from the outset, the Europeans were determined to portray the extra-Europeans as a common entity, from which they had nothing to fear. Consequently, most extra-Europeans were depicted as pagans in order to give the Europeans a sense of security, as they felt they could convert the native populations to Christianity, whilst also providing an excuse for subjugation and slavery in the future - a subject about which we will discuss more later.
Another way in which the Europeans tried to understand and create an identity for the extra-Europeans was through their genealogy. It was felt that in order to understand their languages, beliefs and customs, it was necessary to uncover their ancestors and establish links back to the earliest days of mankind - 'To understand new peoples, it was necessary to invent their pasts." This is why the American Indians posed such a great problem for the Europeans. It was impossible to trace from where they had derived. There was also a great interest in China in the seventeenth century not because of the people, 'who were scoundrels and rascals anyway', but because the lineage of its peoples could be traced back so far in books that it rivalled that of the Bible. Thus, the Europeans did not just use paganism to classify the extra-Europeans, they were also interested in their genealogy in order to examine from where their ancestors had originated in order to create a sense of common identity of mankind. As with the classification of all extra-Europeans as pagans, this was done to make them seem less threatening and easier to control.
Quite paradoxically, however, the Europeans were also determined to set themselves apart from the extra-Europeans for reasons of self-advancement. They were anxious to depict the natives as savages in order to justify the conquering of their lands, and even to invent a system of control for native peoples through the advent of slavery. Anthony Pagden is of the opinion that, 'Europeans had always looked upon their own cultures as privileged and upon all other cultures as to some degree inferior." This view was based on a claim about the way the world had been constructed. Scientific and technological cultures were considered civilized while those which were not were seen as barbaric and savage. There were many fanciful preconceptions about the New World -
This shows that the Europeans had preconceptions about extra-Europeans before they even arrived in the New World and were unlikely to change their opinions even after meeting them. They were determined to present the natives as savages for their own altruistic purposes.
One of the oldest and most important preconceptions that Europeans had about extra-Europeans was that cannibalism was prevalent in their world - 'The sheer distance of Columbus' voyage led him to expect monsters." Indeed, there was a European obsession with cannibalism which is often overlooked today. This was done to set them apart from the Europeans in order to depict them as inferior and was often ascribed to various peoples with only minimal evidence as 'cannibalism... is a way of defining other people by locating them in a system of values which is an inversion of one's own'. There were many fabrications and exaggerations about cannibalism in the New World. Michael Palenica-Roth argues that, 'In any intercultural encounter, the way people are viewed has a great deal to do with how they are treated." As the Europeans arrived in the New World expecting the extra-Europeans to be savages - 'Columbus and others expected to see cannibals in their first voyage but did not' - they treated them as such. This maltreatment was heavily linked to the advent of slavery. The Cannibal Law of 1503 was the first instance of slavery in the New World. It was undertaken by the Spanish in order to control unlawful elements of the extra-European community. The term 'cannibal' was often extended to include those who were not even flesh eaters, for the sole purpose of inducing them into slavery - 'The Europeans found that the newly discovered peoples... could be used as an almost inexhaustible supply of forced labour." Therefore, the Europeans arrived in the New World expecting cannibalism to be rife. When they discovered that it was not, they merely exaggerated how widespread it actually was in order to give them an excuse to subjugate the local peoples and even to invent slavery.
As stated previously, the term 'noble savage' was created by Europeans in describing the Native Americans. However, there was also a more critical, xenophobic view held by the Europeans which overshadowed their initial beliefs having spent increased time in America. They had always been viewed 'as people outside history, permanently engulfed in an earlier phase', but were increasingly seen as barbarians rather than 'noble savages' after increased conflict mainly caused by the Europeans. This was mainly due to the launch of surprise attacks (Europeans usually declared war before attacking) and the use of scalping and torture, although Europeans came to use all these methods, so the argument is somewhat contradictory. Massacres by Native Americans supposedly reinforced their 'subliminal prejudices and exposed the Indians' barbarity and perfidy'. They were supposedly uncivilized due to a lack of a social order, a political system and an understanding of private property. The Europeans believed that 'only external intervention could propel them toward civilization and progress'. This naturally enforced European superiority over them and meant that they believed it was their right to control the New World and its peoples.
Perhaps the one link between these two seemingly paradoxical depictions of the extra-Europeans was the role of Christianity. Christianity was prominent in determining that the extra-Europeans should be seen as pagans and, therefore, as part of a common humanity. However, it was also important in the idea of an inane superiority that the Europeans held which eventually evolved into racism and eventually led to subjugation and slavery. The Europeans often felt it was their mission to civilize and Christianize those who were considered to be pagans, and, of course, the vast majority of extra-Europeans belonged in this bracket. That is, they took a sympathetic approach to their extra-European brothers in humankind and hoped to develop their society through religion - 'The basic assumptions were that this was a land almost empty of Europeans but availing a native population ripe for conversion." However, Christianity was also the root of a feeling of intense superiority. It gave the Europeans the right, in their eyes, to conquer territories and peoples against their will. This was especially the case with extra-Europeans who refused conversion to Christianity. They were termed heretics and included the Moors and many Native Americans who 'were thought to be stubbornly and incorrigibly attached to their erroneous beliefs... [and] the only language they understood was that of the sword'. This perceived cultural supremacy affected virtually all the extra-Europeans and ultimately led to exploitation and subjugation of blacks as slaves on a permanent basis.
Therefore, in conclusion, it would be fair to argue that there were paradoxical depictions of extra-European peoples by the Europeans. On the one hand extra-Europeans were portrayed as part of a wider humanity in order to create a common identity between the European and extra-European cultures, as indicated by an interest in their genealogies. They were seen as pagans waiting for conversion. The best example of this is the formation of the term 'noble savage' in reference to Native Americans. On the other hand, however, the Europeans purposely set the extra-Europeans apart from themselves by depicting them as barbarians and heathens who were uncivilized. This notion was created to allow the subjugation and exploitation of extra-European peoples, which ultimately led to the creation of slavery. It is Ryan who best summarizes this point of view - 'The world, after all, was discovered by Europeans, not vice versa. And that fact implied a certain ownership, if not legal then at least intellectual and psychological." It was perhaps Christianity which was the only common link between the two almost completely paradoxical depictions in terms of creating the idea of pagans needing conversion, whilst simultaneously producing an ingrained superiority to be upheld through violence and exploitation.