On April the 25 th 1860 an anonymous author submitted the following review of George Eliot's The Mill on the Floss (1860) to The Guardian:
Dickens perceptive remarks, outlined in a letter to Elizabeth Gaskell, appeared to be correct. Victorian society still looked to the novel chiefly as a source of entertainment and amusement until 1890. They did not wish to be reminded of the fears and deep-rooted instability that pervaded their society, which was fractured by social, political and scientific upheavals. The proliferation of scientific material, notably Charles Darwin's The Origin of the Species (1859), which prompted religious doubt, the periodic economic depression inflicted by the Corn Laws passed in 1815 and the passing of the Reform Act in 1832, allowing the industrial middle class to vote, brought elements of the tragedy into everyday life. Why then did these influential writers, George Eliot and Charles Dickens, adopt the facets of tragedy to structure their novels? In response to this, I will examine how the themes of gender relations, education and use of landscape are used as vehicles to write tragedy in George Eliot's The Mill on the Floss (1860) and Charles Dickens's Great Expectations (1861), focusing specifically on the final sequences of each novel.
After the examination of George Eliot's Felix Holt (1867) an anonymous writer for the Westminster Review concluded that "George Eliot's novels are not novels in the ordinary sense of the term - they are really dramas." Therefore, it is rather fitting that one of Eliot's earliest pen names was "Pollian, the Angel of Destruction."
In Mill on the Floss Eliot inflicts two major tragedies; the first is the loss of the Tulliver fortune and the second is Maggie's inability to realise her intellectual ambitions. Tulliver's losing the mill to Wakem not only highlights the struggle of the artisan classes against the invading capitalism from the cities, but for Raymond Williams it shows " the change from prosperity to adversity" integral to tragedy. However, when the principles of Goethe's bildungsroman (as first explored in his Wilhelm Meister) are addressed, it is Maggie's journey of personal growth that exhibits all the elements of Aristotelian tragedy. Matthew Arnold in The Scholar-Gipsy (1853) concisely highlights Maggie's dilemma; " this strange disease of modern life, with its sick hurry, its divided aims." Maggie is 'divided' between a loyalty to her family and her 'thirst for all knowledge." Eliot structures the novel on what Raymond Williams defines as the tragic "wheel of fortune," in which the protagonist makes their infamous tragic error, hamartia, before trying to reverse the consequences, peripeteia, concluding in a moment of recognition, anagnorisis, accompanied throughout by sequences in the novel that evoke pity and fear.
Eliot recognised that the language of her Arcadian protagonist lacked the "eloquent special pleading characteristic of the traditional tragic hero," so she used female subordination to evoke pity. Mr Tulliver' sister, Mrs Moss, is described 'like a half-smothered fire." Aunt Pullet unveils her hat in 'a darkened room in which the outer light entere[d] feebly' is suggestive not only of Miss Havisham's room in Great Expectations, but also of the lady's own spirit repressed by social constraints. Similarly, Maggie can be seen rebelling 'against her lot' when she cuts her hair and expressing her repressed passions in the crucifixion of her doll with 'three nails driven into the head." In many instances, her position seems similar to slavery. Mrs Tulliver refers to her as 'a brown skin...mulatter,'  a 'bit of furniture...on which she could bestow her anxiety." Her subsidiary role in the family is consolidated by her aunts and uncles displeasure in her 'brown' 'gypsy' appearance. However, these consanguine criticisms are inconsequential compared to the fraternal dominance Tom holds over Maggie. Tom promises 'always to take care of her, make her his housekeeper, and punish her when she did wrong." According to old Wakem 'we don't ask what a woman does, we ask who she belongs to,' reducing women to mere chattel. Whilst, Mr Tulliver views women as 'obtrusive flies." Philip remarks that 'Maggie's dark eyes remind[ed] him of the stories about princesses being turned into animals." Subjected to these humiliations and the conditional rather than unconditional love shown by her family, Maggie seems to degenerate into sadomasochistic behaviour by clinging to those who impede her growth because 'the need of being loved would always subdue her." In Darwinian fashion this 'small mistake of nature' will not survive because she is too modern. Her anagnorisis comes when she acknowledges the social barrier between genders; 'you are a man Tom, and have power, and can do something in the world." Her female gender limits her from achieving the noble magnificence won by traditional tragic heroes.
Eliot reinforces the reader's pity by focusing on the inequality of education. The opportunity of intellectual advancement is reserved only for Tom under the tutelage of Mr Stelling. According to Mr Tulliver 'a woman's no business wi' being so clever' so instead Maggie must attend the occasional class at Miss Firniss's school. When she visits Tom at Mr Stelling's house Phillip Wakem notices the 'unsatisfied intelligence' in her eyes. The reader's sense of frustration in compounded by Tom's 'bovine' dull intellect, on which the 'lessons had left a deposit of vague, fragmentary, ineffectual notions." Like Pip, Tom's education 'had simply glided over him, leaving a light deposit of polish." These sequences of pity lead to Maggie's hamartia, which comes at the Guest's party, when she decides 'this one, this last night, she might expand unrestrainedly in the warmth of the present without those chill, eating thoughts of the past and the future." This decision leads her into the greenhouse with Stephen Guest where he kisses her and their relations are changed until Maggie's moment of peripeteia, when like Tess from Thomas Hardy's  Tess of the D'Urbervilles( 1891) she awakens from 'this strong presence that seemed to bear her along without any act of her own will' and refuses to elope with Stephen, knowing full well ' the irrevocable wrong that must blot her life had been committed.'
Dickens labelled his Great Expectations as a 'grotesque tragi-comic conception,' thus signalling his incorporation of tragic elements in the novel.
Dickens creates both Pip and Estella as orphans, vehicles that Victorians bereft of old traditions, might identify with. Estella tells Pip 'we are not free to follow our own devices, you and I,' they are 'the lonely...battered slowly like pebbles into fortuitous shapes,' as products of their turbulent society. Estella is portrayed as a puppet 'brought up by Miss Havisham to wreak vengeance on all the male sex." Despite Estella's 'proud impatience' and educated elegance she remains the product of Miss Havisham's diseased mind. I am reminded of the monster in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein when Estella cries 'I am what you have made me. Take all the praise, take all the blame; take all the success, take all the failure; in short, take me." The original ending evokes extreme pity for the woman, who only learns to feel after being subjected to 'suffering.' Other female characters in the novel are also subordinated. Mrs Hubble 'held a conventionally juvenile position, because she had married Mr Hubble,' the dim-witted Mrs Pocket remains unintelligent because she had been 'brought up from the cradle...as one...to be guarded from the acquisition of plebeian domestic knowledge,' whilst Mr Jaggers housekeeper, Molly, is told 'you have been admired, and can go' after being forced to reveal the scars on her wrist. Even Biddy 'the wisest of girls' is forced to conform in her marriage to Joe. Interestingly, Dickens also stimulates sympathy for his male characters by portraying them with feminine qualities. Much like Philip Wakem in Mill on the Floss, Joe 'with the touch of a woman' provides Pip with the female tenderness and unconditional love he does not receive from his sister. Similarly, the reader in inclined to trust Pip's friend Startop, who is described as having a 'woman's delicacy of feature...exactly like his mother." In contrast to these characters is Pip, whom despite his first person narration, the reader is inclined to criticise for his treatment of Dickens pitiable characters and his quickly developed hubris. Ashamed of his home, Pip commits his harmartia by accepting Mr Jaggers proposal. He quickly bids farewell to the 'monotonous acquaintances' of his childhood and confesses ' I was beginning to be rather vain of my knowledge." He revels when Mr Pumblechook addresses him as 'sir,' and he immediately puts on airs and graces to distance himself from Trabb's boy and seeks to 'make Joe less ignorant and common, that he might be worthier of my society." I am critical even in his love for Estella, in which I am reminded of Othello's adulation of Desdemona in Shakespeare's Othello. It is a 'jealous' love inspired and fuelled by social ambition. Much like the schizophrenic behaviour of Othello, John Carey has commented on the symbolic use of fire that can be traced throughout the novel and is representative of "the criminal passions that lurk within" Pip and link him to Magwitch. It has been theorised that Pip unconsciously endorses Drummle's victimisation of Estella, Orlick's revenge upon Mrs Gargery and the burning Miss Havisham. Indeed, Pip's moment of peripeteia occurs on the realisation that Magwitch is his benefactor and he wishes 'that he had left me at the forge - far from contented, yet, by comparison, happy!" Jeannette King defends those Victorian novelists criticised for their over emphasis on pathos, arguing this "is not a negative effect, a token of failure to achieve tragedy, but the result of deliberate emphasis on passivity, helplessness and dull monotony by novelists concerned with working these concepts into a total and new version of tragedy."
To evoke the fear necessary for tragedy both Eliot and Dickens resort to the Gothic. When staying with the gypsies Maggie's imagination strays into images of cannibalism and feels sure they will 'kill her as soon as it was dark, and cut up her body for gradual cooking." Eliot links past and present with the eerie legend of St Oggs and the mysterious prophetic writings ' browned by time' in the margin of a book given to her by Bob Jakin. In contrast, Dickens shocks his readers from the very beginning. The appearance of Magwitch 'soaked in water, smothered in mud and lamed by stones' from behind the grave of Pip's parents, awakens 'mortal terror' in both Pip and the reader. Similarly, Magwitch tells the young Pip that if he does not keep his promise a cannibalistic man will 'softly creep...his way to him and tear him open." This traumatic experience is revived throughout the novel with visitations from similar convicts flashing the file that helped Magwitch escape or the reappearance of the convicts leg-iron used to injure Mrs Gargery. The 'waxwork and skeleton' figure of Miss Havisham is not dissimilar to the witches in Shakespeare's Macbeth when she emits ghastly 'low cries' and has 'a whirl of fire blazing all about her,' even Pip notices the 'positively dreadful ...energy of her looks." Pip's guilt prompts him twice to see illusions of Miss Havisham 'hanging to the beam.'
Dickens often employs "antisocial" landscape to embellish this theme of fear. The unearthly inner landscape of Sattis House, bathed in darkness and the horrific description of Miss Havisham's wedding cake overrun with ' speckled-legged spiders,' ' mice' and 'black beetles." Even the gardens surrounding the house are unnatural, where the snow never melts and the 'grass grows in every crevice." However, like the Red Deeps in Mill on the Floss, Sattis House provides refuge and retreat respectively, for Maggie and Miss Havisham, qualities integral to the 'antisocial landscape' according to Pauline Fletcher. Similarly, in Richmond 'ancient trees...[are] cut into fashions as formal and unnatural as the hoops and wigs and stiff skirts' belonging to the inhabitants. For Dickens, Capitalist London is ' rather ugly, crooked, narrow and dirty,''asmear with filth and fat and blood and foam.'
Jeannette King highlights that for many critics "the lower classes [were] inappropriate subjects for tragedy. Their social position deprives their fall of any wider significance." However, Eliot does establish elements of the heroine in Maggie. Like many of Shakespeare's tragic heroes blinded by ambition, Maggie's thoughts 'were the oddest mixture of clear eyed acumen and blind dreams,' she is determined to 'be a clever woman." She is 'gifted with that superior power of misery,' yet has strength capable of 'making out a faith for herself without the aid of established authorities." These qualities raise her above the humble characters being criticised and lends majesty to her suffering. On the whole, however, Eliot substitutes the Aristotelian protagonist of noble or majestic birth, with Maggie, a provincial daughter of nature, ideal for promoting the nostalgic longing for a rural past experienced by so many Victorians. She also replaces the happy, assimilative endings stressed in Goethe's bildungsroman with the traditionalist cathartic death of Maggie and her brother Tom in the flood. Jeannette King stresses "the appeal of the tragedies of the past seems to be partly that they are past. Lacking the distancing effect of time, the modern would-be tragedian was required, therefore, to employ artistic devices to achieve the same distance - to veil the existence of evil in poetic form." Indeed, Eliot's controversial ending has produced divergent opinions among critics as to what this catastrophic event implies. Susan Fraiman highlights some of the possibilities; "an androgynous reunion, incestuous orgasm, the climax of a long suicide...perhaps sororicide, [or] authorial revenge." Whilst, Patricia Ingham sees "the destruction of the restrictive community [and] the fulfilment of incest fantasy." I believe the description of the river Floss at the beginning of the novel with its 'dark, changing wavelets' is reminiscent of Maggie's hair, equating the two as one entity. Such an interpretation might prompt Feminist readings of the flood as the welling up of female anger, which destroys the barriers between female and male. In other feminist enquiries the waters have been compared to the amniotic fluid released at birth, signalling Maggie and Tom's return to childhood and a state of innocence. The over determined conclusion might just be the simple fulfilment of the curse that 'when the mill changes hands, the river's angry' symbolizing 'nature repair[ing] her ravages." Ultimately, I believe Tom's death is more significant than Maggie's because in killing Tom Eliot is able to symbolically enact the death of the patriarchy that has hindered Maggie's development. Darwinian ethics dictate that Maggie the overreacher cannot survive. What does become clear is the inter-relatedness of Tom and Maggie's lives. In a statement to publisher John Blackwood Eliot herself described the novel as 'the history of two closely related lives.' Jerome Buckley concurs that "we must not ignore the declared duality of purpose." Indeed, perhaps the novel can be considered as two bildungsromans interwoven, in which their "simultaneous deaths mark a moment when their narratives collide for the last time." Indeed Fraiman states, "if Tom indicates the work's nominal status as bildungsroman, Maggie's problem...is her inability to enter the designated mode. The novel is structured by her vain attempts to participate in the genre." It seems then that Maggie's identity is not formed independently, but in response to Tom's decisions. Her attempts to learn Latin and earn money by sewing are examples of her fruitless efforts to make Tom's Bildung her own. In life she is Gilbert and Gumar's 'Madwoman in the attic' unable to develop and caught in a cycle of childlike behaviour. Her aspirations to Bildung are only fulfilled in death, when she is immortalised in the legend of St Oggs. Unlike Pip who returns to his roots eventually, Maggie is left 'a lonely wanderer' with 'no home.'
At the suggestion of Bulwer Lytton, Dickens revised his original ending for Great Expectations, this time opting for an optimistic tone. However, critics like John Forster felt that although the official ending was marginally happier, it was 'less consistent with the drift, as well as natural working out, of the tale." Indeed the original ending was praised for its 'flat tone and refusal of romantic expectation' that the revised ending seems to fall into; Pip gushingly confesses the truth to Magwitch and Estella's suffering has finally 'given her a heart." Like Eliot, Dickens adds a cyclical element to his novel by renaming Joe and Biddy's son, Pip. There is a sense that the same mistakes will be repeated when Pip sees the image of himself in the young boy and places him on ' a certain tombstone,' the same one that Magwitch had placed Pip on years earlier. In a sense, Pip's great expectations and 'wanderings' were wasted dreams, similar to Maggie's intellectual ambitions. Much like the flood in Mill on the Floss, Pip's illness perhaps signals a moment of rebirth, after which he is able to experience his true anagnorisis when he finally accepts his place among the marshes of Kent. Accordingly, just as Maggie was unable to 'run away from her shadow,' Estella is able to shed this shadow self, symbolic of social restraint. Dickens revised conclusion offers a brighter future, as we are reminded of Milton's Paradise Lost when Pip and Estella leave the 'ruined place' of Sattis House hand in hand.
In conclusion, it seems both Eliot and Dickens found the facets of tragedy ideal for exploring the topics that were the cause of the doubt and fear endemic to Victorian society. They used their novels as vehicles to teach and where possible provide comfort through comedy. They were able to convey their realist views on social class, gender relations and education, whilst purging their "yearning for an earlier society that was supposed to be idyllically integrated and morally pristine." Indeed, Eliot was concerned with exploring the relationship of the past to the present. She saw "tragedy as the universal experience," so she opted for the traditional catharsis, or purging of emotion that Maggie and Tom's death delivers to the reader. In an ironic twist Eliot destroys her champion for the liberated female, perhaps too afraid to openly challenge Victorian morality and keen to restore the stability her society craved. Sandra Gilbert feels "Eliot becomes entangled in contradictions that she can only resolve through acts of vengeance against her own characters." Alternatively, Dickens opted for a modernist denouement that lacked finality but paved the way for a new version of tragedy, preferring to leave his readers is an emotional stasis and in doing so reserving and concealing his final conclusions on social reality.