In a collection of poems entitled Why Brownlee Left (1980), Irish poet Paul Muldoon included the sonnet 'October 1950,'in which he writes about his own conception:
This deliberation over subjectivity, technology and place is not new to contemporary literature. Victorian society was fractured by social, political and scientific upheavals, through the proliferation of scientific material, notably Charles Darwin's The Origin of the Species (1859), which prompted religious doubt, the periodic economic depression inflicted by the Corn Laws passed in 1815 and the passing of the Reform Act in 1832, allowing the industrial middle class to vote. These rapid changes created instabilities that threatened an individual's sense of their social identity and it seems this dilemma of the self has extended into the zeitgeist of contemporary literature, as Steven Connor highlights "the novel is [still] central to modern societies, in that it dramatises the process of integrating self-formation." In response to this, I will examine how social identity is constructed through the politics of space and place in Charles Dickens Great Expectations (1861), Alan Warner's Morvern Callar (1995) and Jeanette Winterson's The Powerbook (2001.)
In his Great Expectations (1861) Charles Dickens writes the bildungsroman of the protagonist Pip. It is a novel of growth* depicting the boys search for identity and exploring the Renaissance trope of self-fashioning. The novel opens to reveal Pip in the marshes among the gravestones of his deceased parents and brothers. Against the backdrop of the wild, unpopulated and unclaimed Kent marshes, he forges his own identity when he states 'I called myself Pip." By establishing Pip and the other young adults in the novel as orphans, Dickens allowed his readers, who had been bereft of old traditions, to commiserate with this lost identity. The orphan was equated with an 'unauthored' identity that goes in search of authority in an attempt to 'authorize the plot of his ensuing life." Linked to this ideal of authority is the father figure. Psychoanalyst Anny Sadrin believes Pip is " a Telemachus figure: a male orphan who has to redeem his father's death and return to his origins. So the 'true' ending of Great Expectations is Pip's return to the parental graves, and his story is about his mistakes in projecting his paternal ideal." His attempts to construct his personality are prompted through a Lacanian lack of his parent's identity when he gleans their character traits from the 'shape of the letters' on their tombstones. Interestingly, I am reminded of Saussurian signifying systems when Pip relates; 'from the character and turn of the inscription, 'Also Georgiana Wife of the Above,' I drew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly." Accordingly, his sense of separateness and his 'first most vivid and broad impression of the identity of things' are established on his meeting with, would-be father, Magwitch, who suddenly appears from behind his father's grave. His social identity dilemma then arises from misinterpreting paternal figures like Miss Havisham and Wemmick and being confused by characters assuming the role of stepfather; like Mr Pumblechook. Interestingly, Charles Dickens own relationship with his father was fraught with instability and disappointment. His father repeatedly led the family into debt, eventually ending in his imprisonment in Marshalsea prison, with Dickens being forced to work in a blacking warehouse. These early experiences traumatised the young Dickens and propelled his literary ambitions. The parallels between Dickens own life and the bildungsroman of Pip in Great Expectations are striking in their similarity. It is entirely possible that Magwitch is the embellished literary form of Dickens father, for it is Magwitch who propels Pip towards the realisation of his great expectations and social identity. Interestingly, in the Twentieth Century Fox production of Great Expectations (1997) directed by Alfonso Cuaron, the young Pip encounters Magwitch not by the gravestones, but when examining his reflection in the shallow waters of the marshes he notices the convict hiding underneath, as if revealing an older mirror image of himself. Linked to this is the notion of naming. The parent names a child and in this action forms the fundamental basis of the child's subjectivity. Christopher Morris concurs that "Pip's preoccupations with names...all point to Pip's own basic lack of an autonomous self." On the marshes Pip is free to let his social identity evolve naturally. However, when placed in Sattis House and London, other social identities are forced upon him. Estella feeds him ' as if I were a dog in disgrace' Interestingly, on meeting Pip in the marshes Magwitch demands him to 'give us your name' as if it were a physical handle that can be taken off and on like a piece of clothing. Despite Magwitch's instructions as Pip's benefactor are that he must 'always bear the name of Pip,' Herbert quickly convinces him to change it to 'Handel." Similarly, on his arrival in London Magwitch assumes the name 'Provis' because 'it's as good as another' and Mr Wopsle works under the name ' Mr Waldengarver' at the theatre. Perhaps these characters are influenced by the city itself because according to W.H. Auden "the lonely are battered slowly like pebbles into fortuitous shapes[by the city.]" Indeed, Wemmick divides his social identity between his work for Mr Jagger's in London and his country residence the 'castle.'
Dickens employs the first person narrative to convey the inner thoughts of young Pip. As a result, the reader is able to witness the slow formation of Pip's social identity, as he experiences Lacan's definition of inner and outer reality when he reveals 'I and my conscience showed ourselves' and during his illness ' I confounded impossible existences with my own identity." It exists as an entity apart from himself. In contrast, the motif of hands that runs throughout the novel is perhaps symbolic of social realities and identities interweaving. Mr Jagger's obsessive-compulsive hand washing is a negative response to the crowds of people that wait outside his office; he does not like his social reality being invaded. Whilst, the joining of Pip and Estella's hands at the end of the novel is not only reminiscent of Milton's Paradise Lost but also symbolic of divided social identities being united among the neutral space of the ruins of Sattis House. The cyclical motion of events suggests that Dickens believes place is irrelevant in forming the social identity. In truth, identity is manufactured and maintained by interpellation within society and Pip must find his place among the social strata of Joe and Estella. As Eiichi Hara highlights "the human psyche simply locates itself within a range of subject positions already available within society's language and ideology."
Like Dickens, Alan Warner constructs Morvern in Morvern Callar (1995) as an orphan and writes her in the first person. However, unlike Pip who readily shares his emotions and ambitions, Morvern's character is decidedly nihilistic. Her detached and dispassionate language leave the character to act as a vacuum that reflects the equally vacuous dull world around her. Cristie March is keen to show that whilst Warner "glorifies and rusticates the Highlands ...[he] also represents to the reader a 'weirding' of the landscape as socio-cultural and technological change infiltrate the environment." This evidently impacts upon Morvern's social identity and Wallace and Stevenson highlight the damaged identity common to Scottish Literature is expressed through " a failure to find - or accept- self-fulfilment in education, work, emotional relationships; [and] inarticulacy." Indeed, " in Scottish novels...protagonists, are rarely, if ever, in control of their existences, and [are] morbidly aware of the fact." However, we are reminded of Samuel Beckett's Happy Days (1963) in the openness of her simplistic language and linear narrative, which suggest a child that has yet to form her social identity. Morvern makes two key ethical decisions that shape her social identity. The first is her decision not to report the death of her boyfriend and the second is the theft of his novel and essentially his identity when she puts her name on the manuscript. In this act, Warner is perhaps exploring Roland Barthes 'the death of the author' hypothesis, in which he argues that the author cannot claim any absolute authority over his or her text because 'to give a text an Author is to impose a limit on that text, to furnish it with a final signified.' Warner experiments with these ideas both in the title and content of the novel. Not only does the male author distance himself by constructing a female character, but also the name itself, Morvern Callar, is asexual and genderless. By confusing issues of gender Warner is able to lend existential qualities to his protagonist and he is able to limit extra-diegetic interaction and therefore prevent her social identity being formed in relation to the author.This gender confusion is extended to Morvern's preoccupation with names. She plays with the construction of identity by nicknaming her stepfather 'Red Hanna' and her co-workers 'Tequila Sheila,' 'Smugslug' and ' Creeping Jesus." Whilst, these names deny the character's true identity, she foregrounds the lack of her boyfriend's name by referring to him as 'He." The capitalization is usually reserved for references to God and is suggestive of a divine authorship or father figure status in Morvern's life. Indeed, the large age gap between the two could perhaps be construed as Oedipal re-enaction of a father and daughter relationship. Morvern, like the characters created by Jeannette Winterson, is detached from the body she occupies and her ritualistic toe painting, smoking and obsession with clothes are not simply a preoccupation with the teen culture but an attempt to integrate her inner and outer reality. Ironically, this disjointed sense of self allows her to interact with the corpse of her dead boyfriend without ethical dilemma; 'what you do is divide the limbs and wrap them in a good few layers of bin liner.'
Accordingly, Warner implements poststructuralist concerns with the limitations of language. If we are confined within the symbolic order of language dictated by society, our sense of social identity is contained within the selected discourses available to us. In Baktinian terms our 'heteroglossia' limits the construction of our social identity. Perhaps in defiance of this Morvern seems to refuse this narrative economy. She does not speak until page eighteen of the novel and she acknowledges 'it was the first time I'd spoke that day' even though it is now evening. Ironically, we learn the etymology of her name in Spanish means 'silence' and she only seems truly free when not partaking in discourse. Indeed, many readers are isolated by the Scottish dialect Warner uses throughout the novel. Instead of crying Morvern 'greets,' she refers to potatoes as 'tatties' and the elision and lack of grammar in the prose convey her working class discourse. This elision leaves an undercurrent of inexplicable silences throughout the novel, which are perhaps Warner's exploration of the Lacanian 'Real.' Morvern is experiencing an 'other' reality that exists outside her idiolect. Unable to express herself verbally, Morvern turns to her compilation tapes to convey her emotions and express herself. Perhaps then our sense of self can be expressed more fully in the space of technology. Indeed, Morvern attempts to reconstruct her social identity by moving to Spain and taking part in the raves. Through the technology of music she is temporarily able to fulfil her Lacanian lack and find freedom because 'you didn't really have your body as your own, it was part of the dance, the music, the rave." Warner was praised by critics for his portrayal of the "profound anomie of the rave scene" but he is keen to highlight that "such a lifestyle results in a flattening of experience" and all the while she chooses to listen to the music of her dead boyfriend because the rave culture is real no substitute for the emotional void in her life. Eventually she must return to her roots, like Pip, and confront her true social identity, indeed Warner extends this search into the sequel These Demented Lands (1997) where Morvern goes to visit the island where her foster mother's grave lies.
Like Morvern, Jeanette Winterson is aware of the discrepancies between the fragmented inner 'I' and the ideal outer 'I,' the de-centred self. She is conscious that 'the one life we think we know, is only the window that is open on the screen." With a lack of symbolic language to describe those other windows, she questions; 'how do you write me to myself?" She draws on this idea of the potential freedom to be found through technology in The PowerBook (2001.) Through a series of fantasies mapped out on a laptop Winterson explores the boundaries and liminalities of gender and nomadic identity. These concerns are perhaps linked intimately to Winterson's own identity. Having run away from home at the age of sixteen because her parents did not support her lesbian identity, Winterson was forced to construct her social identity in the absence of authorial authority, In contrast to Pip in Great Expectations who searches for his ordained place in society in order to stabilize and ensure its continuation, Winterson creates characters who rebel against the process of interpellation in search of their own personal, psychological identity. She questions how well can we ever really know ourselves and in response to this she offers a new set of politics by which to construct social identity. She constructs love affairs dotted through time and space, 'in the sixteenth century,' at 'the train station' and in 'Paris,' in order to stress that social identity is not formed through one's environment, 'place doesn't matter' neither does time because ' there is no past, present or future, only simultaneous layers of reality." She also finds that names are irrelevant to identity. Winterson creates many characters all different and yet all produced by the same consciousness. She shares Barthes preoccupation with the author by sporadically establishing extra-diegetic interaction asking; 'did I write this story, or was it you, writing through me?" She experiences 'a loss of control' as the 'script now writes itself.'
Certainly Winterson too is acutely aware of the Lacanian jouissance that drives our search for social identity; 'I think it is fair to say that my parents were not loved a children, that they did not love each other and that they did not love me. There was possession, fear, sentimentality, desire, but not love. This has left me with certain absences." If our sense of self is more defined by a sense of lack than presence, can the novel ever encompass this fractured subjectivity? Winterson seems to be exploring this anomaly when she hopes 'my name would contain me, but the sound itself seemed to run off my tongue, and drop, letter by letter, into a pool at my feet." Like in Great Expectations, a name then becomes a physical entity separate from its owner. Instead she postulates that autonomy can only be achieved when we are able to assert our multiple identities, love is the vehicle that allows us to explore and enact those personalities because 'love is a door in a blank wall." Interestingly then, Winterson suggests that cyberspace is the last avant-garde frontier where you are able to ' take off your body,' welcome our Cartesian egos, solipsistic beliefs and enjoy a new freedom by embracing a new cyber consciousness, where 'you can change the story' because 'you are the story.'
In conclusion, the similarities of opinion concerning the politics that construct social identity, expressed by the examined authors, suggest that the construction of the self may have fallen into cultural stasis. Indeed, Bergonzi highlights "no matter how unflinchingly the novelist may try to deal with wholly new kinds of experience, he cannot escape being influenced by the novels that have been written before him." Indeed if Foucault's speculations on the limitations of symbolic language prove to be true, it seems impossible to believe that new dimensions of space and place can produce unique avant-garde examples of social identity, without new discourse to support them. Perhaps it is time to put aside the Lawrencian view that social identity is formed through "responding to the world that was timeless and absolute."
and return instead to Keat's idea of Negative Capability "when man is capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact and reason" and realise our understanding of social identity rests on the acceptance that "human subjectivities [are forever] slipping and sliding" between different discourses. Like the contemporary moment, can we ever truly know our social identity in all its indefinable and mutable glory?