In his provincial novel The Woodlanders (1887) Thomas Hardy, as the omniscient narrator, remarks:
This excerpt demonstrates the symbolic use of nature and landscape to convey the social, political and scientific upheavals that occurred within Queen Victoria's extensive reign from 1837 to 1901. The proliferation of scientific material, notably Charles Darwin's The Origin of the Species (1859), the periodic economic depression inflicted by the Corn Laws passed in 1815 that resulted in starvation and depraved living conditions as highlighted in Freidrich Engels The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845) and the passing of the Reform Act in 1832, allowing the industrial middle class to vote, created a deep-rooted instability that was reflected in the themes covered by Victorian regional novelists. As highlighted in the above quotation, these were themes of Darwinism, class conflict, nostalgia for lost community and even divergence among the sexes. By employing landscape and symbolic geography Victorian novelists were able to express these developments and changes in individuals and communities. Interestingly, each of the novelists wrote at different periods of the Victorian era, therefore I will examine Elisabeth Gaskell's portrayal of Manchester, during the 'hungry forties,' in her industrial novel North and South (1855), the 'golden age' bucolic pastoral East Midlands of George Eliot's Silas Marner (1861)), and explore Thomas Hardy's Wessex in Tess of the D'Urbervilles (1891) and The Woodlanders (1887.)
First then, I will examine the novelists' use of landscape to explore the conflicts that existed between different social classes. As Enid Duthie highlights in the fiction of Elizabeth Gaskell "landscapes...are inseparably connected with the lives of her characters." Indeed Margaret Hale embodies the unbreakable link between southern prosperity and northern misery that comprises the broader theme of class conflict in Gaskell's North and South. Freidrich Engels portrayal of working class Manchester filled with "the heaps of debris refuse...and standing pools for gutters [which] would make it impossible for a human being in any degree civilised to live in such a district" highlights this working class misery. The second chapter entitled 'Roses and Thorns' is symbolic then of the social divide between the 'golden stillness' of Helstone and the 'purpose-like' and 'hopeless' streets of Milton. The significance of this title is emphasised at the conclusion of the novel, when Thornton shows Margaret the roses he brought from Helstone, perhaps a symbol representing the union between North and South and the social classes they embody. In contrast, the riot of angry mill workers who mob Thornton's home, is an obvious motion of conflict. Gaskell relates the 'fierce unearthly groan' they emit, filled with the 'demonic desire of some terrible wild beast for the food that is withheld from his ravening." This animalistic imagery equates the mill workers with nature, thus presenting Thornton's behaviour as unnatural. Similarly, the mutiny that occurred upon Frederick's ship is perhaps a direct reflection of this riot between Thornton and the mill workers and Gaskell's reminder that conflict between the classes was universal, irrelevant of location or landscape. Certainly, Gaskell wishes to emphasise the unnaturalness of Milton due to its removal from nature. Margaret mistakenly concludes the screen of cloud, which she 'had taken to foretell rain' is in fact 'black, un-parlimentary, smoke." This motif is explored further when Thornton abolishes the autonomy of his workers by referring to them as 'hands,' via metonymical classification and patronises them by employing the father-child metaphor, that 'masters would like their hands to be merely tall, large, children...with a blind unreasoning kind of obedience,' used by paternalists during the era, to define his relationship with his mill workers. Similar to Thornton's work ethic is Silas Marner's love of money and material possessions that symbolise the destructive nature of industrialisation. George Levine states that in "George Eliot's realism the details reverberate with significance and the images are as much a part of the consciousness of the characters as representations of material reality." His obsession with counting money whose 'form and colour were like the satisfaction of thirst to him' and attachment to 'the brown pot' he breaks are symbolic of industrialisations consciousness of capitalism. Significantly, its poisoning effects are mirrored in Silas' mental degradation in the form of 'catalepsy' fits. Like Thornton, Silas must fight this individual desire in favour of a moral responsibility to Eppie. Thomas Hardy created many memorable heroines, but the most intricate of his characters was Wessex, his "partly - real, partly-dream country" as he described it in the preface to Far from the Madding Crowd (1874.) Originally a south-western region of Britain ruled by the Saxons, Hardy clearly wanted to evoke connotations of antiquity, essentially though Wessex has come to embody an entire culture that is predominately rural and pre-industrial. Like Margaret Hale in Eliot's North and South, Grace in The Woodlanders embodies the class conflict; she 'combined modern nerves with primitive feelings." The cruelty of nature in which 'stoats' suck ' the blood of the rabbits' and 'etiolated arms of ivy...grope in vain for some support' reflects these conflicts. "Grace then is the pivotal figure, who has to choose between town civilisation and country life in choosing between Fitzpiers and Giles." Grace compares Fitzpiers presence in Little Hintock, to like finding ' a tropical plant in a hedgerow." Whilst, Mr Melbury is listening to the drunken Fitzpiers criticisms of his family, the trees take on the appearance of 'sentinels...pikes...lances' in reflection of Mr Melbury's violent thoughts. These instances show that "the trees, whether viewed as subjects or as objects, are the medium through which the community lives and expresses itself." The gardens of Mrs Charmond's Hintock House, in The Woodlanders, are essentially man-made with nature being restricted to only 'an old tree here and there' and 'an endless shearing of the heavy armed ivy...and a continual lopping of trees and shrubs." Similarly, Fitzpiers' garden is 'so regular in [its] plan that they might have been laid out by a Dutch designer of the time." These images are in direct contrast with Giles' home within the forest and symbolic of the class conflict. Often the theme of depicting conflict between the classes is addressed by the authors extending the boundaries of landscape into the interior landscape within the homes of individual characters. Margaret's aunt's residence at Harley Street that is filled with lavish fabrics of 'white muslin' and 'crimson damask sofa[s],' lies in stark contrast to the home of Bessy and Nicholas Higgins among 'the crowded narrow streets' of Milton. In George Eliot's Silas Marner (1861) the Red house belonging to the Cass' is an eyesore among the traditional cottages and firmly establishes the division of classes, for when Godrey meets a local 'there was no pleasant morning greeting between them...because the sweet flower of courtesy is not a growth of such homes as the Red house." Hardy effectively establishes correspondence between location and the quality's they denote about the types of community who inhabit them. Alec's home is 'a fancy farm' made from modern brick a 'rich red colour' in stark contrast to the surrounding green 'fertile and sheltered' land of Marlott, where Tess is from. Not only is his modern dwelling in conflict with the traditional homes in the Vale of Blackmoor, but it is 'built for enjoyment pure and simple' and it's intrusion upon the landscape signals Alec penetration of Tess. Sandbourne is an 'exotic' and 'fashionable watering-place,' 'a Mediterranean lounging - place on the English Channel' entirely in conflict with the surrounding countryside and symbolic of the social divide between the aristocracy and rural artisan class. In The Woodlanders Mrs Charmond's living room at Hintock House is filled with 'showy Versaillese furniture,' 'a red-shaded lamp' all in a 'style unlike that of the structural parts of the building as it was possible to be." Even the urban interloper Fitzpiers acknowledges that 'the window curtains were closed' because it was raining. Mrs Charmond is literally trying to shut herself off from nature. Her abode is in direct contrast to the bustling, functional home of Mr Melbury that is a higgledy assortment 'of all sorts of buildings' In further contrast, is the room that functions as 'kitchen, parlour, and bed chamber all in one' belonging to Giles Winterborne. The discrepancies between the three homes only serve to embellish the divide between rich and poor.
Issues of class conflict are often concurrent with conflicts between the sexes.
Gaskell originally entitled the novel 'Margaret Hale' but after pressure from her editor Charles Dickens, she was encouraged to change it to North and South, because it was thought to be more 'expressive of the opposite people brought face to face by the story." These events mirror Margaret Hales struggle to maintain autonomy, for just as Charles Dickens realised, so too does Patricia Ingham, that Margaret is 'a middle class woman with the agency and sexuality [to] throw into question the dominant ideologies of gender and therefore class." Indeed, the violent imagery depicted at the riot between Thornton and the mill workers is equally matched by Margaret's brutal decline of Thornton's marriage proposal, with sexual desire figured as physical violence, when she delivers 'a sound blow with her fists." Alternatively, the pathetic fallacy Gaskell employs within the title of chapter thirteen; 'A soft breeze is a sultry place,' is subtly laced with sexual connotations denoting the growing romance between Thornton and Margaret. Interestingly, in Silas Marner it is the lack of a female mother figure, (particularly in the Cass family) which is often equated with nature, that results in selfish behaviour in conflict with community ideals.
In Hardy's Tess of the D'Urbervilles Tess is portrayed as an emblem of nature with 'a flower-like mouth' similar to a 'peony,' she is 'a fresh and virginal daughter of Nature." Alec's rape of her then almost constitutes an assault upon the body of the rural peasant class to which she belongs. However, "Romantic ideologies upholding natures 'holy plan' clash with a Darwinian notion of nature's randomness and cruelty" for during her rape the ' gentle roosting birds' and 'primeval yews an oaks' look on undisturbed. Similarly, during her courtship with Angel at Talbothay's Dairy they walk through an 'uncultivated' garden filled with 'rank' and 'offensive' smells. These 'sticky blights' 'stain' her skin. Although the imagery is symbolic of the biblical Garden of Eden, I also feel that Hardy's descriptions of nature carry sinister undertones that perhaps signal Angel's abandonment of her in the future. Unlike Eliot's preference for Wordsworthian realism, Hardy favours the idea of 'negative capability' as promoted by Keats, who urged readers to stop 'reaching after fact and reason' and be 'content with half knowledge." This explains Hardy's employment of several motifs in Tess of the D'Urbervilles to communicate conflict between the sexes. The colour red can be traced throughout the novel, particularly when the rose Alec has given Tess 'pricked her chin' and draws blood, prophesising Tess' loss of virginity and Alec's mastery over her. Later, a 'scarlet blot' of blood on the ceiling signals Tess' murder of Alec and the final assertion of her will over Alec. Hardy also employs the motif of the sun to mirror Tess' state of mind and the effect of Alec's mastery over her. Before her rape she has 'a private little sun for her soul to bask in,' however after the rape the suns rays are 'ungenial and peering." Throughout her courtship with Angel the 'sun itself was hidden' and sits 'like a great inflamed wound in the sky." Until finally after the murder of Alec, her sense of freedom is accompanied by 'a shaft of dazzling sunlight." In The Woodlanders Hardy employs similar techniques to those he used in Tess of the D'Urbervilles to highlight tension between the sexes. I concur with Enid Duthie , who feels "certain types of landscape tend to become associated with certain patterns of feeling and action." Open commons and fields are often the sphere of action and Fitzpiers affair with Suke Damson occurs because on 'open ground she had placed herself at his mercy." In contrast, Hardy's uses rain with pornographic intent to symbolise Fitzpiers lust for Grace, which increases until 'it is wetting [her] dress.' For Grace, the forest takes on a gothic transformation with the 'half-dead oak, hollow, and disfigured with white tumours' during Fitzpiers' affair with Mrs Charmond and, like Tess, she is left hypnotised by Fitzpiers' mastery over her, as mirrored in the landscape of 'the outbuildings, the garden [all of which] wore that aspect of mesmeric passivity." Mr Melbury's treatment of his daughter can be compared to the wood used to make walking sticks, which has been moulded 'as the Chinese have been said to mould human beings into grotesque toys by continued compression in infancy." During Graces' relationship with Giles, Hardy employs the pathetic fallacy of 'fog' to mirror Grace's mental confusion about her feelings. Indeed, their separation is so unnatural 'that the morning could not penetrate the trees." In, contrast we are reminded of the unnaturalness of her union to Fitzpiers captured in the out-of-season strawberry beds in his garden, that echo those grown by Alec in 'glasshouses' in Tess of the D'Urbervilles. This aberrant union is emphasised again through the ill omen of 'the falling mixture of rain and snow." Finally, during the bark stripping
Marty is 'encaged amid the mass of twigs and buds like a great bird.' She is confined to her artisan class and will never gain the education needed to win Giles Winterborne's heart.
The use of landscape was an ideal vehicle through which to explore the recent implications of Darwinism upon community. Although Gaskell's North and South (1855) was published prior to the publication of Charles Darwin's Origin of the Species (1859) theories of evolution and natural selection had already been hinted at in Lamarck's Philosophie Zooloqiue (1809) and Malthus' Essay on Population (1798.) Accordingly, Gaskell effectively highlights this 'struggle for existence' between Thornton and his mill workers, who 'jostled each other aside in the Mart... as they did in life, in the deep selfishness of competition." Those characters that exist outside the norm of community are ignored, like Thornton's 'weak' sister Fanny, or silenced by nature through death, like John Boucher who drowns 'i' th' brook." Similarly, Margaret discourages Nicholas Higgins from leaving Milton to find work in the South because she knows the change in landscape, away from his community would 'eat [him] away like rust." Even Thornton eventually realises that the survival of his mill rests upon group solidarity, so he builds a 'dining-room' believing there is 'nothing like the act of eating for equalising men." Correspondingly, in Eliot's 'parable' Silas Marner Eppie acts as Silas' salvation by 'link[ing] him once more with the whole world' and the skeleton of Dunstan Cass, who worked against the community and its ideals, is found dead in 'the stone-pit' and thus returned to his native soil. In Hardy's work, Merryn Williams remarks "industrialism can certainly be brutal but so can nature." Tess' discovery of the pheasants that have been shot and whose 'rich plumage [were] dabbled with blood' is a violent re-enactment of Tess' rape. Tess eventually faces death because she exists outside the community and such transgressors will not survive according to Darwinism. With echoes of William Shakespeare's King Lear Hardy sees Tess ' like a fly on a billiard table of indefinite length, and of no more consequence to the surroundings than that fly' and similarly with echoes of Macbeth 'men every one of whom walked in his own individual way the road to dusty death." His final reminder that 'the pale and blasted nettle-stems of the preceding year even now lingered nakedly in the banks, young green nettles of the present spring growing up from their roots,' seems to promote the survival of the species. However, by nominating Angel and Liza Lu as the progenitors of the species Hardy deprives the reader of a cathartic closure. Compared to Milton's epic Paradise Lost whose Adam and Eve depart with 'paradise within,' Angel and Liza Lu leave a lasting image of a shrunken humanity. In The Woodlanders passages highlighting the struggle for survival in the forest, where 'two overcrowded branches in the neighbouring wood... were rubbing each other into wounds' and 'wrestling for existence,' are interwoven throughout the text. By planting trees Giles and Marty are working to preserve 'the soft musical breathing' of the trees that will not be felled until 'long after the two planters had been felled themselves." Such images promote the survival of the species, instead of the individual.
With Darwinian influences on group solidarity assuring survival, Victorian society began to experience feelings of nostalgia for rural communities that were quickly becoming consumed by industrialisation. Margaret herself leaves rural Helstone and even though she once 'took pride in her forest' and 'its people were her people' she becomes 'native' to industrial Milton. Her garden at Helstone, in which 'everything [is] falling and fading, and turning to decay,'  reflects the destiny of this rural community. This destiny is realised upon Margaret's return. She notices that familiar landmarks like, the 'squatters roughly-built and decaying cottage had disappeared' and 'old trees had been felled." The new instated Vicar has already put in 'new grates...and a plate-glass window' into Margaret's old home. Gaskell's novel is a bildungsroman of Margaret's journey from innocence to experience, however, I feel that the fate of the countryside follows the same path, 'a great improvement it was called; but Margaret sighed over the old picturesqueness, the old gloom, and the grassy wayside of former days." This nostalgia becomes particularly poignant when we realise that "Elizabeth Gaskell's own predicament was partly that of Margaret Hale. She was a country lover inescapably committed to making her home in Manchester." Unlike other novelists of the genre Eliot's rural communities, like Raveloe in Silas Marner, exhibit resilience. "She presented an idealised social order and way of life ...in memorial to a unified national past." She relates that 'Raveloe was a village where many of the old echoes lingered, undrowned by new voices." The conversion of the stone pit into a garden is testament to the enduring spirit of this bucolic pastoral world and the marriage of Eppie and Aaron consolidates the community. In contrast, at the end of the novella, Silas discovers that Lantern Yard monastery has 'gone.'
An admirer of J.M.W. Turner's impressionist paintings, Hardy's vast set-piece descriptions of Wessex are breathtaking in their 'painterly' detail and help evoke a sense of nostalgia for the fading rural traditions. Tess' innocence establish her as a totem for the dying rural community experiencing the 'ache of modernism', especially when contrasted with the onset of industrialisation embodied in the steam train, which with its 'gleaming cranks and wheels' looks 'foreign' next to Tess and the 'red tyrant' threshing machine used at Flintcomb - Ash. The engineer who drives the machine is described as 'as creature from Tophet' and although 'he was in the agricultural world [he was] not of it." Yet in Merryn William opinion Hardy "shows no consistent hatred of machinery" instead he exposes the reader to the multitude of conflicting impressions, which he himself felt. Like Tess' family, Giles Winterborne, in The Woodlanders loses his property to Mrs Charmond and her belief that 'it is of rather more importance to know what the man is himself than what his family is' negates the importance of community. Grace is aware of a climate of change, when looking up to the sky she ponders on the 'new worlds being cast' and when out walking with her father she encounters the hunt master, who is a stranger and speaks to her in a gruff manner unlike the familiar tones of the community. In another encounter with a squirrel, father and daughter notice that it ' did not run up its trees, but...cried chut chut chut and stamped with its hind legs on the ground,' behaviour that symbolises that nature is no longer in harmony. Even Sherton Castle, the home of Fitzpiers ancestors, is in 'ruins.' The novel appears to end on a note of defeat. The community seems to passively accept those urban interlopers; Fitzpiers and Mrs Charmond who invade their bucolic pastoral world and nature fails to exert itself.
In conclusion, analysis of Gaskell, Hardy and Eliot's use of symbolic geography and landscape as an analogy to explore the themes of class conflict, Darwinism, loss of community and differences between the sexes, has shown that despite the lapse of time between each of the authors work and the varied social settings, they all adopted the nature and landscape leitmotifs as a vehicle to make a wider social comment, ultimately expressing the often-conflicting demands of the individual and the community at a time of accelerating social change.