In George Byron's Manfred a Dramatic Poem the Abbot remarks:
The notion of 'chaos' influencing the 'mind' and 'passions' is a direct reflection upon issues of the self, the category of the individual, which permeated the literature and philosophy of the nineteenth century, due to the economic, religious and social upheavals caused by advances in science, the debate on slavery and industrialisation, all of which disrupted the class structure. Critic David Punter concurs that " it is conventional, and reasonable, to say that the society which generated and read Gothic fiction was one which was becoming aware of injustice in a variety of different areas ... there was a dawning consciousness of inequality."
These external conflicts were internalised by the writers and poets of the genre and immortalised through literary tropes, symbols and figures in Gothic writing. Therefore, to explore the category of subjectivity, which depends "on an individual's perception for its existence," it is beneficial to analyse descriptions of sensibility, landscape, architecture and liminality within my selected texts. I will examine elements of George Byron's Manfred, Samuel Coleridge's The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, John Keat's The Eve of St Agnes and Ann Radcliffe's The Mysteries of Udolpho.
By entitling the poem  Manfred, Byron immediately establishes Manfred as a liminal, renegade figure. A strong, stark entity unto his own, whose unconventional codes of behaviour separate and define him as an overreacher and a liminal figure. Based strongly upon J.W. Von Goethe's Faust 1540 who was frustrated with 'wretched theology,' and reminiscent of Christopher Marlowe's Dr Faustus,1616 Manfred too is uncontented with 'philosophy and science' so he employs 'written charm(s)' to call up the seven spirits. Whilst Faust desired 'certainty,' Manfred desires 'self oblivion,' to lose his subjectivity, in order to return to a place of innocence and surety. I recall Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, as we learn that Manfred's 'promethean spark' has led him to pass 'the nights of years in science untaught." Only the death of his sister, Astarte, has brought on Manfred's agnorisis, which consequently has caused his sense of self to deteriorate into an extremely negative self-image.
This notion of negativity is adopted and used by Keat's in his idea of 'negative capability,' which he puts to full use in Eve of St Agnes. In a letter to his brothers in 1817, Keats argues that the poets of the day are "incapable of remaining content with half knowledge." He wished to implement "negative capability, that is when man is capable of making all disagreeableness evaporate, without any irritable reaching after fact and reason." He desired the reader to immerse the self in what is perceived, and lose oneself in a dream like reverie, instead of constantly analysing the text. The ambiguity of the passage depicting Madeline's rape by Porphyro highlights the liminality that exists between consummation and purity. The reader is left in doubt as to whether the rape actually takes place because Byron's description is so poetical:
This liminality between the dream world and reality leaves the reader without 'fact and reason' and they are forced to remain 'content with half knowledge.'
Liminality also encompasses notions of religion and sexuality. Like Matthew Lewis' creation, Ambrosio, in The Monk, Manfred is continually within the liminal sphere of redemption and damnation. The Abbot reminds Manfred twice that 'penitence and pardon; with thyself/The choice of such remains." He urges Manfred to 'reconcile thee/With the true Church." However, Manfred's hubris causes him 'not (to) choose a mortal to be [his] mediator." His actions are sacrilegious and transgressive. Neither Orthodox Christianity (represented by the Abbot) nor the spirit world can control Manfred. His agency is overpowering till the last. He is never terrified by the evil spirits he calls up, and proudly declares in his final speech ' I have not been thy dupe nor am thy prey-/But was my own destroyer." On the other hand Coleridge's inclusion of the Latin epigraph 'facile credo, plures esse Naturas invisibiles quam visibiles in rerum universitate - I can easily believe that there are more invisible than visible beings in the universe' suggests an acknowledgment of a higher power in The Rime of the Ancient Mariner. Indeed the Mariner himself and the curse he brings upon the ship, when it is stranded 'as a painted ship/Upon a painted ocean,' is reminiscent of the tale of Jonah from the Bible. Coleridge and Wordsworth were renowned for their pastoral idyllic descriptions; the incongruent killing of the albatross therefore is highly significant, because not only has it often been compared to the crucifixion of Christ, but the bird also appears domesticated and poses no threat when it came 'everyday, for food or play." The murder appears entirely arbitrary, unprovoked and the Mariner displays no signs of repentance. This produces an ambiguous moment of transgression, which is complicated further by the arbitrary judgement of the other sailors. Similarly, when the Mariner encounters the 'water-snakes' he twice remarks 'I blessed them unaware.' These actions suggest the Mariner is not in control of either virtuous or immoral events, this problematises the Mariner's agency and subjectivity. All these factors conspire to confuse the reader's moral compass.
In her Mysteries of Udolpho, Radcliffe appears to be writing a bildungsroman, depicting Emily's process of maturation from childhood and innocence, through to adulthood and experience. However, Emily eventually returns home to 'La Vallee' creating a circular structure in the novel. This is an uncharacteristic ending for a bildungsroman and therefore compromises the novel's status as a bildungsroman and places it in a liminal sphere. When faced with Valanacourt's sexual advances Emily is in continual conflict with her natural reactions and having to display the desired qualities of sensibility, typical in a Rousseauian female figure:
She is forced into a liminal state by the constraints of society.
Manfred's purpose for calling the seven spirits is in request that they 'wake [from the] dead' his sister Astarte, whom he 'loved and 'destroyed.' His confession that 'I have shed/Blood, but not hers, and yet her blood was shed' is deliberately obtuse and carries sexual undertones, which might assign the 'blood' as hymnal blood. I am persuaded to think Byron's own incestuous relationship with his sister, and the guilt associated, influenced this pivotal moment of the prose. Manfred never reveals the implications of his confession. The bathetic ending does not provide any conclusive certainty for the reader, so ironically it is them who are left stranded in a liminal sphere instead.
Sexuality is introduced in The Rime of the Ancient Mariner through the bride, who is 'red as a rose' who may be compared with Madeline, who is also portrayed as a 'rose' in Keat's Eve of St Agnes. Madeline is denied agency through her unconscious state, as she lies 'trembling in her soft and chilly nest,' we recall Tess in Tess of the D'Urbervilles prior to her rape, by Alex, in the forest. A carnality and sensuousness pervades the entire poem. The 'sculptured dead' that adorn the cold castle filled with 'shadows haunting' contrasts sharply with Madeline's sensuous dreams of 'fairy fancy." The 'amorous cavalier' Porphyro and his chivalric romantic status is soon replaced by sinister scopophilia. He skulks in a 'closet' and provides temptations of ' candied apple...and dates, in argosy transferred/ From Fez' to trick Madeline into believing reality to be a dream. By seeming to enter into Madeline's dream world, Porphyro is essentially invading her sacred sphere of chastity and propriety, 'free from mortal taint." His actions transgress the liminality between dream and reality, whilst also carrying threatening sexual undertones.
I propose that the boundary between reality and perception of reality is problematised for the reader, by its existence depending entirely on a character's level of subjectivity. Radcliffe highlights from the beginning that her heroine, Emily in The Mysteries of Udolpho, is possessed of ' a degree of susceptibility too exquisite to admit lasting peace." Despite her father's instructions to not gratify her sensibilities and to learn 'the duty of self-command,' 
Udolpho is loaded with scenes of Emily succumbing to her emotions. She often 'sunk...under the pressure of her sorrow,' she 'could only listen and weep' to her father's dying words and after his death 'she [freely] indulged her tears." According to David Punter "it is this quivering sensitivity which continually prostrates her before spectres of her own imagining." Effectually Emily manifests her own terror. This is evident on her meeting with Count Morano, whom 'she looked upon...with horror, but apart from him, a conviction, if such that may be called, which arises from no proof, and which she knew not how to account for, seized her mind.' Punter suggests "it is never clear to what extent those circumstances are genuinely imposed on the characters by outside forces and to what extent they are projections of paranoia and vulnerability."
In the Eve of St Agnes Madeline does demonstrate some of the sensibilities attributed to a Romantic heroine. On being awakened by Porphyro she regrets the 'painful change, that nigh expelled/ The blisses of her dream so pure and deep/At which fair Madeline began to weep." However, she often lacks agency and is given no chance to make her own decision about the elopement, she only 'hurried at his [Porphyro's] words.'
Analysis of sensibility inevitably leads to an awareness of landscape and its potential for describing the external world, whilst also evoking sublime emotions that reflect interiority. As Kilgour highlights "nature is never fully detached form the human mind, which is itself a veil covering it." Landscape carries huge potential for highlighting the essence of subjectivity in Gothic literature, whilst also providing access for exploration of liminality. Manfred employs pathetic fallacy as a means to describe his lonely nature:
Fred Botting suggests "wild, natural images, internalised as a sign of tormented consciousness, give force to the sense of individual dislocation." Manfred, however, does find comfort and 'sweet solitude' in nature and is able to access the sublime and 'spirit of [a] place." On the other hand, nature assumes it own agency and is personified when Manfred appeals to the 'grey haired ... blasted pines' and 'avalanches' to come and crush him. The hostile 'land of ice' depicted in The Rime of the Ancient Mariner lacks identity unlike the classic Gothic castle. However, it is the classic setting for Gothic horror, 'storms' and 'water snakes' and 'slimy things' infest the sea. The ship's journey south leads to foreign lands, ungoverned by moral rules and allowing existing ones to be easily transgressed. This perhaps explains why the murder of the albatross is a bathetic moment, instead of a terrifying or shocking one. However, the revelations of the Mariner may just be dreams, subconscious acts of rebellion against convention, as David Punter recalls:
Alternatively, landscape carries positive connotations for Emily in The Mysteries of Udolpho. Radcliffe fills the pages with lucid, poetical depictions of sublime landscape:
I believe Radcliffe's numerous descriptions of nature are stimulated by a nostalgia that was being threatened by the onset of industrialisation, suggested by St Auberts fondness for the 'oak' that resides on their property at La Vallee.
Architecture carries "talismanic importance" in Gothic writing and holds huge potential for highlighting subjectivity. The sensuous descriptions of the landscape painted by Radcliffe in Udolpho contrast sharply with the architecture she designs and describes. Emily views castle Udolpho as 'silent, lonely, and sublime, it seemed to stand the sovereign of the scene, and to frown defiance on all, who dared to invade its solitary reign." Here Radcliffe uses the castle of Udolpho as a metaphor of the mind, particularly Montoni's.
Ironically, the castle adorned with 'the sculptured dead' and the 'scutcheon [that] blushed with blood of queens and kings' in Eve of St Agnes is according to Mark Sandy:
Allowing them to escape to an ideal existence. However, this is undercut by the deaths related at the end of the poem, suggesting they have only eloped into a troubled 'storm' of tragic reality.
In conclusion, analysis of these categories; liminality, sensibility, landscape and architecture have revealed that a sense of agency or subjectivity depends upon reflection within the character. This belief blurs the boundaries between subject and object, so that all these tropes act as distorted mirrors onto which a character can impress their perceptions of reality. There is a continual dialectic relationship between self and object, in an attempt to confirm their own identity or sense of self.
#