In this opening quotation George Eliot highlights a crucial theme that pervaded not only her novels but also her private life; the role of the outsider. Eliot's refusal to attend church with her father between the January and May of 1842, the translation of prominent anti-Christian texts; namely Strauss's Life of Jesus (1844-46) and Feuerbach's Essence of Christianity (1854), and her relationship with the married George Lewes secured her own status as a religious and social transgressor. These histories strongly suggest that the characters of her first novel, Adam Bede (1859), would experience similar rejections. Indeed, the quotation cited demonstrates the perennial ethics of a traditional, provincial community like Hayslope which will not tolerate those characters who do not conform to the tenets and codes of behaviour established in this bucolic pastoral world. A character's social and moral integrity is established by their adherence to these implicit codes. Dorothy Van Ghent concurs that there is a "mute recognition by which the community lives...it is a recognition that personal good has communal determinations." Therefore, to explore the category of the outsider it is beneficial to analyse Eliot's literary methods, the treatment of her characters and the intellectual tropes concerning realism, Darwinism and the religion of humanity.
David Carroll has identified two anomalies that the inhabitants of Hayslope seek to exclude; they are "the reality of sin, suffering and death" and " erotic desire." Therefore, those characters that introduce these anomalies are considered outsiders. Accordingly, the reader must also keep in mind that without the existence of typically good characters like; Adam, Seth, Lisbeth and Mr Poyser, their antithesis's, the outsiders; Hetty, Dinah and Arthur would not exist, as Eliot highlights all 'men's lives are as thoroughly blended with each other as the air they breathe.'
First then, I will discuss briefly those characters considered insiders.
Eliot portrays her protagonist, Adam Bede, as a 'Saxon'  who embodies the traditional values and beliefs of bucolic Hayslope. His defining characteristics of strength and intellect establish him as no 'ordinary character among workmen' and the moral yardstick by which all other characters are measured by the reader. Indeed, the religious significance of his name can easily be assimilated to Adam in the Garden of Eden. Accordingly, his employment as a carpenter is reminiscent of Jesus' vocation. Similarly, his brother Seth is an insider due to his obliging ' benignant' behaviour, but Eliot is keen to highlight his inferiority in comparison to the muscular Adam by denoting the prominent 'coronal arch', which according to the science of phrenology that was introduced to Eliot by George Combes, is a sign of weakness in a man. Their mother, Lisbeth, at times alienates the readers through her constant fretting but this is overwhelmed by her enduring 'mother's voice,' which links her to nature and therefore the community. Accordingly, her constant residence inside the family home consolidates her status as an insider, as she never strays outside to compromise or transgress her allotted social role.
Eliot juxtaposes Adam's moral integrity with Arthur's fickle nature to establish his liminal status. Indeed, the religious connotations implicit in Adam's name suggest that Arthur's betrayal of Adam is equivalent to Judas' betrayal of Jesus. This suggestion is supported by Arthur's 'absence' at Thias Bede's funeral. In his affair with Hetty, Arthur is forced to meet her, neither on a farm nor on an estate, but on 'the Chase,' a liminal place where they are free to explore their erotic desires without the condemnation of the community. Indeed, Arthur must undergo a symbolic death during his fight with Adam in the grove, to emerge understood but not forgiven by the community, for Eliot makes it clear to the reader that 'our deeds determine us as much as we determine our deeds,' suggesting that Arthur is responsible for his actions and no malign fate is at work. Valentine Cunningham agrees that 'Eliot was doubtful that destiny was determined entirely by character." Here Eliot is seen to be exploring contemporary thoughts on Determinism within her text. Indeed, Adam Bede was published the same year as Charles Darwin's influential bestseller The Origin of the Species.
In contrast to the young Arthur, Mr Irwine is constructed as an essentially good clergyman with a moral character. However, not only does his prosperity separate him from the rest of the farming community but also his devotion to his bigoted mother, Mrs Irwine. On surveying Hetty at the spring games, she declares 'what a pity such a beauty as that should be thrown away among the farmers." She physically detaches herself from the community by refusing to join the festivities. Mr Irwine's sisters, Miss Kate and Miss Anne, remain at the epistemological petticoats of the novel as 'superfluous existences; inartistic figures crowding the canvas of life." The community ignores them because their sickliness is incongruent with the healthy pastoral idyll Eliot has created. They merely serve as a reminder that the aristocracy are dying out.
In contrast to the dismal Lisbeth Bede and the gentry' women who contribute nothing to the community, is the lively Mrs Poyser. She is an integral part of the community, however, it is her outspoken nature, similar to Chaucer's Wife of Bath that classifies Mrs Poyser as an outsider. Eliot makes it clear that 'she would have her word about everything' and always 'keeps at the top o' the talk." Indeed, Eliot devotes an entire chapter to Mrs Poyser having 'her say out,' the strength of her voice and opinion emphasised by Eliot's use of quotation marks in the chapter title. Interestingly, Mrs Poyser is never punished for her strident remarks to the Old Squire Donnithorne. I feel this is because her strong dialect and comical idioms undermine the strength of her arguments. Raymond Williams agrees that these dialects evoke " a ballad element which denies (her) the possibility of articulating ideas and developing a higher consciousness." This suggests that Mrs Poyser would not flourish outside Hayslope, yet Eliot creates the impression of Mrs Poyser's larger than life character being constrained by her social role within the community. Her strength and intelligence are perhaps signals of a paradigm shift.
Continuing the comical motif is Bartle Massey, whose role as teacher within Hayslope also establishes an anticipation of change. However, the strong female characters, like Mrs Poyser, with whom he has several comical disagreements, will not tolerate his misogynistic attitudes that paint women as 'adders' and 'wasps', which place him into the outsider category.
Similarly, Thias Bede is a drunk who neglects his duties to his family and thus lives in conflict with traditional religious beliefs and is silenced, through death, for these transgressions. Likewise, Eliot uses Colonel Townley's status as an outsider, as a vehicle to introduce the reader to the novel.
However, it is Hetty and Dinah Morris who greatly transgress their social roles. Hetty pursues her sexual desires, whilst Dinah becomes absorbed in religious fervour.
Both women are 'orphan'(s) and Hayslope is not their natural home. Dinah especially is continually urging to return to Snowfield. Ironically, Hetty seems to fulfil her Rousseauian female role, she is the quintessential rural beauty who is subservient to males. However, she wants to deny her family in pursuit of elevating her status;
It is this denial of her family links that condemn her as an outsider. The image of the courtroom at Hetty's trial ' haunted with the shadowy memories of old kings and queens' reinforces her betrayal of family loyalty. She can only enter the path to redemption once she has acknowledged the importance of family, captured in the moment she longs for ' the bright hearth and the warmth and the voices of home." Eliot 'others' Hetty by portraying her as never fully human; she is consistently referred to as a 'cat' or 'kitten ' and throughout the novel Hetty sees herself via reflections in mirrors. The 'murder of her child' simultaneously contradicts religious beliefs and indicates her denial of the natural role of motherhood, both actions heavily transgressing the traditional ethics of Hayslope. Like Thomas Hardy's Tess in Tess of the D'Urbervilles (1891), Hetty's disruptive character is 'transported' from Hayslope, her identity removed as she becomes the nameless 'wanderer' and she is finally silenced through death. However, many critics have criticised Eliot because "the final treatment of Hetty is unsatisfying," arguing that Hetty is not equipped to develop a sense of moral responsibility. Ian Gregor argues that she "lives simply by the coercive morality of the community and, when this is broken, she is destroyed, she has no life apart from this."
Juxtaposed with Hetty is Dinah Morris. Eliot immediately establishes her as an agent for change, her sermon upsets the social hierarchies of Hayslope life and Colonel Townley observes the 'total absence of self- consciousness in her demeanour." She establishes a strong, radical feminine force in the novel that gives expression to the artisan classes. However, Dinah's asceticism not only invites comparison between her the "Madonna" and Hetty the "Magdalene" but it also separates her from suffering and the community. In chapter fifteen enititles ' the Two Bed Chambers,' Eliot is keen to stress that whilst Hetty views herself via reflections in the mirror, Dinah looks out of a window onto the world. However, her gaze is detached and Eliot's reason perhaps for muting her radical voice. when the female preachers are banned from preaching, is a method to teach Dinah the religion of humanity. Indeed, critic David Carroll states that Hetty's "moral life can only arise from [her] reciprocal interaction with others." Indeed, the reader becomes aware that the community only accepts Dinah after her marriage to Adam and she has assumed the role of wife and mother.
In many respects, Eliot's use of literary methods establishes the reader as an outsider. The use of dialect creates a barrier between the reader and the characters. Her complex construction of time, which is double removed, creates a sense of distance between reader and community. Similarly, events within the novel are already in motion when the reader enters the story. Arthur and Hetty already know each other, Dinah has not just arrived in Hayslope, and in fact she is about to return to Snowfield and Adam's relationship with his father has already deteriorated. Despite her extensive intellectual knowledge, Eliot wrote Adam Bede "from a memory of a memory" of her childhood spent at Griff House in Warwickshire. It seems she must return to her childooh to regain those feelings of love and sympathy integral to the religio of humanity that Feuerbach promoted. Indeed throughout Adam Bede George Eliot carefully maps out the trajectory for the advanced intellectuals transition from God to good. Eliot uses Adam and Alick the Shepard as vehicles to promote this religion of humanity, which believes 'there's the spirit o' God in all things and at all times - weekdays as well as Sunday." It is love and sympathy for your fellow human beings, not faith in some obscure physical manifestation of God.
However, it is interesting to note that religion alienates certain characters within the novel. Much like Hardy's Tess it offers Hetty no comfort in her time of need. She views the parish as 'a prison' instead of a place of sanctuary. It seems that a characters status as an outsider pivots on their adherence to this religion of humanity. Those who are not selfless are either integrated or silenced.
Linked to these religious ideals were Eliot's ambitions for realism, which were inspired by the ' rare, precious quality of truthfulness...in many Dutch paintings...the delicious sympathy in these faithful pictures of a monotonous homely existence,' she feels it is 'needful we should remember their existence,' lest they become outsiders of English fiction. Her ambition then is to create the literary equivalent of these paintings, as her manifesto stated in the Riehl essay shows her desire for English fiction to reveal the 'commonplace:'
In conclusion, a sense of irony pervades the final stages of the novel, as it becomes apparent that a dialectic relationship exists between insiders and outsiders and old versus new. The reader witnesses old beliefs being forced to the outside to make way for a new code of ethics, that invites change. The old Squire has died; Arthur has 'plans of drainage and enclosure' of 'new ploughs and drills' to improve his grandfathers estate before he is informed of Hetty's conviction; Mr Irwine and his dated views are challenged by the Quixotic figures of Arthur and Dinah. Arnold Kettle has remarked that Eliot viewed her novels as " a vehicle for instruction or edification, " therefore one expects Eliot's outsiders to experience the same heavy rejection she experienced as a result of her actions, but unlike Thomas Hardy, Eliot refrains from placing her outsiders in purgatory. Their suffering is never acute. As omniscient narrator she protects these carefully constructed characters from being rejected by the reader. She opted for an eloquent Realistic conclusion to protect her fragile Victorian readers because she was a woman whose own role within community remained undefined and unaccepted until her death in 1880.