In this opening quotation Edward Said highlights a sensitive and intimate topic of Romantic Literature. British writers and poets of the genre faced personal, political and social moral dilemma on how best to portray the intensely personal yet estranged issue of slavery in the colonies. Said, in his book Culture and Imperialism, highlights the implications of such an impasse. Many writers, including Austen, used "striking but careful strategies...positive ideas of home, of a nation and its language, of proper order, good behaviour and moral values. But positive ideas of this sort do more than validate 'our' world; they also tend to devalue other worlds." Similarly, texts written by ex slaves also encountered difficulties on how to portray their experiences of slavery. Whether the purpose of a text was abolitionist propaganda or personal catharsis, an ex slave had to safeguard against offending a reader's sensibilities, whilst also pushing the boundaries on descriptions of slavery, so readers did not become complacent and continued to argue in favour of abolition. These tensions established a fine balance between the sublimation and disruption of slavery in Romantic texts. This resulted in slavery finding expression either in abstract images or being banished to the epistemological petticoats of an authors work. I will examine the works of Jane Austen and Olaudah Equiano for evidence of the sublimation of slavery and I will also explore slavery's ability to disrupt, within the texts.
The introductory quotation taken from Edward Said's book Culture and Imperialism, in which he dedicates a whole chapter to the discussion of Austen's Mansfield Park, targets an intriguing trope of the novel. Indeed, although Austen only refers to Antigua six times it creates an undercurrent of emotion that pervades the rest of the novel. The British were extremely active in the Caribbean in Austen's time, yet she seems only vaguely aware of the details of these activities. Many British writers, including their readers, were probably familiar and therefore comfortable with class distinctions within a domestic sphere. However, the class distinctions within slavery were international, dislocated and as a result alien and unintelligible to the British public. Therefore, Sir Thomas's trip to Antigua has a definite function in Mansfield Park because although it is only "referred to in passing, is absolutely crucial to the action- what are we to make of the interpretation...for she might have done something different to establish Sir Thomas's wealth."(E. Said)These exerts are vital according to Said, who feels it is "precisely because Austen is so summary in one context, so provocatively rich in the other, precisely because of that imbalance we are able to move in on the novel, reveal and accentuate the interdependence scarcely mentioned on its brilliant pages." (E. Said) Director Patricia Rozema's 1999 production of Mansfield Park highlights this interdependence by foregrounding the issue of slavery in comparison with the novel. In contrast with Austen's decision to sublimate slavery, Rozema chooses to portray slavery as a silent yet disruptive force. On her journey to Mansfield Park Fanny Price looks out onto sheltered cove on the coast to see a slave ship arriving, it is still present when Sir Thomas sends Fanny home to Portsmouth after refusing Henry Crawford's proposal. This imposing image is an ever-present symbol of slavery threatening to invade and disrupt British values and order. Rozema also creates an extra scene, involving Fanny's discovery of a book, belonging to the feverish Tom, which contains charcoal sketches depicting scenes of torture, rape and murder in Sir Thomas's plantations in Antigua. Sir Thomas walks in minutes after her discovery and is forced to confront the collision of these two worlds. The book disrupts the social and moral barrier Sir Thomas has erected to protect both himself and Mansfield Park. Indeed this incompatibility is emphasised briefly in the novel when Fanny Price relates to Edmund that after enquiring about the slave trade to Sir Thomas 'there was such a dead silence,' that, in Said's opinion, this suggests "that one world could not be connected with the other since there is simply no common language for both."(E. Said)
Returning to the novel it is clear that whilst slavery in the West Indies is sublimated, Fanny Price's status as an enslaved figure at Mansfield Park acts as a disruptive influence. Sir Thomas immediately establishes Fanny's lowly status by making it clear among his daughters that 'they cannot be equals.' He urges the family to prepare themselves 'for gross ignorance, some meanness of opinions and very distressing vulgarity of manner,' attributes which have been commonly associated with savages in the past. Her elder cousin Tom often requests her 'services.' However, Sir Thomas's opinions of Fanny change dramatically after his return from Antigua. His appreciation of her 'improved complexion' and 'figure' are reminiscent of an appraisal of a slave being bought at market. Indeed, in the film, Fanny views her coming out ball as the equivalent to a slave market, attesting she does not 'want to be sold off as one of my uncles slaves.' It seems Fanny is acutely aware of her uncle's mastery over her, depicted when her brother William leaves Mansfield Park and Sir Thomas advises Fanny to go to bed, Austen writes " advise" was his word, but it was the advice of absolute power.' Sir Thomas is often portrayed as a stern master when at home. Austen clearly states " he was master at Mansfield Park' obtaining compliance 'from submission.' He is opposed to the feminist liberal opinions, reminiscent of Mary Wollstonecraft, which Austen promotes. Instead believing a woman should 'adopt the opinions of the man she loved and respected.'
Maria and Julia are perhaps more enslaved that Fanny. They are bound by tradition to marry. Mary Crawford teases that these marriages resemble 'sacrifices to the gods.' Such imagery is reminiscent of fabled savage rituals. Austen highlights that for Maria, at the age of twenty-two, marriage becomes a 'rule of moral obligation, her evident duty to marry.' To emphasise this impasse, Austen includes an exert from Laurence Sterne's A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy1768. Sterne was renowned for his support of the abolitionist movement. Left alone together in 'the wilderness' of the park at Sotherton, Maria employs an abstract image from Sterne using the cries of a caged starling,' I cannot get out'* in appeal to Henry Crawford of her entrapment to Mr Rushworth and imprisonment at Sotherton. Kathryn Sutherland concurs that the image is "emblematic" of Maria's own situation. Austen embellishes a sense of pathos in the reader with Rushworth's comment 'I declare when I got back to Sotherton yesterday, it look like a prison - quite a dismal old prison.'
Edmund too is portrayed as a slave to religion through his father's wishes for him to become a clergyman. He must deny his feelings for Fanny. His position is reminiscent of the amanuensis of Gronniosaw who, it seems, is forced to deny his blackness in favour of religion, when he is delivered from 'regions of the grossest Darkness and Ignorance' into 'the Light of his Truth." In both texts religion is portrayed as enslaving. Gronniosaw is told off by an old black man for swearing in case 'a wicked man call'd the Devil' would 'put them in the fire, and burn them.' (Gronniosaw)
The novel also demonstrates why slavery was so disruptive among the families whose existence depended on the income from their plantations. The Bertram's own new money and therefore the tensions of balancing domestic affairs and the international slave colonies were recent encounters and perhaps more fragile to the potential disruptiveness of slavery in the West Indies. Indeed the colonies depended on the procreation of slave masters with slave women to create a new workforce. Back in England blood relations no longer "assure(d) continuity, hierarchy, authority." Indeed Said feels "Sir Thomas's infrequent trips to Antigua as an absentee plantation owner reflect the diminishment of his class's power." (E. Said) Similarly, the West Indies is sublimated as Sir Thomas is portrayed only as absent from Mansfield Park, but never seen as present in Antigua, suggesting in Said's opinion "the complete subordination of colony to metropolis." (E. Said) The hypocrisy is inescapable; the wealth of Sir Thomas's estate, which is built on the labours of a slave workforce, is entirely hidden from view and denied existence.
Just as the West Indies in Mansfield Park is denied existence, so too does Olaudah Equiano, in The Interesting Narrative and Other Writings, often try to sublimate his blackness. Mutiple tropes and genres are layered on top of each other to create an impenetrable mesh of truth and fiction. " Spiritual autobiography, captivity narrative, travel book, adventure tale, narrative of slavery, economic treatise, apologia and perhaps historical fiction" Equiano's Narrative combines multiple genres, which compliment the double consciousness and dual identity he establishes from the beginning. Hairdresser, slave, Anglican, briefly a captain and propagandist, Equiano has many identities, perhaps due to a lack of his own identity as a slave. He never presents a united identity in the text and it is this radical value of indeterminacy that adds value to the question of Equiano's sublimation or acceptance of his black self. The ease with which Equiano creates these multiple personas, in a "carnivalesque" (Baktin) display of self-fashioning, demonstrates how easy it is to write and assume identities, showing that culture is only a veneer. There are particular periods throughout the bildungsroman, which highlight his struggle between sublimation or acceptance of his black persona. The portrait used as the front piece to the novel establishes this ambiguity between Equiano's black self, Olaudah Equiano and his assumed white identity, Gustava Vassa. He employs both names on the title page, creating immediate confusion as to his true identify. Equiano appears dressed in gentleman's attire and reading Acts from the bible to highlight his literacy and Christianity. However, this serves to embellish his blackness, which is striking and undeniable. Vincent Carretta states, "calling attention to one's loyalty to Britain was conventional in the works by almost all afro-British writers" (V.Carretta) evident in Sancho's Letters of the Late Ignatius Sancho, an African when he claims 'your country, which as a resident I love." However, "none of his predecessors asserts his identity as a Briton more fully that the way Equiano represents himself in his Narrative. "(V.Carretta) In Chapter four Equiano relates that 'I soon grew a stranger to terror of every kind, and was in that respect, at least, almost an Englishman' and later adds ' I now not only felt myself quite easy with these new countrymen, but relished their society and manners...and therefore I had the stronger desire to resemble them, to imbibe their spirit, and imitate their manners; I therefore embraced every occasion of improvement.' Although African by birth, he chooses to be British by acculturation. The incident where Equiano encounters a black boy indicates "that Equiano is not fully comfortable in his position on the border between African and European identities."(V.Carretta) Many critics, especially Carretta, feel the black boy his 'own size' is in effect his own mirror image, which he first denies but later embraces as his African persona. A similar period of tension occurs on his meeting with the Prince of the Musquito Indians. The Prince asks ' how comes it that all the white men on board, who can read and write...and know all things, yet swear, lie and get drunk, only excepting yourself?' The prince's observations place Equiano as morally superior to the whites, dislocating him from his assumed white identity. In comparison, Matthew Lewis in his Journal of a West India Proprietor is dislocated from British values and relocated within the West Indies. By situating himself as an outsider he can perhaps relate to being 'othered' as the blacks were in Britain.
On the other hand, there are also a few passages in the Narrative where Equiano is not reluctant to affront his white audience. He must have been aware that his inclusion of his marriage to a white woman, Susanna Cullen, would appal racist readers. Equiano also employs Shakespeare when using Othello's soliloquy;' Speak of me as I am, nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice." By using Othello's words, Equiano assumes Othello's Moorish black identity. Vincent Carretta recently suggested, "that the author of The Interesting Narrative invented an African identity rather than reclaimed one." His arguments contest the authenticity of Equiano's narrative. The suggestion that the text cannot be read as historical fact, disrupts the influential validity of an ex slave experiences, especially a description of the middle passage. James Olney writes that autobiography has " a special nature as a memorial, creative act" in fact it is " a performance" through which "stories are related not in chronological order but in patterned significance." Equiano was in truth a writer, who perhaps invented certain aspects of his narrative to create a complete, well rounded novel. Through this literary tactic Equiano is able to portray slavery as a disruptive force, rather than a subliminal one, had certain evocative images of his African childhood and the middle passage been omitted. In conclusion, I feel the West Indies subliminal and disruptive capabilities within a Romantic text are still complexly interwoven. As James Olney highlights "the lives of ex slaves were as much possessed and used by the abolitionists as their actual lives had been by slave holders." Just as Equiano's, Lewis's, Gronniosaw's and Sancho's lives had been disrupted by slavery in the West Indies, so too were the texts they produced, either themselves through subscription or via amanuenses. For the authors who were removed from the realities of slavery in the colonies, like Austen, the only option was sublimation. Her text serves to relate the underlying current of emotions, fear and estrangement, experienced by her society in regard to international affairs.