This introductory quote is taken from James' book 'Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution.' For James, Francois Dominique Toussaint L'Ouverture is the figure of freedom and liberty for the eighteenth century genre of slave narratives. He led the only successful slave rebellion in the colonies, against the French in Haiti in 1791. During the Romantic era, common opinions of slavery were based upon Aristotle's philosophies that "from the hour of their birth, some men are marked out for subjection, others for rule." It was these prejudices and overwhelming oppressions that black writers and poets had to overcome. As Davis comments "the purported connection between the act of writing and the 'rights of man' did not escape the notice of the slave." Through the mastery of language, slave writers were able to use poetry and prose as a powerful tool to "write themselves into being." (Davis, C.T) I will examine such issues in the core of my essay, concentrating on the works of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Southey and Cowper.
In 1802, the year of Toussaint's capture and imprisonment in France, Wordsworth composed a sonnet dedicated 'To Toussaint L'Ouverture.' It portrays Toussaint in the dungeons of the Castle of Joux. Following, the popular trope of the noble savage Wordsworth portrays Toussaint as a "man of men," a proud exoticised "chieftain," who nobly wears " a cheerful brow" throughout his torture. These notions portray Toussaint as a feeling human being,, which contests popular opinions of blacks as unfeeling creatures. Wordsworth tactfully employs Nature, an acceptable, comfortable medium by which to discuss the inflammatory subject of slavery. Pastoral images of the 'rural milkmaid' tending her 'cow' equate Toussaint nature. This tactic is employed further when 'air, earth and skies' are employed as his 'allies.' Similarly, Wordsworth incorporates the trope of the 'noble savage' into the trope of sensibility to remove the threat and reality of the slave rebellions in the colonies. The hyperbole showing Toussaint as the 'most unhappy' of men, evokes the reader's empathy for Toussaint. Unlike other poets, Robert Southey for example, who focus heavily on images of torture, or writers like Mary Prince who displace accounts of torture onto other characters, Wordsworth chooses to delete descriptions of torture, and only mentions the 'deep dungeon' Toussaint is kept in, again to protect the sensibilities of his readers.
However, whilst certain features mentioned above suggest Wordsworth's support of slave revolutions, other elements of the sonnet are oppressive. Other poets, like Cowper, attempted to imitate a creolised slave voice; therefore, the lack of voice in Wordsworth's sonnet is fore grounded resoundingly by its absence. Toussaint is imprisoned in an 'earless den,' deaf to his complaints. 'Den' is also reminiscent of a foxes 'den' again including Toussaint as part of nature, like an animal incapable of speech. By denying him a voice Wordsworth others Toussaint. Indeed, it is Wordsworth's voice that is most prominent with a paternalistic tone. The break between the sestet and octave construction of the sonnet, places emphasis on Wordsworth's advice to "live and take comfort." Perhaps, then Wordsworth is ironically addressing not just Toussaint but the entire Haiti nation to wear a 'cheerful brow' in the midst of their enslaving 'bonds.' It seems the poem is more significant when we analyse issues that are omitted, not included in the sonnet. There is no mention of religion, blackness and specifically no reference to Toussaint's military success. Wordsworth kept returning to his sonnet, to alter and adjust. An edition composed in 1807 exists, in which the original version started line 4 with 'Alone in some deep dungeon' but in the later edition Wordsworth changed it to 'Pillowed in some deep dungeon.' These stylistic indecisions and hidden tensions mirror the era's undecided opinions concerning the oppression of slaves and the rebellions occurring in the colonies.
In contrast to Wordsworth, Poet Laureate Robert Southey focuses mainly on oppression instead of revolution. 'Poems on the Slave Trade' depicts a slave being tortured, 'exposed' to the 'gorging vulture' as 'living food.' Southey too employs the trope of the noble savage, repetitively stating that the slave 'groans not' although 'awakened by that fierce sun' which is reminiscent of Phyllis Wheatley's 'A Hymn to Morning' where it is symbolic of white oppression.
Unlike Wordsworth, Southey does discuss notions of religion. The image of the slave 'hung' on 'high' resembles descriptions of Jesus being crucified on the cross. Southey quotes the bible, suggesting a day of reckoning will arrive for those who implement such cruel methods of oppression, 'before the Eternal, 'thunder - tongued shall plead against the deep damnation of your deed!'' This teleological approach suggests retribution will finally occur through revolution.
William Cowper's poem 'The Negroes Complaint' featured in his revolutionary work 'The Task' which discussed notions of what it was to be a man. Edward Said quite rightly states "we must not minimise the shattering importance of that initial insight - peoples being conscious of themselves as prisoners in their own land." As Toussaint relates in a poem written in captivity, " ce qui est a moi?" (Who is it to be me?) Cowper captures such tensions effectively in his poem. He questions 'England's rights' to oppress the slave colonies, and repetitively urges them to 'think' and question the reasons for their oppression. Employing sensibility, he argues 'skins may differ, but affection/Dwells in white and black the same.' By using nouns of torture, 'sighs,' 'sweat' and 'tears' Cowper appeals further to his reader's sensibilities. He too employs the tropes of nature and religion to highlight the unnaturalness of a slave trade's actions. Under the command of the 'one who reigns on high,' 'wild tornadoes' and 'whirlwinds' contest the oppression of the slaves.
Cowper's confessional tone and fluid stylistics inspired Coleridge considerably. Therefore, it is not surprising that Coleridge's 'Fears in Solitude' is similar in style and content to Cowper's 'A Negroes Complaint.' Coleridge, like Cowper questions the slave trader's rights to 'fratricide.' By addressing his readers as 'my brethren' he involves and questions us why we 'poison life's amities' and are able to forget such 'deeds of murder' so easily. I also believe Coleridge refers to the discrepancies between blacks and whites, through his use of pastoral imagery. The hills that are 'gay' and 'gorgeous' refer to white societies pride in their control of the colonies, whilst the 'dell/Bathed by mist' symbolises black oppression.
James mentions the notion of 'Negritude' that blacks embraced. It was a description that encompassed their social and political ideologies, as captured by poet Aime Cesaire in 'cahier d'un retour au pays natal,' "my Negritude is not tower, no cathedral/ it cleaves into the red flesh of the /teeming earth." (James, C.L.R.) Such strong images of independence remove blacks from "being the object of other people's exploitation and ferocity" into " taking action on a grand scale and shaping other people to their own needs." (James, C.L.R.) Perhaps then, Toussaint was embracing and harnessing his Negritude, for an article published in the London Gazette on 12 December 1798 that calls him " a Negro born to vindicate the claims of this species and to show the character of men is independent of exterior colour." (James, C.L.R.) Similarly, a portrait of Toussaint depicts him attired in formal military dress, astride a white horse, pointing towards the future. This stance is reminiscent of his leadership in the revolutions in Haiti. However, the image still appears paradoxical, this tension highlights the oppression still in action today, one can only imagine the strength of character needed to challenge such oppression in its original context.
In conclusion, I feel Hegel's master and slave dialectic is crucial when considering the negotiations between oppression and revolution. As Hegel elaborates "the more perfect the slave...the more enslaved the master becomes. For the master's identity depends on having a slave who recognises him as master." (Davis, D.B.) Ironically, the master is caught in an "existential impasse" (Alexander Kojeve) because the master's identity depends on being recognised by a slavish, unessential consciousness". "Omnipotent lordship, then, becomes...dependent, static and unessential." Whereas, "through coerced labour the slave alone...has an interest in changing his condition...only the slave, therefore, has the potentiality for escaping an imbalanced reciprocity and for becoming truly free."(Davis, D.B.) This dialectic relationship of dependence and independence can be applied to Toussaint. Although imprisoned, he still believed that he had won his cause and that he was a free man, demonstrated when he reminds Napoleon he had been "the first servant of the republic of San Domingo." Just as the master's position is dependent on the slave's status, so too therefore are the steps towards revolution dependent on methods of oppression.