In his book Natural Enemies People-Wildlife Conflicts in an Anthropological Perspective John Knight defines the phenomenon of human - wildlife conflict as:
Whilst, this quotation concisely highlights the elemental features of human - wildlife conflicts, it fails to incorporate the numerous complex issues this umbrella idiom covers. In fact, human-wildlife conflicts are multifaceted and assume a variety of forms. Therefore, whilst this essay will address the elements of competition and predation that create the primary issues of conflict, including; overlapping of land resources and water resources, animals foraging, mobility and economic development pressures like tourism and road development. I will mainly target and discuss the symbolic representations that may be attached to human - wildlife conflicts and conclude by addressing the future of human - wildlife conflicts. There does appear to be a considerably higher number of reports on people- wildlife conflicts within the tropical regions of the world. However, it is not a phenomenon restricted to the tropics. Conflicts between humans and wildlife are universal. Conflicts occurring in the tropics are topical because the developments are recent, in comparison to those countries in the northern hemisphere, where wild predators and livestock were hunted to extinction during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Therefore, although I do provide several anthropological studies conducted in tropical regions, I have also included examples of studies recorded in Europe.
Conflicts arise from competition, this can take the form of 'horizontal' competition i.e. between two species that share the same trophic level, or 'vertical' predation, which occurs between species at different trophic levels. When these relations overlap 'garden hunting' occurs, this usually entails wildlife being killed when they come to feed on crops etc and this feeding pattern is used as a kind of hunting bait. This occurrence is evident within the elitist sport of fox hunting practiced in Britain. The foxes prey on the 'game birds and domesticated livestock' that live on farmer's land and 'the hunt' is given permission to chase and kill the pest.
Fox hunting also provides an excellent example of people - wildlife conflicts actually arising from people-people conflicts. Garry Marvin reports on the 'growing calls for fox hunting to be banned' by conservation groups who view it as unnecessary slaughter, in conflict with rural populations who view it as a vital method of pest control. It seems human-wildlife conflicts are heavily influenced by social determinations, with many disputes occurring from a conflict of opinions between humans towards wildlife. Conover highlights that:
Those who suffer directly from wildlife damage are called 'stakeholders' and it is these groups that often influence the government's decisions on wildlife disputes. Indeed the notion of establishing a ' cultural carrying capacity' (i.e. the maximum wildlife population which society will accept within an area) has been suggested but was determined too difficult because it involved a large diversity of opinions.
Indeed, these differing opinions on wildlife damage give rise to many forms of human - human conflicts. Firstly, wildlife can cause conflict by enforcing human social divisions, as is present in a rural population living on the outskirts of the Budongo Forest in Uganda. The population is a conglomeration of different immigrant tribes, each with a different language, however the Bantu are the original inhabitants. In an attempt to reduce percentage of crop raiding caused by baboons living in the forest, the non-native 'Zairois,' from neighbouring Zaire, are given land closest to the forest. Their crops get raided first and therefore act as a buffer for the rest of the population. Secondly, human divisions can occur in conflicts over wildlife. The wolf may be viewed as a resource for the hunter, but a pest for the farmer or shepherd upon whose livestock the wolf preys. Thirdly, an element of these conflicts which is often ignored, is the probability that human - wildlife conflicts are used as an outlet to provide a focus point for blame, when human social divisions occur. For example, logging in the Brazilian rainforest and its subsequent destruction of fragile ecosystems has become the locus for frictions between the Brazilian government and conservationist groups. However, the issues of the immediate monetary gain from logging and potential presence of unknown medicinal herbs and plants in the forest, are the true issues of dispute.
Ironically, conservationism also creates human-wildlife conflicts instead of dissipating them. Conservationism operates on the assumption that nature should be protected from human resource appropriation. Therefore, the standard response to human colonisation of animal territories is to remove them and establish a protected area for the wildlife. However, whilst the competition for land resources is reduced, the threat of poaching and hunting by the populations removed, remains and even increases because these populations do not benefit from the establishment of the protected area, with revenues gained from tourism often going straight back to the government. This occurred in Uganda when the Virunga Mountains were opened up to tourist groups for gorilla viewing. The gorillas became habituated to the tourist groups and no longer harbouring a fear for humans they came down the mountain, during the night to raid the crops of the local farmers and often became aggressive and violent when approached. The local communities did receive a small percentage of the revenue gained from tourists, however the amount was not enough to compensate for the damage caused by the crop raiding. Similarly, C. Mishra et al conducted a case study in India and Mongolia exploring various incentive programs for conserving the native snow leopard. They soon discovered that the local populations would 'derive virtually no benefits from wildlife conservation' and therefore had to adopt new methods, like the manufacture of handicrafts. In another study, anthropologist M.N. Tchamba reported on the present status of the human - elephant conflict in the Waza-Logone Region in Cameroon, West Africa. He highlights that although the convergence between humans and elephants has always existed, the conflict has recently deteriorated further due to the rapid growth of elephant and human populations and the expansion of agricultural land. These factors have reduced the elephant's habitat and occupied some of their migration routes. However, legislation requires migratory routes to be built into and out of the National Parks and according to Tchamba's research in 1980 30 elephants came to Waza during the rainy season, this number increased to 50 in 1991 and to 320 elephants in 1992, he concludes it was because the 'Kaele region ha(d) become a wet season refuge for elephants." During their migration crop raiding occurred at a time 'when crops were maturing or ready for harvest' meaning farmers were unable to plant another batch, causing nearly '27% of [farmers] to lose their entire annual harvest." It has been suggested a team of technicians and local informants could be employed to defend the farms located on the vicinity of the Waza National Park to avert the elephants during their migration.
Often human-wildlife conflicts arise from humans invading wildlife habitats. However, John Knight reports on a new occurrence called 'commensalism,' where people-wildlife conflicts have adapted to perform as interfaces, where it seems some wildlife have been able to adapt successfully to humanised environments. Biologists Merrigi and Lovari have found that the wolf in Southern Europe demonstrates this acclimatisation. The canid usually feeds on wild herbivore species, however, after analysing their scat and stomach contents, it was discovered that wolves in Southern Europe have adapted to feed mainly on other food resources like, fruit, rubbish and domestic ungulates. According to the optimal foraging theory, wildlife 'tend to feed in a manner that maximises their nutrient intake in the minimum possible time.' (as cited in Sukumar 1994) This theory explains the wolves' adaptive behaviour. It seems livestock is 'left unguarded in the countryside' and proves an easy, collected target, whilst rubbish and fruit needed not be chased or hunted and therefore no energy is expended. Merrigi and Lovari state that shepherds originally tolerated the wolf, however its long absence has made its reacceptance difficult and by preying on domestic ungulates, wolves have acquired the status of pest. On other hand, it seems this conflict has been culturally institutionalised, through children's stories and games etc where the wolf is portrayed as cunning and evil, which exacerbates the problem.
The symbolism associated to certain species often creates human-wildlife conflicts. Mary Douglas's notions of pollution that suggest 'dirt' is just 'matter out of place' (Douglas 1966) can be applied to human - wildlife conflicts, where pests are simply wildlife out of place, they somehow transgress the subscribed boundaries established by humans. Putman concurs that:
I earlier referred to the wolves' status as a pest perhaps resulting from its sinister portrayal in children's stories and games. The same culturally institutionalised epithet is applied to the fox. In classic tales like Aesop's Fables and Beatrix Potter the fox is portrayed as a 'sly, amoral, wily, cowardly and self seeking creature." These negative connotations cannot fail to influence human perception of the creature. Interestingly, structuralist models of animal symbolism classify the world into groups, but phenomena that resist classification are deemed anomalous. According to Knight 'foxes have a special anomalous or ambiguous status because they straddle the boundary between field animals and remote wild animals." They inhabit a liminal, negative symbolic sphere. Knight suggests another possibility that 'underlying many people-wildlife conflicts are ideas of balance and reciprocity, with respect to which the behaviour of this or that animal may be deemed to be problematical.'
In this respect, foxes apparent tendencies for feeding frenzies in hencoops, upset this balance and incur the anger of the farmer and establish a conflict.
In conclusion, anthropology as a discipline has huge potential for helping to resolve human - wildlife conflict issues. Knight reports that 'anthropology provides a cultural contextualization of wildlife that could help achieve a more locally sensitive wildlife management policy' and he suggests the implementation of a:
Indeed whilst there is no panacea for the conflict issues, I concur that it is vital to consider the human element of the conflict issues, as discussed in C.M. Hill's article
' people should not suffer impoverishment from wildlife preservation." The solution is to adopt community-based management schemes that involve the local population in conservation projects. Finally, it becomes clear that the term 'people' of the people- wildlife conflicts is not a static term, but rather one that carries many connotations. As I highlighted earlier, it appears that human-wildlife conflicts are a consequence of wider, far ranging conflicts between human populations whether local, national or international and certainly not restricted to the tropics.