In 1881 in his Descent of Man Charles Darwin concluded, "it is somewhat more probable that our early progenitors lived on the African continent than elsewhere." Today this prognosis is still a topic of intense debate among paleoanthropologists. All concur that 1.8 million years ago (mya) a group of H. ergaster or H. erectus moved out of Africa into Asia, and eventually into Europe. However, once in these locations opinions were divided by which method these species evolved into H. sapiens. Two main schools of thought arose in response to this dispute; the Multiregional/Regional Continuity Model, led today by Milford Wolpoff and Alan Templeton, argues that H. erectus and H. ergaster left Africa and evolved separately into populations of H. sapiens, through a range of intermediates species. Whilst, the Out of Africa/ Replacement theory, proposes that H.sapiens only originated 200 kya and dispersed out of Africa into other regions of the world, effectively replacing the H.erectus populations in Asia and H.neanderthalensis species in Europe when they became extinct. Despite ethnocentric behaviour and attitudes often influencing the interpretation of fossil finds throughout paleoanthropology's history; today those views have become more balanced and the subsequent discoveries of fossils, archaeological evidence and developments in genetics tend to disprove the multi-regional hypothesis and there is a general consensus in favour of the Single Origin model and it is these findings that I will elaborate upon.
In 1964, Louis Leakey discovered a collection of fossils at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania, namely a lower jaw, parts of the cranium and hand and foot bones. These were dated to 1.75 million years (mya), older than the Zinji boisei species Leakey had been investigating with his wife Mary and in April the journal Nature published his findings as the species homo habilis. Similarly, in 1986 Donald Johanson and Tim White found fragmented skeletal remains, named OH 62, at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania which were typical of H. habilis. These specimens too showed a reduction in jaw size, a reduction in dentition and an increased brain size from 500cm3 to 640cm3. The fossil was also dated to 1.75 mya. H. habilis fossils then were showing shared morphological traits of an increase in the height of the cranial vault, an increased thickness of the cranial vault, a decrease in facial prognathism, including the reduction in dentition and increased brain size.
In1984, Richard Leakey uncovered a nearly complete skeleton west of Lake Turkana in Nariokotome, Kenya that was named KNM-WT 15000. From the complete remains Leakey and his team were able to accurately calculate his height (1.84 m), his brain capacity 880cm3 and date the skeletal matter at 1.6 mya. It was classified as h. erectus. However, in 1975, KNM-ER 3733 an almost fully intact cranium was discovered at Koobi Fora with a brain size of 850cm3, it was dated at 1.8 mya and it was judged to be another species named; H. ergaster. These two species shared many morphological traits namely; thick cranial bone, pronounced supraorbital sulcus (brow-ridges), a projecting nasal aperture and an increase in body size; 63 kilos in males and 52 kilos in females, in comparison to h. habilis males at 52 kilos and females at 32 kilos. H. erectus/ergaster were the first hominids to appear outside Africa.
Interestingly, in 1907 a mandible was found in Mauer, Germany, it was both robust but had reduced dentition size, suggesting a hybridisation of primitive and modern morphological traits, it was dated at 500 kya. The species was named
h. heidelbergensis. Much later in 1993 finds in Boxgrove, England, revealed a large tibia and some Acheulean tools and was dated at the same date of 500 kya, subsuming it under the h.heidelbergensis species. This species was presumed to have evolved in Africa before evolving into h.neanderthalis in Europe. Indeed, the mixture of traits does not imply continuity.
Towards the end of the Pleistocene era anatomically modern humans; early homo sapiens, begin to emerge in the fossil record. These hominids display a reduction in skeletal robustness, fully modern bipedalism, small face, presence of a chin and a large forehead. In 1967 at Omo, Ethiopia, a brain case and post cranial material were recovered and dated to 130 kya . Similar specimens were found at the Klasies River Mouth Cave in South Africa and were dated to 70-120 kya. It is also important to remember the finds in Israel at Skhul and Qafzeh where several partial skeletons were dated at 100 kya. However, the most significant recovery was made in Herto, Ethiopia 2003. Three almost intact crania were unearthed and dated at 160 kya. Not only was this the oldest anatomically modern fossil recovered, it also highlighted a gap of tens of thousands of years between the first evidence in Africa and elsewhere in the world. This timing points to " a wave of advance" from east Africa (160kya) to South Africa (100kya), Israel (95kya), East Asia (67 kya) and Europe (47-40 kya.) The similar dates between anatomically modern human fossils found in Africa and the Middle East have also led to conclusions that the two areas formed the same ecological niche. Ultimately, the fossil record highlights a transition from h.habilis to h.erectus/ergaster to modern h.sapiens within Africa.
Archaeological evidence in Africa shows the use of mode 3 Mousterian tool technologies in the Middle Stone Age (MSA) and the application of mode 4/5 Aurignacian technologies in the Late Stone Age (LSA.) However, the problematic nature of archaeological evidence means it cannot be heavily relied upon. Most of the archaeological record is too late or to regional to be able to establish adequate correlations. Indeed, archaic sapiens and anatomically modern humans were restricted in their choice of materials when constructing tools, as the MSA tool technology is associated with both genus's and as a result it is very difficult to distinguish between the different species handiwork. Significantly, the use of blade technology, the production and use of pigments, carving of hunting points and evidence of shell fishing can be dated in the archaeological record at 250 kya. Such technology is not found in Europe until 27 kya, this is a clear indication of behaviour belonging to anatomically modern, dexterous humans situated in Africa.
On the other hand molecular genetics offers quantitative precision to a science that has lacked such exactness in comparison to its fellow sciences. The completion of the Human Genome Project (HGP) in 2003 marked an enormous advance in the capabilities of genetics. These advances in science have allowed genetics to fill the gaps left in the fossil and archaeological records; it is also vital for determining coalescence dates between anatomically modern humans and ancient sapiens.
Unlike nuclear DNA, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has a closed circular genome and is made up of only 16500 base pairs, in comparison to the 3 billion that comprise the human genome. It addition to this, mtDNA is not subject to recombination, segregation during meiosis, or the effects of natural selection. It only changes via random mutations, it is passed only through the maternal line and it is present in every cell of the body. As a result, mtDNA is relatively simple to decode, is inherited more simply and occurs in large numbers. Therefore, in 1981 Cann, Stoneking and Wilson attempted to analyse the variability of mtDNA from 147 individuals from all regions of the world. Richard Klein records, that " the 147 subjects possessed 133 different types of mtDNA, all presumed to originate ultimately from a single type by mutation." These high levels of genetic variation among the African populations implies that anatomically modern humans (amh) arose first in Africa and have therefore had a longer period of time over which to accumulate genetic diversity. Klein continues " the tree turned out to have two main branches - one comprising exclusively Africans and the other some Africans and everyone else,"  thus producing a coalescence date of 200 kya. Matthias Krings and Svante Paabo used this mtDNA technology in 1997 to sequence some mtDNA from the Neanderthal specimen, Feldhofer. The genetic sequence was found to "lay outside the range of observed modern human variation." Similar results were obtained from Mezmaiskaya Cave in Caucasus and from Vindija in Croatia. This disparity rules out the possibility of interbreeding, as advocated by the multiregional model. It also highlights that where all living humans coalesce to a common ancestor around 400 kya, the coalescence with Neanderthals is closer to 650 kya, showing a 1.2 kya of divergent evolution and clear separation between the lineages, again supporting not continuity but a replacement theory.
Another study conducted by Alan Rogers and Henry Harpending addressed the enigma of the low level of genetic diversity of mtDNA present in modern populations. They developed a hypothetical model called mismatch distribution, based on mutational time scales, which uses genetic variation in modern populations to infer population events in the past. They discovered that a population bottleneck occurred leaving a small founding population of 10,000 people, which left Africa between 150 - 287 kya and spread to different geographical locations. They concluded "the numbers that flow from this analysis (if correct) make the mulitregional hypothesis untenable." Their research then revealed a huge population expansion followed this bottleneck around 60 kya, with the African population expanding first. These findings revolutionise the existing Out of Africa hypothesis. It was originally posited:
Recent developments in evolutionary genetics include exploring the use of the male Y-chromosome to represent male history, instead of the mitochondrial 'female' history. Work led by Matt Hammer and Luca Cavalli-Sforza seems to support the evidence produced from mtDNA investigations, with Y-chromosomes showing a coalescence date of between 100-150 kya and a greater African genetic diversity compared to other regions of the world. Microsatellite DNA, short stretches of DNA comprised of 2-5 nucleotide segments, are unique because their mutation rates can be determined in a laboratory and do not have to be calibrated against the fossil record, allowing independent coalescence dates to be calculated to a date of 156 kya. Similarly, Alu elements are defined as "sequences of DNA approximately 300 base pairs in length, which become inserted in large numbers over the nuclear genome." Like mtDNA, once inserted they are never removed and remain immune to point mutations. Studies on this have produced a coalescence date of 102 kya. All the coalescence dates garnered from the above methods corroborate the Out of Africa hypothesis and are inconsistent with the multiregional one.
In conclusion, the evidence highlighted within the essay strongly supports an Out of Africa evolution model, indeed F.Clark Howell agrees that the anatomical data "afford[s] no support to a continuity model" he believes the multiregional hypothesis is a "fragile, frayed and unfructuous conceptual framework." However, there are arguments against the single origin hypothesis that need to be taken into consideration. Many advocates of the multiregional hypothesis argue that the fossil record is not very comprehensive and although those fossils recovered so far seem to support a replacement theory, those fossils that might confirm the continuity model just have not been found yet. On the other hand, the recent recovery of a 12 kya fossil named LB1 at Liang Bua, in Flores which has been classified as a new species; Homo floresiensis, adds to the mounting evidence against the continuity evolution model, for its transitional morphological traits provides clear evidence in support of the replacement hypothesis.