Anthropology as a social science faced many impediments compared with its contemporaries, largely because "information available over a century ago on the customs and beliefs of exotic tribal peoples was incomparably poorer than it is today." The armchair anthropologists in the Victorian era and well into the nineteenth century depended on reports from travellers, colonial officials and missionaries, these were often misleading and only conveyed a partial picture. It was from the humble ponderings of Evolutionism, the Victorian era's legacy to anthropology, that nineteenth century anthropologists gleaned the basis for their ideas. The anthropologists of the twentieth century attempted a more active approach, by moving away from the genre of armchair anthropology by establishing fieldwork led by Malinowski. However, although these bold attempts did signal a change in social anthropology, many theories still exhibit elements of the nineteenth century theorists and it is these continuities I shall explore.
Evolutionism adopted a diachronic approach and aimed to concentrate on issues of society rather than culture. Its ideas were embraced by the likes of Morgan, Maine, McLennan, Tylor and Frazer. Many were monogenist theorists who favoured the idea of unilinear evolutionism, which advocated that all societies pass through the same stages of evolution; therefore if 'lower' races were studied anthropologists could conclude about the early phases of their own societies. Similarly, they were interested in the idea of 'survivals' that were the relics of former customs which linger on anachronistically out of context. It employed a comparative method of analysis and this form of comparison was used to form a macro history of civilisation and culture. There was more emphasis on the use of factual and empirical methods, instead of a speculative philosophical approach and focus was shifted from looking at societies to looking at institutions instead.
A popular evolutionary scheme was the transition of societies from primitive promiscuity to matriliny or patriliny. Lewis Henry Morgan (Ancient Society 1907) the railroad tycoon and state senator was one of few during the nineteenth century to conduct serious field research. He studied the language of the Iroquois North American Indians and through this work developed a model for kinship systems. He stated that from his knowledge of the Iroquois kinship terminology, the name for father and father's brother was identical this implied polyandry and therefore matriarchal society. His rival John Ferguson McLennan disagreed. His studies on the form of family led him to believe that a struggle for food led to female infanticide, leading to a shortage of women and marriage rules of polyandry. It became difficult to determine the father of a given child, so decent became matrilineal. Henry Maine also considered ideas of the family in his objection to Rousseau's 'Social Contract.' It was considered the cornerstone of legal thought, but as a jurist Maine accused its content as artificial. Using his knowledge of Roman law he argued that society originates within the family and kinships are built upon that family.
Sir Edward Tylor ( Anthropology 1881)explored the evolution of culture through the doctrine of 'survivals' and explored schemes of magic, religion and science, particularly the progression in societies from animism to polytheism to monotheism.
Sir James Frazer in his legendary Golden Bough 1890 breaks with the tradition of the 'primitive' savage when he appoints science as a feature of culture attributed to primitive and as well as civilised cultures. He is also remembered for his ideas on 'the psychic unity of mankind.' This was the presumption that there exists a single, overarching human nature that permeates all peoples in all places on the planet, regardless of the level of their cultural evolution.
Another method beginning to be employed by evolutionists was the idea of functional interrelations between customs or institutions. This functionalist approach can be seen in Durkheim's work; indeed he represents the transition from nineteenth century to twentieth century anthropology. In contrast to the evolutionists, he was against reducing things and favoured a more objective approach when studying society indeed his stance was almost relativistic. To study society empirically then some form of fact was needed to manipulate and analyse the data received. Durkheim devised the notion of 'social fact' a social constraint that could be evaluated as hard data. On the other hand his ideas on 'organic solidarity' were enlightening. They implied that all units of society have a 'collective conscience' that binds them together and aids transition from past views towards modern thinking. His ideas were strong but often too rigid, as can been seen in his theory on suicide in which he states that suicide is caused by four states; fatalistic, altruistic, anomic and egoistic. He leaves no room for indecision. However, the notions Durkheim was criticising are themselves products and therefore not scientific studies so we begin question whether Durkheim actually owns his own theory? Despite this Durkheim is renowned for his attempts to move away from evolutionism instead of continuing it.
As we move further into the twentieth century we see Malinowki fathering a new revolution. He rejected armchair anthropology and invented modern fieldwork methods using the native language in participant observation. He viewed fieldwork as a critical step to acquiring first hand empirical data and a deeper knowledge of local culture essentially 'to grasp the native's vision of his world." His most esteemed work was conducted among the Trobriand Islanders in Argonauts of the Western Pacific 1922. He follows Durkheim's functionalist approach, although vague, because he asserts that culture, customs and institutions serve practical needs. However, Malinowski is also remembered for his " theory of culture and cultural universals based on assumptions" especially in his posthumous work A scientific theory of culture. If his theories were beginning to be based on 'assumptions' is this evidence of a slip back into the armchair anthropology of the nineteenth century? However, I doubt such a suggestion because Malinowski was as keen to employ empirical analysis as were the evolutionists.
Similarly, Radcliffe-Brown openly rejected evolutionism. Instead he proposed the idea of a single, unified social science, dismissing the notion of a science of culture. His attitude and theories marked a transition from functionalism into structural functionalism. He undertook a synchronic, scientific approach and wanted to see an "improvement of the comparative method and its refinement as an instrument of analysis." However, he did praise his evolutionist predecessors for their comparative objectives. Durkheim's influence can clearly be seen in Radcliffe-Brown's work in the Andamans where he studied their customs to show how they contribute to social order, consensus, co-aptation and social solidarity. Radcliffe-Browns theories on social dynamics were confusing, he adopted the phrase 'structural form' to replace what was usually called social structure, and used the term 'social structure' to define data. In suggesting that the study of individual relationships would reveal the structural form of one society to another, he appeared to be creating his theory backwards, for "one cannot get at universal, general laws by counting up instances of anything." (see footnote 3) His interest in totemism is reminiscent of Tylor's work and he builds on Durkheim's idea that totems have the function of expressing clan solidarity.
Evans Pritchard, a student of Malinowski, rejected Radcliffe-Browns notion of the discipline as a science, he preferred the subject to be studied as an art. Despite this, he practised his anthropology within the general theoretical framework of Radcliffe-Brown and Durkheim. He developed the idea of anthropology as 'translation of culture.' Already his aims differ from those of the evolutionists who preferred to focus on ideas of society rather than culture. Durkheim's influence is evident as Evans Pritchard states that thoughts and ideas combine in complex relationships (similar to Saussure's ideas on language) and systems always within a social context. Indeed, he resumed Durkheim's interest in 'collective thought' that is rooted in all social relationships and institutions. Yet his interest in the Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande (1937) and work on Nuer Religion are reminiscent of Tylor's work, but it lacks the evolutionist preference for an empirical approach. Also, Evans Pritchard promoted anthropology as a humanities subject instead of a science, which suggests a wider synchronic approach and a discontinuity with evolutionist opinion.
Levi Strauss's work was heavily influenced by the likes of Durkheim, Mauss, Boas, Radcliffe-Brown etc. He continues Frazer's work on psychic unity or as Strauss termed it 'l'esprit humain' or 'collective unconscious' in direct contrast to Durkheim's 'collective conscience' and believes his structuralist approach involves social structure and structural form in the Radcliffe -Brownian senses, as well as the structure of ideas. Barnard highlights that "his structures are built on a rational rather than an empirical foundation," therefore his theories do not concur with those of the evolutionists. When Levi Strauss dubbed societies that were open to trade as 'hot cultures' i.e. they warm quickly to the new and assimilate change and defined 'cold cultures' as insular and expending a great deal of energy to maintain central control. This collective representation is quite philosophic, another attribute criticised by evolutionists. More importantly, Evans Pritchard contested the opinions of armchair anthropologists by advocating that mind of the so-called 'savage' was equal to the civilized mind.
Clifford Geertz was a prolific writer with a radical approach, similar to Evans Pritchard; he studied culture as 'text,' an art form. In accordance with many of his contemporaries he studied 'meaning' as the path to making sense of the world. Secondly, he rejected etic attempts to theorise culture. He takes the same opinion as Evans Pritchard when he eliminates the empirical, diachronic approach of the evolutionists in favour of a timeless synchronic method. However, he does not eliminate the possibility of the comparative method completely, suggesting a theorist who is open to the benefits that nineteenth century anthropologists provided for the anthropologists of the twentieth century.
In conclusion, it seems the strongest threads of interpretation have survived, leaving the failures of nineteenth century anthropologists behind. Although their work was inspiring and revolutionary, too often it was hypothetical, based on poor facts and data often manipulated to fit theories. The main achievement of the twentieth century anthropologists was to loose the stereotype of the 'primitive savage' and progress away from the philanthropic attitude and "a narcissistic preoccupation with their own past" promoted especially in the Victorian era and well into the nineteenth century.
However, there were many bold statements made by twentieth century anthropologists claiming their fresh approach to the subject, but despite their valiant attempts, a few sunk back into the methods of their predecessors. After an overall assessment it seems there are less continuities and more discontinuities between nineteenth and twentieth century anthropology. Most anthropologists from the twentieth century seem to base their exploration of the discipline from Durkheim's work.