This essay will examine the similarities and differences in the migrations to New England and the Chesapeake by comparing the type of people who migrated to each colony in terms of demographics, social status and motives until 1640. It will also compare and contrast the societies they created including an examination into the factors which shaped their settlements such as relations with local Native American tribes and the influence of disease on the colonies. In general, the migrants to the Chesapeake were young, single males in search of wealth who were usually from poor backgrounds (many were servants), while migrants to New England were usually families seeking religious freedom from persecution in Europe, with less of an interest in wealth as they were already financially secure. This meant society in New England was far more stable. The volatile society in the Chesapeake was further exacerbated by hostile relations with the Native Americans and a struggle against a plethora of diseases; factors which the New England migrants had to contend with on a very small scale - 'Within this panorama of turmoil, however, New England stood apart as a region of unusual stability.'
In comparing the migrants to the two new colonies in America, it is necessary to compare their demographic characteristics including age and gender, their social background and status as well as their motives for migrating in the first place. Bernard Bailyn states that 'the number of immigrants that had arrived, the timing of their arrival, and their social, physical and legal condition... [was] extremely different'. Firstly, we must examine the migrants to the Chesapeake. All the migrants before 1618 were male and the vast majority were young and single aged between sixteen and twenty-five. This trend continued until 1640 as there were very few female migrants to the colony. In 1625, the Chesapeake had a population gender distribution of seventy five per cent men, ten per cent women, and fifteen per cent children. This is in stark contrast to the situation in New England where far more families and even whole communities of all ages migrated to the New World together. About seventy per cent of the migrants to New England belonged to family groups, with the remaining thirty per cent being single males who usually belonged to the families as servants anyway - 'the age structure of New England's emigrant population closely resembled that of the home country with both infancy and old age represented." The adults in the families were normally in their 30s and 40s, unlike the young single migrants to the Chesapeake, and also brought their children with them. Meanwhile, 'the first generation of immigrants that settled in the Chesapeake region included a significant proportion of unrelated individuals'.
Due to a lack of source material, we cannot be entirely sure about the class and economic status of the people who migrated to the Chesapeake, but fairly reliable assumptions can be made. That is, they were probably mainly from the poorer classes of society, but it is unlikely that they would have been the truly impoverished. Equally, the richer members of the public, such as the merchants and aristocrats, would not have migrated, as they would have a lot to loose, and it was simply not necessary for them to risk their money. It is likely that the types of people who migrated to New England were better off economically. The migrants to New England before 1640 were almost purely drawn from two religious groups: the Pilgrims and Puritans. The Pilgrims were unable to obtain their own charter in England due to their religious beliefs, since they were at odds with the Crown and government. However, the majority of Pilgrims were merchants, so they were able to purchase land from the Virginia Company. This indicates that they had money available and probably emanated from the middle class. The Puritans, like the Pilgrims, would also have been relatively well-off in economic terms, as they majority of them migrated from East Anglia where there was a decline in the cloth trade - they were mainly small scale artisans. Thus, the migrants to New England would have generally have been of higher economic status and from higher social backgrounds than the migrants to the Chesapeake - 'Where most Chesapeake settlers were poor and short-lived indentured servants, New England attracted primarily "middling sorts" who preserved their freedom because they could pay for their own way across the Atlantic.'
In terms of motives for the migrations, the alternative reasons for migrating to New England and the Chesapeake are extremely varied but relatively simple to explain. As there was free land available, the prime motive for migrants to the Chesapeake was personal economic advancement - 'Economic opportunity in the broadest sense constituted the single most important motivating factor." Young Englishmen sought their fortune and improved status. Indeed, many saw their migration as temporary, so they could make a substantial profit quickly through tobacco production before returning to England with their newfound wealth. The free land offered by the Virginia Company was the key factor in attracting the poorer members of society and the younger sons of gentry, both of whom had little prospect of riches in England. Many migrants to the Chesapeake could not afford to pay for their journey. Consequently, seventy to eighty-five per cent of migrants were indentured servants - they worked as servants for a number of years (on average about seven) before being freed in return for their passage to America .'[It] consisted overwhelmingly of unmarried male indentured servants (males outnumbered females by well over six to one), bound in indentures." The colony of New England, however, was created for completely different reasons. It was designed primarily as a religious utopia, and its people had no thought to economic advancement. The Pilgrims sought freedom from religious persecution in both England and then Holland, and believed America would give them a fresh start. The Puritans disliked Catholic aspects still embedded within Anglicanism in England, and believed that a separation of church and state was necessary. They were committed to the beliefs of the Church of England and hoped to create their own religious ideal in New England. They also migrated to avoid increased persecution from the new Archbishop of Canterbury. Therefore, neither the Pilgrims nor the Puritans migrated to New England for economic reasons. Both sought a peaceful existence with religious freedom and the ability to worship without interference. They wanted to prove that a religious utopia was possible, saw their settlement as permanent and were determined to make it work, as it was in their best interests. This outlook was the exact polar opposite to the majority of the migrants to the Chesapeake.
As the types of people, their characteristics and motives for migration to the two American colonies were so different, it is hardly surprising that the societies they created were almost diametrically opposed. In terms of the settlement created in the Chesapeake, it can certainly be described as unstable. There were a number of important reasons for this. The colony had a crisis of authority during its immediate infancy as the first two governors lost control, since they could not prevent a high death toll among its early settlers. Indeed, this crisis of authority and unstable society was to characterise the area for decades after the initial settlement in 1607 at Jamestown. There was also a constant shortage of food as the settlers struggled to adapt to the conditions in their new home. A lack of planning meant there was no food stockpiled during the harsh winter of 1609-10. Consequently, there was widespread starvation and the future of the colony was placed in jeopardy as the remaining colonists wanted to return to England. The colony could also be characterised as extremely violent. One of the main reasons for this was the lack of women - 'At mid-century, the New England sex ratio was six males for every four females, compared with four males for every female in the Chesapeake. Greater balance encouraged a more stable society and a faster population growth." The Virginia Company's charter was revoked in 1624 and the colony came under royal control as the 'rights of Englishmen' were seen as being neglected. Clearly, the political situation as well as the social situation in the colony was highly unstable. This was in marked contrast to the state of affairs in New England, where the colony got off to a far better start in terms of creating stability, as all the colonists agreed to sign the Mayflower Compact which was an agreement to work together to ensure the stable future of the colony - 'Puritan values helped the colonists prosper in a demanding land." In general, New England was a far more cohesive society than that created in the Chesapeake - 'Only [in New England] did the framework of social and cultural institutions created by the very first generation of settlers prove to be remarkably durable." It was more moralistic, religious and conservative. This meant that there was less emphasis on finance, as most people were farmers and artisans who were able to have a comfortable life without seeking riches. Most migrants came to New England to live there permanently, which was definitely not the case in the Chesapeake. There was more broad based prosperity in New England than the Chesapeake, where there was extremes of wealth and poverty. The success of their colony is borne out in the number of people who migrated there. Between 1620 and 1642 about 25,000 people migrated to New England, and by 1640 the colony had a total population of 40,000. After this period, though, migration was not an ongoing phenomenon (unlike in the Chesapeake), as society became more settled and stable - 'Emigration to the Chesapeake continued for more than a century, but the movement to New England lasted scarcely a decade." The progress of their society can be seen in the founding of Harvard in 1636. Clearly, therefore, the society created in the Chesapeake was far more stable and prosperous compared to the society created in New England which was almost its polar opposite.
However, it was not just the colonists themselves who were responsible for the societies that were created in their respective regions. There were other extenuating factors which were almost entirely beyond their control. Perhaps the most important of these was the relations with the local Native Americans. In the Chesapeake, poor relations with the local Native American tribes were hugely responsible for the instability of the colony in its early years - 'Murder, torture, and cheating had marked the interaction between Indians and settlers, and the result was mistrust and hatred." The Powhatan Confederacy was far more powerful than the English colony: it had 10,000 Native Americans in 1620, whilst the colonists had just over a tenth of that number. The Native Americans also knew the lay of the land, how best to exploit it, and were generally used to living in the conditions of the area. The English, however, faced a massive culture shock and a struggle for survival even during times when the two sides were on good terms. This was actually the case initially as the English maintained good relations with Powhatan. However, when the Native American chief died in 1618, he was succeeded by his brother, Opechancanough, 'who from long and bitter experience despised the invaders'. On 22 nd March 1622 the Native Americans launched a surprise attack which killed over a third of the colonists (347 out of 1200 people). Clearly, the colonists' attempts to colonize the Chesapeake were on the brink of failure. This pattern would continued until 1640 as the colonists became embroiled in a number of serious wars. In New England, however, Governor William Bradford ensured that the colonists shared positive relations with the local Native Americans (the Massasoit) from the outset, which enabled the settlement to survive. Indeed, they traded items such as fur and wampum. The migrants to New England also benefited to a huge extent by a smallpox epidemic which had wiped out a large proportion of the Native Americans. The Pequot tribe was more hostile but had been decimated by disease - they had been reduced in number to an estimated 3,000 from 13,000. The epidemic had probably been spread by fisherman who had come into contact with Native Americans decades beforehand, and meant that the New England colonists faced far less opposition to their settlement. The Pequots were eventually slaughtered by the settlers in 1636. Therefore, the situation in the Chesapeake was bleak in terms of creating a stable society before 1640. This was only further exacerbated by poor relations with local Native American tribes. In New England, however, the lack of any Native American resistance helped their cause to create a prosperous society.
A second highly important factor in determining the ability to create a stable society was the affect of disease. Yet again, the colonists in the Chesapeake fared far worse than those in New England. The migrants to the Chesapeake faced a wide variety of diseases, the most notable being malaria - 'It was an unhealthy environment in which malaria, which opened its victims to the ravages of a dozen other diseases, was endemic, and they had died like flies." Disease killed thousands of people annually and decimated the population, making the struggle for survival in their colony even harder. Thirty per cent of settlers died each year and disease was the main cause. Indeed, 'In Virginia from 1625 to 1634, the colony received 9,000 arrivals, while half the population died in this nine-year period." In New England, however, the colonists faced very few threatening diseases. This is indicated by a life expectancy in the 70s, while that of the Chesapeake was in the 50s. Therefore, yet again the colonists in New England held a distinct advantage over their counterparts in the Chesapeake in their initial struggle for survival and attempt to create a stable society.
Therefore, in conclusion, the migrations to New England and the Chesapeake were highly different before 1640 in relation to the people who migrated, as well as the societies they eventually created. The migrants to the Chesapeake were largely young single males from poor backgrounds with the primary aim of economic advancement. The majority had little interest in the future of the colony itself and many saw there residence as short term. The migrants to New England, however, were drawn from families, so there was a far more balanced range in age and gender. They were generally from wealthier backgrounds with the primary interest of creating a religious utopia free from persecution. They had a long term interest in the colony and were determined to make it succeed. The attitudes of the colonists were greatly responsible for the societies that were created in New England and the Chesapeake. The Chesapeake was characterised by instability, violence, food shortages and poor leadership, while New England was far more stable, settled and prosperous. However, there were also other factors which were instrumental in these differences. The migrants to the Chesapeake faced huge Native American resistance as well as a wide variety of deadly diseases on arrival, whereas the New England colonists were far more fortunate in both respects. However, it must be mentioned that the two societies were gradually becoming more alike towards the middle of the seventeenth century - the Chesapeake was stabilising due to a greater migration of women, the increase in families and the decline in the death rate, while NewEngland faced increasing problems as outside religious groups such as the Quakers threatened its religious idyll. However, the contrast between the two societies was still extremely noticeable.