The two texts I will be examining are, an extract from the poem, The Love Song of Alfred J. Prufrock, by T.S. Elliot and Her Face by Sir Arthur Gorges. Both texts share a common theme, love poems dedicated to the narrators muse, yet both are expressed in very different ways. Through exploring the linguistic, poetic and cultural features, I will examine the comparisons and contrasts that the poems possess. I will refer to the texts as 'A' and 'B', respectively from now on.
I will begin by comparing phonemes and patterns. Both texts have comparisons with frequent repetition of alliteration and assonance. The long and low /l/ sounds of the liquid consonants in text A (ye llow, licked, lingered, let fa ll, s lipped) provide a smooth fluidity to the poem's sound and flow.
In contrast to this, text B uses fricatives to enhance the staccato effect. An 'audible friction' is created with the repetition of the aspirate /h/ in the opening line, and with the hissing sibilants in 'so' and 'sweet', a contrast in phonemes is formed between the poems. Short vowel sounds of the /i/ along with the quickly released /t/ gives the feeling that the word has been broken off quickly or cut short, creating a short sharp abrupt line ending.
Both texts use rhyme, but do so in different ways. Text A has quite an irregular scheme which appears unsystematic, though lines 2 and 4 rhyme (A) as do 6 and 8 (D) which adds musicality to the sound patterning.
Text B adopts a lyrical form set out in quatrains. It begins with an almost Shakespearean rhyme scheme (ABAB CD...) and this vague frame has repetition with variation in the penultimate stanza. The structure ABAB is regular and repeated, however again it is rhyme 'A' that is foregrounded as it is constantly used throughout all five stanzas creating a cyclic effect that is continually returning to the beginning. Visual rhyme is used with 'love' and 'move', however when read aloud the rhyme is not heard.
The two poems have mainly regular stress patterns, but with variations. Text A begins with a couplet that is an iambic heptameter, although the remainder of the text has an irregular number of syllables and stresses per line, so is free verse. Three lines start on the reverse foot and so are foregrounded against the regular iambic pattern. These trochees change the readers pace, acting as a vehicle to carry the text forward.
Text B is a highly regular stressed poem. Each line contains six syllables and three stresses, and on every occasion but one, these are iambic lines. The words are all monosyllabic creating a highly structured formal pace. It also contains a trochee line, which creates disjunction because of the change in rhythm. This foregrounding is further heightened with the parallelism in word structure; the second word in the couplet remains constant and the first word changes, a reversal of all the other lines.
In text B the use of so much repetition falls into the background and becomes part of the frame of the poem. When the repetition breaks in the third line, the replacement of 'first' with the adverb 'then', breaks this pattern and is foregrounded. This break adds kinesis and propels the text forward, leaving the emphasis on the word 'hit', giving weight to the action verb. The line changes the functions of the same context sensitive personal pronouns. The possessive pronoun 'mine', changes to the possessive determiner 'my'. This causes disjunction and produces an effect of broken language, which could be archaic, as it is used in a context that no longer exists. This shows that the seemingly safe structure of the text is susceptible to change.
Both poems are similar in their lack of similes but inclusion of metaphors. In text A we meet the inanimate nouns 'fog', and 'smoke'. Not only do they become physical things with a 'back', but also animate and carries out the action, 'rub'. This conceit or extended metaphor continues with animalistic connotations, anthropomorphising the 'smoke/ fog'. It also possesses a 'muzzle' which not only denotes a part of an animal's face, but also something that "Prevents (someone) from expressing their opinions freely" implying that the smoke is smothering and restricting, giving the 'muzzle' a double meaning, making it a pun. 'Its' in the third line is a third person singular pronoun, adding to the creatures substantialism as it has its own possessions, and although the poem implies we can identify 'it', the reader is unaware of what 'it' is in this context. 'Smoke' is not the only personified noun, 'evening' also takes on a life of its own. Being abstract and not something physical, the rules are broken when it becomes a 'space'. This shape with corners implies that it is three-dimensional, which takes the reader out of their normal schema and into a parallel world, where the abstract is physical and the inanimate becomes animal. Text B includes the metaphor, 'doth knit/ mine eye.' Eye here is recast as something other, the verb 'knit' is not usually coined with the noun 'eye', which creates an unusual collocation and gruesome image.
The sentence structures in the two poems have strong contrasts. Nevertheless, both are declarative, active sentences that inform the reader, and both contain the definite article, signalling a close proximity and specificity to the subject, which invites the reader into the world of the narrator. At first glance text A consists of two major sentences that include the main verb, noun head and grammatical subject. The first two lines are a couplet with a subordinated clause. By starting in media res, the reader gets a sense of immediacy that is echoed by the ellipses at the beginning of the third line with the omission of 'that'. Yet the full stop after the couplet acts as a hinge as there is a shift in tense, breaking it away from the rest of the poem. The present simple tense (signified by 'rubs') shifts to the past perfect, where "it was a soft October night" indicates the past tense. The second sentence consists of premodifiers that are dependant upon it being 'a soft October night,' making it a subordinated sentence.
Graphologically, the two texts are visually presented very differently. Text A's appearance on the page means it is immediately recognised as poetry, with capitalisation of initial letters of the first word on every line, and stacked in a block in the middle of the page, whereas Text B can be likened to concrete poetry. Text A uses caesuras in the form of commas or full stops to avoid enjambment and text B uses physical spaces between words to indicate a break or pause. Set in a table-like format, comparisons can be made between this and classic oriental scripts which are read from top to bottom, and when done in this way the poem surprisingly still making grammatical sense.
By contrastively analysing these poems, I have explored linguistically, poetically, and culturally the differences and similarities between the two, and highlighted how poems with similar subjects can in fact hold completely contrasting features.