During the Victorian period there was what is known as the 'Victorian crisis of faith' due to scientific discovery, changing philosophy and doubts over the validity of the Bible. This crisis of confidence in Christianity was experienced mostly by intellectuals who renounced the Bible as literal fact and replaced it by a humanistic religion. These changing ethics were clearly illustrated in the literature of the time; the discourses of the writing and the characters portrayed in them. Both George Eliot and Thomas Hardy were sceptical of Christianity, especially some of its strict moral standards, but both felt that its altruistic teachings were beneficial. They both used the Bible richly as a resource for their novels and I will discuss their use of it and their alternative humanism looking at Eliot's Silas Marner (1861) and Hardy's Tess of the D'Urbervilles (1891).
George Eliot's (called Marianne Evans) parents were members of the Anglican Church and sent her to schools which were strongly influenced by Evangelical teachings of the day. Eliot became especially involved in church at the age of 12 when she began teaching in Sunday school but it was not until the age of 15 when she became convinced of Evangelical Christianity. Nineteenth Century Evangelical teachings emphasised the doctrines of eternal salvation and judgement, original sin, justification through faith alone and activism. Yet there were many ambiguities; shown by new emphasises later in the century, as to how one is assured of salvation and what the implications of biblical doctrines were. Preachers did not see the Bible's teaching as a whole and so were left to hold different human authors, such as Paul and James, in opposition to each other. People felt great unrest because they were left unaware of whether or not actions on earth determined one's salvation because they did not have a balanced biblical understanding. Amidst the confusion, Eliot felt great relief in dropping her faith,
Her anxious and ascetic lifestyle did not provide much resistance to the thinking that she became aware of when introduced to the writings of Charles Hennell. He believed Christ's life was a myth made up by humans writing about the historical Jesus. Eliot was particularly convinced of the inadequacies of the Bible when she translated Strauss and Feuerbach. Strauss believed the gospels were a "literary construction", not historical truth, and he replaced dogmatic Christianity with a religion based upon community and humanity. Feuerbach claimed that the Christian God was simply a product of man seeking to imagine perfection. He believed that the greatest and most important feeling in nature was the love between fellow human beings. Eliot felt the moral teachings of Jesus were beneficial but concluded that the Bible itself consisted of "mingled truth and fiction". She was also hugely influenced by the 'positive' philosophies of Auguste Comte who promoted human altruism, solidarity and the progressive improvement of the world through human goodness. Despite Eliot's changing thinking she presented a slightly ambiguous figure as she remained much attached to the Bible. Hennell had claimed Christianity to be "the purest form yet existing of natural religion" and Eliot herself judged it as "the highest expression of the religious sentiment that has yet found its place in the history of mankind". Her novels in fact became increasingly more religious in content and filled with Biblical allusion and imagery.
In Eliot's Silas Marner Lantern Yard is described as a "narrow religious sect" (9). This description is suggestive of a Calvinistic emphasis on the doctrine of salvation through election. The community's belief in the explicit power of the supernatural mean they are intrigued by Silas's peculiar fits and single him out for a special role. Eliot presents Silas as a confused soul in response, not wishing to exaggerate his experiences and uncertain how to interpret them. He describes himself as being "not in the body, but out of the body" (12) a reference to the apostle Paul (2 Corinthians 2:1-3) talking of visions and revelations from God. The occasions when Silas has his trances are important; namely when he is waiting by the deacon, which leads to his downfall and when Eppie appears in his home, which is his reward. So I think the biblical allusion demonstrates the importance of the trances as visions and revelations from God or a higher being. The people's response is to accept it as supernatural guidance and intervention, something they eagerly desire as they draw lots later on.
By comparing Silas and William Dane's friendship with that of David and Jonathan, (1 Samuel 18:1-4) Eliot is investing their relationship with a special significance. Yet Eliot portrays Dane as the manipulative, superior partner and Silas as the unsure innocently influenced youth. Dane is "faultless" (10) in Silas's eyes, whose weakness is to "admire imperativeness and lean on contradiction" perhaps a scathing reference to Proverbs 3:5 as an image of the Christian life being one of swapping any intellectual critique in place of trust. Silas and Dane discuss assurance of salvation, and Dane's reference to a supernatural viewing of the words "calling and election sure" (11) from 2 Peter 1:10 is a clear example of the community's Calvinistic tendencies. Yet also it shows an unbalanced understanding of the doctrine that was perhaps typical of the confusion over the subject in Eliot's day. The doctrine of God's sovereignty in predestination is to be held in conjunction with people being held responsible for their actions on earth and having the choice to believe or not believe in the rescue provided by Jesus. Yet Dane's viewing suggests that one must discover whether one is chosen or not; in his case possessing "unshaken assurance" leaving Silas with an honest and anxious claim of his "hope mingled with fear". Silas's anxiety over his future is reminiscent of Eliot's own feelings when she explained that "at each moment I tread on the chords that will vibrate for weal or woe for all eternity"
. Through the biblical discourse, Eliot has created an uncomfortable 'spiritual' atmosphere for Silas, one that represents an aspect of Christian thinking in her time, and one that both she, and Silas, are happy to abandon.
Dane suggests Silas's cataleptic fit is from the Devil, exhorting him to remove the "accursed thing" from within his soul. Eliot is making a reference to Joshua 7 when after the siege of Jericho; Achan is condemned to death for violating God's covenant by stealing possessions devoted to destruction. Dane's harsh biblical language provides him with the authority to suggest that Silas's inner evil and will are against God. Dane also questions Silas over anything he might have done to "give Satan an advantage" (13) a reference to 2 Corinthians 2:11 where Paul is discussing forgiveness, and calls the people to forgive each other so that Satan might not outwit them. Dane uses this passage written to a community and focuses on a battle taking place in the "secret chambers" of Silas's heart, employing a biblical reference to an imagined incident that cannot be proven. Later on in the novel Silas refers to Dane as "mine own famil'ar friend in whom I trusted, had lifted up his heel again' me" (144) taken from David's Psalm 41:9. Yet David was able to continue and say "But you, O Lord, have mercy on me" whereas Dane's malign treatment of Silas leads him to lose his faith in God. Throughout Silas's accusation, he repeats the phrase "God will clear me" being confident of his innocence, yet the lots fail to provide the divine intervention of justice that Silas expects but instead suggest Dane's manipulation of the nave religious community. Silas's distress at his "disappointed faith" (14) seems the inevitable reaction to the lots which falsely proclaim Silas's guilt. When Silas relays the events later to Dolly, she summarizes by saying
Dolly's unconventional way of referring to God in his Trinitarian form perhaps suggests poor understanding or intelligence rather than familiarisation, yet I think Eliot is emphasizing her innocent care for Silas in opposition to the seemingly distant or non-existent God. On one hand Eliot is showing Dolly's naivety and therefore the manipulation of the Raveloe church, but on the other hand, the church that does not take doctrine too seriously is congratulated because it is mostly concerned for the community companionship and goodwill that Eliot believes in.
Silas's deep felt anger at the injustice so infuriates him, he proclaims, "There is no just God that governs the earth righteously, but a God of lies, that bears witness against the innocent" (14). This unequivocal blasphemy denies the God of the Bible and reminds the reader of Job who cried out to God for mercy and yet received none despite his innocence. Job was a rich and powerful man, blameless and upright and a man who feared God. Yet God let Satan test him and took away all he had. Job never cursed God in quite the same way as Silas but still despaired at the God who he claimed "denied me justice" (Job 27:22). Job is encouraged by his wife to curse God but he never did and God rewarded him by revealing to him his sovereignty, answering his call for a mediator between God and man in Jesus Christ and rewarding him by giving him twice as much as he originally had. Although Silas's experience does in fact lead him to reject God (who Eliot claims does not exist) he in the same way is innocently punished and yet rewarded. Silas's comforters (80) are also reminiscent of Job's and both have friends, in Dane and Eliphaz who suggest that their judgement is just, due to their actions. The rich comparison of the two and Silas's new discovery of community life introduces the god of Eliot's humanitarian religion, the god of love between humans in relationship to each other. Silas is not only originally comforted by the people of Raveloe after 15 years but it is through the mysterious gift of Eppie that he is enabled to gain his reward, the experience of real love from human care and affection.
After Silas's gold is taken from him all he can do is expectantly "watch for the morning" (59), a biblical image (Psalm 130:6) exhorting people to put their hope in the Lord's redemption. This comes as the gold metamorphoses into Eppie, Hepzibah is the name given in Isaiah 62:4 to confirm God's covenant with his people that they will be righteous. Eppie's arrival is the turning point in the novel, and for Silas this means the discovery of himself and life within the community; a life of "pure peace and joy" (143). Eliot uses the image of the transfiguration, where Jesus was seen in all his glory alongside Moses and Elijah (representing the law and the prophets) showing that he was the Christ (anointed one), to show Silas's own self-realisation. He has now grasped fully his life and its meaning.
The last paragraph at the end of chapter 14 is vital to understanding Eliot's critique of religion. She is clearly discussing religion because of her allusion to the "City of Destruction" from Genesis 19 where the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by God because of their grievous sin. It is also a reference to John Bunyan's well known religious novel Pilgrim's Progress (1678), as Christian begins his journey from the City of Destruction. "In the old days" is suggestive of time development; of something that is past and finished. The use of the phrase "there were" is interesting as the reader knows that Eliot does not believe this, I think perhaps she is giving value to former societies who believed this and maybe even hinting ahead of her time in the belief, or lack of belief that truth is relative. "We see no white-winged angels now" unequivocally attacks Christianity, claiming there is no evidence or proof. The statement suggests collective denial, even though at the time this would have been shocking to read as most people had not come to this conclusion about Christianity. Eliot's tone is slightly mocking as she promotes her rejection as logical and seems to be asking others to follow her lead, which is not characteristic of her as she never took great interest in persuading others to doubt their faith. The child's hand depicts the end of religion, substituting it with a human being, but the child is described as innocent and good, as the Romantics depicted children. This comment is against the Evangelical and Calvinist doctrine of original sin, widely discussed at the time, which says that through Adam sin entered the world with the consequence that all humanity is subsequently fallen in nature. So rather than the child being fallen and in nature sinful, it is described as innocent; yet untouched by the world. The "calm and bright land" describes heaven or paradise which is idyllically promoted as doctrine-free and irrespective of the Christian God.
The utopian ending in the Conclusion describes future wealth and prosperity through nature, love and the continuing harmonious working community. There is no possible return to the oppressive and dimly lit Lantern Yard or dogmatic Christianity; instead the philosophies of Feuerbach and Comte are ringing in the readers ears as the future looks bright and glorious. Eliot's overall use of the Bible in Silas Marner demonstrates her belief that dogmatic community will never succeed, but instead the essence of Christianity - the moral teachings of love, are the only lessons that can help modern society.
Thomas Hardy had a not so dissimilar upbringing to Eliot as he also went to church in his youth and he even considered going into church ministry at the age of 25. But as he read more contemporary science, especially Darwin, he became sceptical of Christian dogma and subsequently lost any faith that he might have had. He became an agnostic and he saw the church as an oppressive institution. He was judgemental of some Christian doctrine; especially its strict laws about sex, yet at the same time affirmed Christian charity. Hardy had an extensive knowledge of the Bible and used it often in an ironical way to attack Christianity. Hardy's bleak novels never provided a substitute religion; he believed the universe to be indifferent and only had hope in, along with the positivists, the power of human aspiration and feeling.
Tess of the D'Urbervilles is richly laden with biblical imagery and allusion. Tess's downfall starts before the reader even meets her, her ancient family's legacy is reanimated by the Parson, who reminisces with Tess's father and pronounces "how the mighty have fallen" (9). This clich comes from David's lament for Saul and Jonathan after they had been killed in battle. It immediately places Tess in an ill-fated position and perhaps Hardy uses this allusion to state that it will be through the eyes of the Bible or religion that she will be doomed and condemned. The family are later compared to having fallen like Babylon (100), which is an ironical reference to Revelation 14:8, where Babylon is referring to the adulterous nation who rejected God. Although the Bible is using the word to mean the nation's rejection of God in terms of a marriage relationship, I think Hardy is using it to suggest that literal adultery might be at the root of the D'Urbervilles decline and therefore God's revenge upon adultery and sexual promiscuity.
Tess's mission to re-establish the family name and re-acquaint with the D'Urbervilles is akin to the Old Testament the idea of a kinsman redeemer, where it was the obligation of close relatives to take on responsibility for others in the family in case of special need such as buying out of slavery, redeeming family land or taking care of a widow. Tess is similar to Ruth, who followed her mother-in-law Naomi back to Israel and married her kinsman redeemer Boaz. Tess is compared to Ruth later in the novel (89/Ruth 2) as she works in the fields, but before this she expects Alec to play the part of Boaz, as she cries out "But I - thought you would be kind to me, and protect me, as my kinsman!" (56) Hardy uses this biblical allusion yet Alec, rather than playing the role of Boaz, destroys her. He is instead compared to the "spoiler" (74), an image from Judges 2:14 referring to the people that God used in his anger against Israel after the Israelites had forsaken him and worshipped other gods. By using this image Hardy is in fact condemning any guardian of Tess as negligent or cruel as they render Tess helpless. Hardy asks the question "where was Tess's guardian angel?"(74) And suggests he is asleep like the "ironical Tishbite" said. The Tishbite is Elijah, who in 1 Kings 18:27 proposes that Baal might be sleeping and not responding to his prophet's calls. This passage is a triumph for LORD as God, yet Hardy twists it to condemn even God's existence as Tess is left alone to Alec's menace. The narrator longs for a reason for the tragedy of Tess's rape; even acknowledging a potential wrongdoing on the part of Tess's ancestors. Yet he concludes,
In Exodus 20:5 God promises to punish children for the "sins of the fathers" and Hardy denounces this judgement as inhumane and inexcusable. It leaves the reader with the clear understanding of Hardy's religious scepticism and his overwhelming sympathy for his protagonist.
Hardy introduces the religious text painter to show that Tess is condemned by the church. Hardy felt the church's immovable stance on sexuality was an unnecessary hindrance and unnatural cause of sorrow and suffering in life. His first quote, "THY, DAMNATION, SLUMBERETH, NOT" (2 Peter 2:3) is presumably a call to Tess's imminent judgement, but in its context, Peter is discussing God's judgement upon false teachers and therefore Hardy might be twisting it to accuse the text painter of his unrighteous judgement upon Tess. I think it is most likely that Hardy has taken it out of context because in the MS. version of the novel the text reads "THE, WAGES, OF, SIN, IS, DEATH"
 and the next quote is from the Ten Commandments, condemning adultery (Exodus 20:14) which suggests Hardy wants to show the church's judgement on Tess. His response is to make a scathing attack on the "poor Theology!" (80) that accuses Tess, stating that it "had served mankind well in its time" but is no longer relevant in the current society or the future.
From the outset in the title page Hardy is keen to promote Tess as a "Pure Woman" despite the moral paradox. This is always in conjunction with opposing pernicious Christian teaching; whose standards of morality he claims are "out of harmony with the actual world" (85) and "unknown to the environment" (86). Tess is described as at harmony with nature which Hardy claims puts her much more in tandem with her forefathers than those who abide by the "systematized religion taught their race at a later date" (104). Comte's philosophies are pertinent here as Hardy denounces theology as a humanity-dividing and an anti-society device. He also makes a huge claim by saying that the Bible has only been introduced after original religions, despite its claims to be God's word from the beginning of time. Hardy goes on to claim that the law found in the Bible is in fact only an "arbitrary law of society" having "no foundation in Nature" (279). Hardy backs up his claims in the narrative as he portrays Tess's good nature without doctrine and its negative influence on society's treatment of her. Due to her tragedy, Tess becomes "an alien...though it was no strange land that she was in" (89) and Hardy is happy to use a biblical image (Exodus 2:22) because in fact it is the target of his blame for Tess's situation. Tess is also condemned by the Bible through Angel's parents when they read out Proverbs 31, which describes and proclaims the wife of noble character that they presume Angel has found, but in fact they are damning her.
Yet is through the Bible that Hardy chooses to praise Tess most extravagantly. Angel describes her as "true, and honest, and just, and pure, and lovely" (195) taken from Philippians 4:8. Hardy continually portrays Tess's perfect submission to Angel, including her "Apostolic Charity" (241) taken from 1 Corinthians 13:4-5 written by Paul. Hardy's ultimate praise of Tess is revealed by Izz Huet who says to Angel "nobody could love 'ee more than Tess did!... She would have laid down her life for 'ee" (270). Hardy is depicting Tess as Jesus, whose demonstration of love to the world was to die for its people so that they might be put back into relationship with God. Hardy could not make a stronger biblical allusion than to compare his protagonist with the king of the Bible, extolling her goodness. Yet in doing so, the reader cannot fail to remember Hardy's claim that the Bible and the Church are what are condemning his 'pure' protagonist. This sums up clearly Hardy's overall use of the Bible; his biblical allusions are primarily to describe the book's influence as oppressive and the cause of much suffering for Tess, and its detrimental influence upon society.
The core factors of Eliot's utopian ending spring from the essence of her human religion that has replaced Christianity, that of community fellowship and love. Hardy does not provide an alternative to biblical Christianity, Angel Clare's silence on the matter is notable, but there are perhaps suggestions which represent much of the changing religious and ethical thinking of the time. Angel does not believe in the literal resurrection (as Strauss did not) or the centrality of the cross in the teachings of Jesus, but in the "spirit" (321) of his teachings. His opinions can be seen through Tess, who argues to Alec that "you can have the religion of loving-kindness and purity at least, if you can't have-what do they call it-dogma" (330). This debate focuses on what the consequences are when one decides that there is no God, whether there is any reason or ability to act benevolently towards each other, or whether God's existence is in fact irrelevant. Jesus summarises the law as a love for God and then others. Eliot believed this was selfish love, and immoral because it was only benevolence for a reward. But the law was never given in this context; it was given to Moses after God had rescued the Israelite people from slavery and had made them his own. Therefore the context was never, 'follow these laws in order to get to me or earn my favour' but rather, 'this is how to live in relationship with me.' The motivation for obeying the law was the enjoyment of God's blessing. Eliot fundamentally misunderstood this, and as a result fundamentally misunderstood God's character, seeing him only as an oppressive tyrant and consequently always took her morality out of its context. Both Eliot and Hardy use the Bible as a literary and cultural resource in their novels but they do not seem to appreciate that its morality flows out of its theology, doing violence to its coherency.
The Bible says obeying the law (loving one another) will only come from a motivation to please God as a response to the cross, and will be impossible if there is no help from God, let alone no God. Alec responds to Tess by saying, "I am not going to feel responsible for my deeds and passions if there's nobody to be responsible to". This statement is reminiscent of Frederich Nietzsche's scathing criticism of Eliot for holding onto Christian morality after dismissing the Christian God. Hardy's view is reflected through Tess' response to Alec when she claims he had mixed two different matters , "theology and morals" together which she believed were in fact distinct. A significant problem I find with the atheistic humanism of Eliot and Hardy is that morality and truth become subjective once there is no objective law giver and therefore anybody is able to justify oneself and one's standards as acceptable as there is no objective comparison. As Eliot and Hardy reject God and consciously begin to believe they know best then selfishness takes over and moral standards slip; and I believe that what many people would identify as a decline into increasing decadence in our society today is a testament to this. Eliot and Hardy's search for a religious formula that might unite society, without God, was and ultimately will be fruitless because the morality that they so earnestly sought after already had its context bound up in the character of God.