Michel Foucault's essay 'What is an Author?' has had a massive impact upon how people view the idea of authorship and authority. Foucault claimed that the traditional view of the author was simply a modern construction seeking to exalt the author to an omniscient position. However, he felt that in reality the author has no authority over their text, as the reader cannot know the author and therefore cannot interpret the author's intentions. Moreover, he felt it was unnecessary to know the author's intention; what was more important was for the reader to be able to bring their own meaning and interpretation from the text for their own use. Other Postmodern thinkers have taken this idea further, treating the world as a text and the individuals habiting the world as the readers. The individual has no clear authority or standards by which to interpret the world and is consequently left to discover 'truth' for themselves, and to live in a way which best serves themselves and their needs. Sigmund Freud thought that in view of death, the central motivation for the individual in life was the feeling of desire and pleasure. In addition, Jacques Lacan said that at the core of human identity is a sense of lack, knowledge that we will never be fulfilled, therefore desire is not the product of the search but the point of it; the individual desires desire. The Modern subject, in light of the death of God and religion, searched for reason and truth, believing they could be found in science, philosophy and in the benevolence of mankind. The Postmodern individual, unconvinced by the reality of altruistic humanism, became fluid, hybrid and fragmented. At the heart of Postmodern subjectivity is the need to define oneself against the 'other'; the need to find self fulfilment and realisation.
Modern and Postmodern thought derives from the idea that religion is dead, and in view of human death being the end of life (if religion is dead, so is the afterlife) come the philosophies for the present age. It is interesting that much of this thought is also taught in the Bible, the book which Postmodern thinkers see as ancient and transient. The writer of Ecclesiastes claims that life under the sun (without God) is in fact meaningless and impossible to understand. The pursuit of pleasure brings no satisfaction, we do not know what will happen when we die and yet we feel and desire to live. The apostle Paul writes to the church in Corinth that if death is the end and there is no resurrection then  "Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we die"
. Although both the Biblical writers are arguing that in fact death is not the end, they can see that if it is, then they are in agreement with Freud, Lacan and Foucault that all that is left is instant gratification, desire and self-fulfilment. The subject must find their identity in a fragmented world. The exploration of identity through storytelling and the effects of truth upon identity are the themes of continuity that I will look at in Joseph Conrad's modern novella Heart of Darkness (1899) and Alan Warner's contemporary novel Morvern Callar (1996).
Heart of Darkness is Conrad's novella about the journey of a western seaman, Marlow, and his search into Africa for the explorer Kurtz. Marlow's physical journey is reflective of his psychological journey for truth and meaning that he hopes Kurtz might bring him. The novella is written from the narrator who is listening to Marlow telling his story to a group of men. Marlow is portrayed as a thoughtful, insightful, meditative idol (p.16). He is compared to a Buddhist preacher (p.20), one who is enlightened and has a voice, able to explain the world to his followers. However, the narrator fears he will only be expounding one of his "inconclusive experiences" (p.21) which would be the result of attempting to understand an "incomprehensible world" (p.20). The white man was viewed as a god-like figure, a civilized being. Yet when Marlow arrives in Belgium, the western city reminds him of a sepulchre (or tomb), an image that suggests an outward adornment of beauty and civility, but an inward shallowness and depravity. Marlow himself is losing confidence in his own understanding and interpretations as he tells how the injustice of exploitative colonialism that he encountered would slowly have an effect on his view of humanity. "For a time I would feel that I belonged still to a world of straightforward facts; but the feeling would not last long." (p.30)
He has given up hope of finding any meaning in the west, cautious of the noble idea of the civilizing mission and sceptical of his aunt's view of him as an apostolic "emissary of light" (p.28). Conrad describes Marlow's journey as one into hell, as the women in the waiting room to see the doctor guard "the door of darkness" (p.26). He is aware of the dangers of the psychological impact of his journey, he feels he is becoming "scientifically interesting" (p.40) and he had been warned before by the doctor that "the changes take place inside" (p.27). Marlow struggles to narrate his story, despairing at his "impossible" (p.50) task, unable to become more than a silent voice in the pitch dark.
Marlow realises his need to find understanding and although he recognises his own limitations of expression, he believes that he can find this wisdom in Kurtz. Kurtz is portrayed as an enigmatic god-like figure, the man who has become an idol for the local peoples and an inspiration for all those who hear of him. Marlow's greatest fear is that he will "Never hear him" (p.79). He has not been thinking about meeting or seeing him, but hearing him. For Kurtz has,
The image of Kurtz here is of a deity; he has a voice, which the Bible describes is the method (the voice of God) by which God effects his power in creation, revelation and bringing life. Kurtz is being specifically compared here to Jesus; he has a voice that Marlow believes is able to enlighten the darkness of the world. As Marlow does not have the expression that brings understanding, it becomes his destiny, or pilgrimage, to hear Kurtz.
The Russian, who Marlow meets before he encounters Kurtz, tells him that "You don't talk with that man - you listen to him" (p.88). Although he claims that Kurtz has indeed "enlarged my mind" (p.90) there is a hint that the result of hearing him has indeed left him still without hope or understanding. 'He waved his arm, and in the twinkling of an eye was in the uttermost depths of despondency' (p.88). This phrase is a biblical reference to the final triumph of the resurrection, the moment when all hope and joy in life is fulfilled but Conrad associates it with an epiphany of despair, a fall to utter hopelessness. Marlow continues to have faith in his meeting with Kurtz, but as his journey evolves and he finds out more about his methods he becomes increasingly distressed and antipathetic towards him. The anti-climax that the Russian's despondency predicts comes true in Kurtz's final revelation before he dies. As he lies in the despair of darkness, he experiences a "supreme moment of complete knowledge" (p.112), his last words, the hope that Marlow has, are "The Horror! The Horror!" (p.112) The god-figure is dead, the voice is gone and his revelation is ambiguous and at best a bleak summary of the world that he has left behind. The discovery that their shared fate is simply oblivion is the "appalling face of glimpsed truth" (p.113) that Marlow discovers which maligns his belief in humanity and mankind.
The loss of the voice, the narrator and the author at the end of Heart of Darkness destabilises the framework of Marlow's mind and his outlook on society. When he returns to Europe he views people's lives as meaningless, filled with "insignificant and silly dreams" (p.114). Foucault predicts this effect when he sees the death of the author. The loss of the central and authoritative figure creates disharmony and instability leaving the reader with no answers and no centre. The centre or the 'heart' is no longer knowable, but in fact filled with darkness. When there is no longer the god-like figure, the self becomes fragmented and unsure of anything, death is the only common fate and life must be understood subjectively. At the end of the novella we see that in effect, Marlow has been searching for something that was not actually there. Lacan's theory is relevant here because although the point of his search is intangible, he would say that he has been searching for desire. He is fulfilled in the sense that although from the beginning an answer was never there, in his journey he has desired it, and filled his sense of lack.
Alan Warner's existential novel  Morvern Callar begins when the main protagonist Morvern finds her boyfriend having committed suicide and examines the issues of the morality of her reaction in a seemingly valueless and hedonistic society. The novel begins where Heart of Darkness finishes; with the death of the author, the creator and God. Morvern's boyfriend remains nameless but is referred to with the divine capital "Him" (p.7). He is the author who has written a novel which he leaves with Morvern and he is the creator of the model village of their town which is in the loft of their apartment, where his divine body lies. The reader never hears his voice; his life and death are left in Morvern's hands, and he becomes her story. Morvern is an orphan, unaware of her biological parents and born into a vacuum, with no grounding, stability or history. She keeps her boyfriend's death a secret and then claims authorship of his work. Throughout the novel, there is a clear emphasis on the narrative voice; in the Mantrap, Lanna and Tequila Shiela recall their ex-boyfriend stories, at the Kale Onion Hotel the main event is Panatine's 'finger' story and Couris Jean is keen to reminisce with Morvern about her arrival at the port. All the characters exist and find their identity in storytelling, a discourse which gives them order, meaning and coherence in the midst of an unstable confused world. The god-like figure is dead and consequently people have a sense of lack and desire for it to be filled. The story with its notion of order replaces God and the peace and stability found in the godhead. The narrative voice is what the characters strive for, which is why Morvern is so keen to hear what Couris Jean had said before she died, and why it is so tragic that she dies speaking an incomprehensible language. Towards the end of the novel as Morvern becomes increasingly isolated, the storytelling diminishes and all Morvern can hear is the "silentness" (p.221).
Foucault argues that because the author is dead then the individual must interpret the world subjectively. The individual becomes inward and self-interested. This is demonstrated clearly through the narrative by Morvern's meticulous description and fascination of her physicality. The sensuous narrative continually describes Morvern washing, doing her nails, going to the toilet, applying her lipstick and shaving her legs. Her inward-looking fascination with herself and her body reaches the extent that she feels separate from it; when she has sex she says "I let them do anything to me and tried to make each as satisfied as I could" (p.26). The emphasis here during such a physically binding passionate act, is the disconnection of her body from her mind and the base instinct of self and not mutual gratification. Morvern's world is the youth culture of sex, drugs and alcohol. Her music is central to her identity; guiding and encapsulating her. The 'Utopian Experience' (p.73) of the club scene is another escape from reality, a "huge journey in that darkness" (p.203) where the music takes over and "You didn't really have your body as your own" (p.203). She searches for experience by using up her boyfriend's money  and enjoys all the pleasures of the hot island sunbathing, drinking and clubbing youth-culture, not even wishing to sleep in order that she can "know every minute of that happiness" (p.210).
The fragmented, blurred and illusory identities of the characters in the novel are signified by the use of nicknames. The individuals create and re-create their subjective identity through a process of deferral from reality. The alienated self must find definition through different 'others'. Another example is the individual as consumer; Morvern is closely connected with her favourite drink Southern Comfort, her Silk Cut brand of cigarettes and her gold lighter. Her constant cycle of re-identification is portrayed by her evolution from Silk Cut onto Regals, then Sobranie and then by the end she has given up smoking. The most explicit image of the fragmented self is Morvern's boyfriend's body being cut up and spread all across the land. The cycle of the characters' lives revolve around their meaningless jobs and their nights out, with set venues and structures to their entertainment. The definition that Trevor gives to describe his group of friends is simply "We drink" (p.128). Red Hannah laments the "the world we've made" suggesting that despite the seemingly endless opportunities of self-fulfilment "There is no freedom, no liberty; there's just money" as he bemoans his "wasted life" (p.45).
I would like to suggest that Morvern Callar demonstrates the implications of Foucault's theory and the world that is created in the wake of it. When there is no author or God, there is no objectivity, moral standards, and truth. One of Morvern's most questionable actions is when, after keeping her boyfriend's suicide a secret, she cuts up his body and distributes it over the countryside. The narrative during her exercise portrays her as a nave, innocent and playful youth.
The narrator gives no moral judgement; she is a child performing what many might see to be a transgressive act, but as though she were playing a game or carrying out a banal task. Without responsibility to an objective moral standard the individual is left to judge moral actions on conscience alone and the more standards are suppressed the fewer there are and the less immanent one's conscience is. In a society where there are no rules, her actions are justifiable. Even her claimed ownership of the novel is an attempt to find an identity, an attempt of self fulfilment which the Postmodern thinker presumably must applaud.
Warner's lack of moral criticism opens up the question of whether or not Morvern has any choice in the way she acts. What happens to morality and ethics when there is no centre? How does one identify oneself when there is no one to be accountable to? It could be argued that the society created, and therefore Morvern, is simply amoral, rendering her innocent, blameless and unaware of any harmful consequences of her actions. However, I would argue that our individual consciences would point us to the distinction between right and wrong. If someone were to sadistically rape, beat and cut up a young child, then it would take great courage (or lack of courage) for an individual to claim no objective wrongdoing. Our objective ability to see a clear wrong action indicates an objective moral standard that is not controlled by the individual or the state. I grant that perception and recognition of wrong actions may become increasingly unknowable, as in Morvern's case, but I think that is a self inflicted state to begin with, as one persistently disregards one's conscience. Morvern may well be a product of her society, but that does not render her or her society innocent. It is no great intellectual or practical attribute of any individual or society to confuse morality with immorality, or to confuse right with wrong.
Foucault is correct that one cannot know dogmatically the intentions, the circumstances and the thoughts of an author. However, there is a difference between exhaustive and correct knowledge. The reader's inaptitude to know the whole context does not mean they cannot know some of it. Enough evidence can lead to a correct conclusion, without having perfect proof. As human beings, we may not share all circumstances together, but it is not a fair conclusion to say that we have nothing in common, as we are equally human. Foucault makes an illogical assumption that because meaning and interpretation will be open to some question, it is impossible to communicate any meaning faithfully. In effect, if Foucault's theory were true, then we would not be able to read his own essay and understand it so coherently. Foucault leaves the individual as a helpless, alienated and incommunicative being. However, one does not need to look too far to see communication everywhere, whether by translation, signs or systems; not perfectly, but successfully.
In conclusion, I have argued that Heart of Darkness represents the modern journey to Foucault's argument that the objective authorial figure is dead, and Morvern Callar illustrates the outworking of the theory. The Modern subject fails in their search to find order and stability in the world and is left darkly disillusioned and empty. The Postmodern subject seeks to fulfil the 'self' in a desperate conquest to find meaning and identity, a search that has become helplessly subjective. The individual, if Foucault is right, is left to act alone in a bleak world that has become incommunicative, de-stabilised and seemingly meaningless, despite their inner need for communication, order and morality.