George Moore experienced many problems with the circulating libraries and publishers when seeking to publish his novel Esther Waters. Some of his earlier works such as A Modern Lover (1884) had been deemed not suitable for family readership due to their lack of "moral proportion" and consequently some of them were banned. I would like to discuss why Esther Waters in particular was so shocking to its original readers, and what it has to do specifically with its heroine. I feel it would also be interesting to compare Esther with Hardy's heroine Tess (Tess of the D'Urbervilles 1891) as similar figures in society, yet who experience contrasting ends.
George Moore (1852-1933) was the son of an Irish landowner and racehorse breeder, and with little early education, he was hardly literate at 16 years old. After his father died he went to study in Paris and during his time in France he was influenced greatly by the young artists and writers of the time. He was particularly influenced by the social realist novelists, such as Zola and Balzac, who were interested in the idea of 'telling the truth' and exposing social injustice. As a novelist, Moore saw his role as writing "contemporary history, an exact and complete reproduction of social surroundings of the age we live in". When composing Esther Waters, he wrote to a friend that "people have always written how servants worry us. I am going to write about how we worry servants". When considering why the novel was so shocking, it is important to consider the context of the Victorian period that Moore was writing in. Samuel Johnson had proclaimed a century before "for vice is necessary to be shown, should always disgust" and the novel was certainly a place where the narrative was strictly used to make moral judgements. Chastity was the "cardinal value" and any character that did not conform was normally given a minor role and would face a tragic consequence. Yet in Esther Waters, the central protagonist is an illiterate female, a working class servant and a single mother with an illegitimate child. On all accounts the main subject of Moore's novel is shocking.
Tess is also a 'fallen woman', a single mother and a working servant and she faces similar plot circumstances. Yet Tess, who is distinct above her peers by her beauty and descent, faces the tragedy of her child dying, marrying and killing her seducer and execution at the end. I would like to discuss how Esther's representation is different from Tess' in identical situations, as a suggestion of why their consequences are so different. When Esther gives birth to Jackie, the narrative describes the scene with a high level of subjectivity, although it starts objectively, we soon see the scene and those characters in it from Esther's point of view. We read how she feels and what she thinks as the narrative even stops and starts with her consciousness. The birth, although an illegitimate one, is still seen as a celebration; in stark contrast to Tess' birth, which is not even mentioned. Esther is able to confess her incident to her mother with direct speech clearly and explicitly without pretence, whereas Tess's confession is simply mentioned in the narrative. Tess mournfully procrastinates her confession to Angel and we finally read that "her narrative ended" whereas Esther is forthright and without disguise as she explains the truth to Fred, even dictating a possible response that he might have. In conclusion to the comparison, it is clear that Moore gives Esther the voice, through direct speech and narrative focalisation, to express her feelings and actions, in contrast to Tess who is the passive recipient of her circumstances.
Esther's frankness also raises the controversial question of whether she is even repentant or not. An argument against would suggest that, especially compared with Tess, she is more concerned in persevering forward and providing for her child, than to be sorry for her actions. Yet I think her faith and understanding of God's character, although possibly small, provides her with an acknowledgment of both her wrongdoing and also her forgiveness. Throughout the novel, Esther fights for her actions and situation as she defends her child as blameless and even challenges other people's treatment of her. Moore allows Esther the voice without much comment, yet when he does comment, he does not condemn her, but praises and commends her as "heroic" and criticises society's own part in her struggle.
Lastly, it is worth looking closely at how else in the text Esther is given a voice.
The narrative in the paragraph "Esther looked... William-"
 begins objectively, yet it soon slips into Esther's voice as we gain access to her thoughts, how things are to her, how they effect her and her responses to them. The narrative describes "Miss Mary", Esther's name for her friend, it gives us Esther's moral judgment of the activities and then stops sharply as Esther hears voices and loses her train of thought. Hardy writes long, dense scene-setting paragraphs that, although Tess may be in the scene, are completely distant from and regardless of her, whereas Moore is always concerned (often through Esther's use of rhetorical questions) with Esther in a situation. At Derby Day, we do not read much about the horse racing itself, because Esther does not know much about it, instead Moore depicts the hustle and bustle of the crowd because it interests Esther.
Chapman writes that "the reader is aligned with Esther as she experiences her story" and because she is the controlling consciousness of the novel, the reader is encouraged to sympathise and appreciate her struggle rather than condemn her-an incredibly unique and shocking experience for the Victorian reader.