The term 'Romanticism' was not recognised as a distinct movement or object of study until the late nineteenth century. During this period there were a number of revolutions, political, cultural and literary. However, Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron Shelley and Keats, often referred to as the 'big six' by no means regarded themselves as a unified group and were actually much divided in their political, religious and artistic beliefs. John Blades notes that whilst these recognisable figures of Romantic poetry were aware of each others' work, "they did not form a recognisable group with anything like a united artistic manifesto." They did, however, share a strong opposition to the rigid and artificial diction of the Neo-Classical literary movement of the eighteenth century and strove to create poetry which would illustrate "a natural delineation of human passions, human characters and human incidents." Politically, the Romantics were against authoritarian government and favoured democracy. They were also attracted to Rousseau and Godwin's campaigns in the cause of humanity. Emotionally, they expressed an extreme assertion of the self, the value of individual experience and the dynamic nature of the imagination.
It is vital to reinforce that although the 'Romantic poets were united in their resistance' to eighteenth century literary culture, "it would be misleading to describe them as a combined 'school'". This 'pluralism' of ideals is one way in which the Romantic poets differed greatly from their predecessors of the Neo-Classical movement, whose united, rational ideals were in great contrast to those of the Romantic period. Where the Romantics considered it to be "the honourable characteristic of poetry that its materials are to be found in every subject which can interest the human mind", Neo-Classicism generalised about people and was inclined to assume that "all people were in essence uniform", thus disregarding the areas of human interest that were central to Romantic poetry. It 'diminished the importance of individual perception and expression, in exchange for conformity and mechanistic formalism.
The way in the Romantic poets 'revolutionised' such rational and structured ideas is abundantly evident in William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge's Lyrical Ballads, "arguably the most important single volume of the romantic period" which "signalled a literary revolution." In his 'Advertisement' (1798) for the anthology, Wordsworth wrote of the poems: "They were written with a view to ascertain how far the language of conversation in the middle and lower classes of society is adapted to the purposes of poetic pleasure." Wordsworth and Coleridge did not use the format of the couplet which dominated eighteenth century poetry but wrote in quatrain, hymn - like ballad form, and experimented with other poetic structures. Furthermore, they wrote in simple verse which was in direct contrast to the popular periphrasis used extensively by eighteenth century poets such as Pope, Swift and Sheridan. In the Preface Wordsworth contrasts these two types of language describing the latter as "arbitrary and capricious habits of expression....to furnish food for fickle tastes, and fickle appetites, of their own creation."
These new modes of expression are directly linked to the Romantic revolution in aesthetic perspective and attitude towards previously ignored areas of "artistic interest, namely the imagination and intuition."
The 'revolutions' of the Romantic period are often viewed to have been partially inspired by the ideals of two key figures, the Swiss philosopher Jean-Jaques Rousseau and William Godwin, an English essayist and political idealist who shared many of Rousseau's ideas. John Blades argues that Rousseau was "the seminar force in the revolution of thought that produced the Romantics." His focus on the emotional power of nature objection to the artificiality of Neo-Classicism is indeed directly linked to many of the ideals of the Romantic poets who saw nature as a source of inspiration and affection.
Although the Romantics were not revolutionary in their admiration of nature, the way in which they used it as a source of truth and inspiration within their poetry was indeed a literary revolution of the period. Prior to this period, Neo-Classicism wrote of nature as something mundane and almost lifeless. This movement remained rooted in Greek and Roman models of interpretation, and as a result, "the pastoral was a fairly conventional, flattened vision of bucolic life." In contrast to this the romantics saw in nature a much greater power and were largely interested in the moral powers of nature and the way in which they could affect the human psyche and conscience. By and large the Romantics saw nature as an educational force in human morality:
Both Wordsworth and Coleridge took this idea further in the Lyrical Ballads through the poems 'The Dungeon' (Coleridge, extracted from 'Osario', 1797) and Wordwoth's 'The Convict' (1796). Prison reform was a topical issue in the politics of the time during which these poems were composed. Both poems illustrate the Romantic belief in "the experience of being harmonized and healed by nature." Coleridge writes of contemporary prison conditions:
Wordsworth echo's his colleague's argument in his own poems, asserting nature's moral power on the human mind:
This relates to the way in which the Romantics regarded nature as "potentially the landscape of the mind itself; they believed that nature contained transcendent truths, which could condition the human mind in a way that the Urban or social environment of the period could not.
The Romantics vision of nature was also revolutionary in the way in which it contradicted greatly the political and cultural revolutions for the period. For Wordsworth in particular, the industrial revolution, expansion of cities, and technological advances created a distinct feeling of 'alienation', whereby the individual became mechanised and distanced from aspects of 'natural' humanity. He observed the way in which time became disciplined and the way in which the division in labour within factories 'alienated' man from their craft. This is largely evident in Wordsworth's poem 'Composed Upon Westminster Bridge.' Wordsworth's poem has been described as "...a celebration of the wealth, power and beauty of London." The grandiose language evokes what might be regarded as a pompous celebration of the power of the city, and in a sense suggests that what is in essemce 'artificial' is a pinnacle of human achievement. However, it is perhaps more accurate to read the aesthetic terminology employed as emphasising the external purity and natural beauty of the city. It is interesting to read Dorothy Wordsworth's account of the same moment and image. Her statement, "The houses were not overhung by their cloud of smoke" implies that industrialisation had started to have a significant effect on London. Indeed the poem was written at a time of a "gradual convergence of imperialist and capitalist practices in the process of modernization," during which occurred an "overall change in attitudes, perspectives, relations, knowledges and practices."
Wordsworth's sonnet images London as a 'spot of time', a momentary and temporary snapshot vision of the capital city. This technique for Wordsworth was a form of escape from "the multitude of causes unknown to former times." He regarded it as a "'feeble endeavour' to resist the changes taking place [in Britain] by appealing to Nature as an alternative." What Wordsworth was reacting against was the artificial and constructed state of urban culture and humanity of the modern time. In Westminster Bridge, "the naturalization of the artificial would represent the ultimate victory of both the spot of time and the natural poet over the process of modernization." The use of the spot of time concept creates a distinctly still and isolated image.
In his sonnet, it is quite apparent that Wordsworth seems only to find beauty in the city in the absence of urban activity; his aesthetics seem only to work on the basis of human absence. Makdisi suggests that the "natural bowers" in Wordsworth's poetry work as spots of time "by virtue of their opposition to the "artificial" and unnatural world of humanity as the latter had been corrupted in the age of modernization." It is through "the people, the practitioners and producers of the space of London that Wordsworth sees the difference between country and city." Indeed, in the absence of human life, Wordsworth brings the city and the countryside closer together. He achieves this through the transformation of the cityscape into a "naturalized and greened landscape." The "Ships, towers, domes, theatres and temples" are juxtaposed with "fields", "valley, rock" and "hill" and there appears to be no distinction between the two. It is only through the absence of urban and human activity that Wordsworth can find such beauty to write about, and articulate through this beauty his opposition to the effects of modernisation.
One immediate observation that can be made about Wordsworth's sonnet is its emphasis on the external, natural beauty of the city, a vision evoking an emotional response. "This City... All bright and glittering" creates in the narrator "a calm so deep". The equation drawn between the visible sense and inner emotion, here, begins with the external appreciation of beauty and nature, a common feature in Romantic poetry. One literary revolution of the period was the way in which the Romantic poets found in nature a transcendental quality. Nature seemed to take on a "mystical or religious significance, possessing power and radiance, nature becomes transfigured into something actually beyond the power of man to comprehend or rationalise." In Coleridge's poem 'The Nightingale: A Conversational Poem, he writes that "In nature there is nothing melancholy."
Rousseau and Godwin also inspired the Romantics in their fervent campaigns in the cause of humanity. Blake's concept of the abstract was strongly related to Wordsworth's notion of 'alienation'. Blake believed that the way in which 'abstract' labelled people conceptually was the direct opposite to humanity, which showed compassion and empathy for the individual. Blake was the earliest of the major romantic poets and used a new distinctive style of poetry to combine politics and literature. His 'Songs of Innocence' and 'Songs of 'Experience' express his own anxieties about the modern world. Blake's exultation of humanity was deliberately opposed to the effects the Age of Enlightenment had on society at large. The scientific discoveries of Isaac Newton about the workings universe as an independently functioning mechanism encouraged the view that universal laws existed "behind all things, including art and ethics." People began to use and place the notion of the Universe over individuality and humanity; the individual self was seen as almost insignificant. In his poetry Blake attempts to bring everything back into the human form through the belief that it is through man that the Universe can perceive and contemplate itself. Blake's 'Songs of Innocence' were not intended to suggest that a pure view of nature and humanity can only be found through a child's eyes, but that people can chose at anytime to contemplate and understand the world in such a way; humanity is more important than laws and science which form the 'abstract':
In this poem, Blake refers to the way in which man was made in God's image and that is through humanity itself that people can relate to God. Religion was also an area of great contempt within the Romantic period. This is illustrated greatly in Blake's works. It was not against Christianity that Blake was writing, but against the institution of the church and the way in which it was inaccessible to most people. In his poem 'I saw a Chapel all of Gold' Blake suggests that the psychology of religion and sexuality at this time is bound, giving a critique of the destructive ideological way that sexuality had been conceptualised. The image of a chapel was itself sometimes used to represent female genitalia or sexuality, which during this period was highly valued and regarded as something that should be protected. The way in which the 'serpent' is imaged to ejaculate, "Vomiting his poison out / On the bread and on the wine" is a direct attack on the corruption, or abstraction of the church. At the end of the poem the speaker retreats "into a sty/ And laid me down among the swine." In the Bible, pigs are ritually unclean; hence this action of sleeping in a pig sty rather than the church is an extremely strong attack on religious institution.