The Renaissance period saw a significant change in the way in which people viewed themselves. An increase in focus upon the individual generated various perspectives on the 'self', both public and private. The period also witnessed key developments in literature. Writers developed "new genres to fashion a self, to describe other persons, or to present a personal vision of the world... The works produced are often intimate and personal but at the same time serve political and public purposes." There are several areas in which to explore this often conflicting interplay between the public and private 'self', namely love and social manipulation. This essay will explore both the contextual background of the development of such ideas and how they were constructed in literature of the time
Humanism was a movement that lay at the heart of the fifteenth century Renaissance in Italy. Italian humanists believed that God had given man a central position in the Universe, and that man could freely decide to degenerate into the innately brutish or aggressive character of man as described by Thomas Hobbes, who regarded a man's life to be essentially "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short." This belief was dominant throughout the medieval period and encouraged people to believe that whatever their situation was at birth, it could not be changed. However, Humanist readings of Plato and Homer generated the belief that man could choose himself to be, or do good, or to be bad, or evil; humans were not governed by destiny or absolute values, but could determine their own fate.
Education was essential in man's pursuit to better himself. Humanists designed new, much broader curriculums, and the Renaissance saw an increase in the amount of schools. This is particularly evident in England in the development of grammar schools across the country. In Marlowe's drama Doctor Faustus, the protagonist, Faustus embodies all the characteristics of an educated Renaissance man. In his first speech he illustrates his extensive reading and knowledge in logic, physics, law and theology. He also embodies the art of rhetoric within his speeches throughout the play, a literary technique used greatly by other writers of the period such as Thomas Wyatt and Erasmus a key figure in the development of the 'private' self.
It is an important observation that it was during the Renaissance that the use of the word 'self' as a prefix first arises. Through the rise of humanism and focus on the individual, the 'self' becomes something that can be regulated, enjoyed, but more importantly something that needs to be examined and constructed. The way in which people sought to better themselves individually essentially resulted in a more 'public' sense of image. The art of 'self-fashioning' becomes central to the nature of the Renaissance court; men were 'self-made' and 'self - serving'. Renaissance men and women began to socialise more freely, and more frequently, in order to promote themselves within various social circles. In "The Courtier" Castiglione personified the idealistic view of a courtier, or Renaissance man, who should display a high degree of Sprezzatura. In the Elizabethan court it was the warrior and prolific writer Sir Philip Sidney that embodied this to perfection. J.F.R. Day writes that "Sidney's remarkable writings - Astrophil and Stella, Arcadia, A Defence of Poesy - were...circulated in manuscript as was customary for Elizabethan aristocrats exhibiting their literary sprezzatura." This was also true of Sir Thomas Wyatt, who wrote under Henry VIII, but who lacked Sidney's social extravagance. Buxton wrote of Sidney that "He seemed to his contemporaries to exhibit to perfection those qualities which went to make up the ideal courtier of Castiglione's description, which they wished to emulate..."
However, such public virtue was not always entirely honest, nor natural. Through humanistic beliefs and ideas of Sprezzatura, the art of social mobility became deceitfully constructed and there was a clear element of hypocrisy. The individual consciousness of the public 'self' meant one could manipulate situations in order to benefit oneself through the 'putting on' of different various faces in order to please varying audiences. This generated a strong sense of distrust and unease within the court. It might be argued that to an extent such activities and feelings contributed to the development of literary Machiavellian characters.
In Marlowe's Doctor Faustus it might be plausible to argue that the character of Mephastophilis illustrates this manipulative nature of the Renaissance court through the way in which he uses multiple-forms in order to pursue his own interest. A key example of this is his first appearance. In order to secure the entrapment of Faustus, he complies with the protagonist's command for him to appear as a Franciscan friar. Indeed, Mephastophilis is a very interesting and complex character, who discourages Faustus from pursuing the route to damnation when he tells him that he would rather be in heaven:
Marlowe utilises this intimate scene between Mephastophilis and Faustus, set within the small interior of Faustus's study in such a way that the text is able to comment upon more public issues of contemporary society. This was a technique used by many writers of the Renaissance who frequently accommodated "a new focus on real people and the actual contemporary world." Marlowe continues to play with this notion of self-fashioning at the end of scene four. Fautus's servant Wagner offers to "teach thee [the clown] to turn thyself to anything." The clown's reply subtly infers the fickleness of the court: "No, no sir, if you turn me into anything, let it be in the likeness of a little pretty frisking flea, that I may be here, and there an everywhere!"
In The Duchess of Malfi John Webster's character Bosola also embodies these sel-serving characteristics. However, Bosola's character is far more complex than perhaps that of Mephastophilis; Webster uses this character as a construct to explore and illustrate new contemporary ideas about conscience. Bosola is regarded as the "court gall" who will "rail at things which he wants" and will do anything in order to fulfil his desires. His nature is well illustrated in his soliloquies, a dramatic technique which became very popular during the Renaissance, since they allowed the audience an unmediated access to a character's inner, private thoughts. It was an opportunity for writers to reveal the true 'self' of a key character and illustrate character development. Bosola's complex character is revealed to the audience through the use of this technique to great effect.
Despite Bosola's initial portrayal as an 'evil' character, it is possible to read him as a construct or vehicle within the play, used by Webster to exploit the "price for private security amid court splendour, and also the psychology of a spy." Bosola's public (and private) actions are arguably bourn from a need to survive. M.C. Bradbrook comments upon "Bosola's insecurity, his bitter jesting and self-mockery, his constant, unremitting demands for "reward,"which is always denied him, and finally his love of disguises as a mode of psychological relief." Webster uses Bosola to illustrate the dark, private and cruel "side of political power"; his decision to become an 'invisible devil in flesh' and commit the evils "the ill man can invent" essentially leads to his destruction. Bosola's soliloquies illustrate a conflict of conscience, and though we may perceive a total change of heart at the end of act four, it is more likely that his conscience overrides his private desire for survival and he manipulates his public 'self' in an attempt to rectify the evils he has committed.
Sidney's work Astrophil and Stella clearly illustrates further this conflict between public virtue and private desire. Of Sidney himself, Day writes: "Sidney's obsequies primarily were meant to honour a man who epitomized the best that aristocracy could produce, an aristocracy which theoretically rooted its privileges in virtue and was still keenly aware of its role in society at large." In Sonnet 47, Sidney suggests that privately Astrophil desires only for Stella through lust. In private he admits to himself that he does not love her, but "that eye, / Doth make my heart give my tongue to the lie." He continues to express his false love to appear virtuous in public, but also to secure the fulfilment of his sexual desires.
Sidney utilises the sonnet form in order to express Astrophil's inner thoughts and desires. This format became largely popular during the Renaissance period due to its capacity for exploring the dimensions of the 'self' and illustrating the inner thought processes of an individual. Furthermore it allowed the writer to make some form of public or political comment. Marlowe referred to the sonnets as "infinite riches in a little room". The form attempts to represent the self that lies beneath public self-fashioning, asserting a dimension of interiority. It was largely used during the period to express the frustrations of unrequited love; the deformed 'self' through desire; and aspirations of divine love. In the first sonnet of Sidney's work he writes: "Look into the heart and write". This, in essence, expresses fully the intent of the sonnet form to exploit the spiritual, 'private' workings of the 'self'.
The use of small spaces in literature is evident on different levels, graphologically as in the sonnet form, metaphysically through the use of short spaces of time and in drama, physically. Patricia Fumerton writes that "The history of the Elizabethan self...was a history of fragmentation in which the subject lived in public view but always withheld for itself a 'secret 'room". In Doctor Faustus, the action is focused in the very intimate arena of Faustus's study; only here can he practice the art of magic out of view from those who admire him. This 'private' arena is in great contrast to the way in which Faustus's tragic end is exposed in a very 'public' fashion in front of the play's audience, which in essence is what, it might be argued, makes it so dramatic. Webster uses the effect of small, intimate spaces to great dramatic effect in his tragedy The Duchess of Malfi, a play riddled with secrets and deceit. Many of the most poignant and significant scenes of the play take place within the Duchess's chamber. Webster uses these scenes to create a paradox around which the play revolves. The Duchess, despite partaking in intimate scenes and relationships, both romancantic and dramatic (namely those leading up to her inevitable death) within the chamber, is constantly haunted by her public role and duty as Duchess. In Act One scene three, she justifies her proposal to Antonio and expresses her private torment caused essentially by her public role:
In her final scene in Act four she questions Bosola, "Who am I?... Am not I thy duchess?" In spite of her attempt to assert the power of her position when she states, "I am Duchess of Malfi still", Webster's use of the intimate setting enforces that indeed she is trapped, like "a lark in a cage". Peter Washington examines this conflict between the Duchess's private and public 'self'; the "gap between the way in which the heroine perceives herself and the ways in which others see her. To Antonio she is a chaste saint, to her brothers a potential whore, to herself simply a woman who wishes to fulfil her natural desires."
It is possible explore further Webster's dramatisation of the public and private 'self' through the nature of the Duchess's tragedy and questioning whether it is the person or the role of the Duchess we see suffer. Washington argues that in fact it is the latter, "a stripping away of attributes gathered together under the Duchess's name." He contxtualises his argument suggesting that her title has little significance prior to the "reality of death". Indeed, throughout the play, despite her own private statements of authority, her public 'self' appears to have very little control and thus her character seems more confined to her private persona. It is only in her tragic death scene and throughout the act following her death that her public position seems to have any real effect. This, Washington argues, is "a sententious conclusion characteristic of Jacobean tragedy's obsession with theme of momento mori. She affirms her [public] identity in the process of losing it."