The given statement proposes a number of ideas using several key terms. This essay will break the question down into sections, defining these terms and arguing to what extent the given opinions can be considered as true. Furthermore, it will explore a range of ideas and techniques within modern literature with reference to Virginia Woolf's Mrs Dalloway and Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness.
It is possible to consider "Modernism" as a cultural phenomenon which permeated both art and literature that was produced during the period. It has also been suggested that works of art and literature that are "accommodated under the umbrella of modernism [...] share a relationship to the modern world which is peculiarly new and exceptional to any other previous cultural and historical condition." Modernism as a period peaked during the early decades of the twentieth century, a time often referred to as "High Modernism". The period was one of innovation and anxiety; excitement and fear; people within the modern society were searching for new answers.
In order to determine whether writers during this period "lost in faith" in narrative, it is important to understand the levels operating within this framework. A number of literary theorists have referred to "narrative" as "a particular form of representation implementing signs"; it is, furthermore, "necessarily bound up with sequence, space and time". Narrative is essentially the mode of sequencing and selecting a set of events determined by the overall "plot". The modern period saw a disruption in narrative continuity; a distinct move away from realist linear narratives. Paul Cobley asserts that "narrative has the potential to be thoroughly captivating", but, as suggested by Peter Brooks, narrative must entail a number of delays or detours. These detours, Brooks argues are "a crucial site of potential enjoyment in a narrative." Both Mrs Dalloway and Heart of Darkness give evidence of such narrative detours, which function to give the texts layers of meaning and embrace the ""thickness" of [modern] experience".
Virginia Woolf regarded narrative structures, particularly the meta-narrative of history, to be gendered as specifically "masculine", and sought to feminise the novel. Hence, it is possible to argue that Mrs Dalloway is in fact an "anti-narrative"; a series of detours tenuously linked together by a fine thread. It is clear that the text pulls strongly against the formal linear, forward drive of conventional narrative structures. However, this is not to say that Woolf "lost faith" in narrative, rather that she wanted to change it. Unlike Conrad's novel, which is essentially driven forward by Marlow's journey, the journeys in Mrs Dalloway seem to occur outside the text; it could be argued that other than the characters' journeys through the streets of London, the only journeys move backwards through memory. Woolf largely marginalises exterior events, using them mainly as mere triggers to direct characters in and out of interior monologues. However, if the key term in defining narrative is that it is the "mode of sequencing and selecting a set of events", Mrs Dalloway, it might be argued does have a narrative structure.
Throughout the novel Woolf employs various techniques of focalisation, whereby the novel moves between several key characters, or focalisers, whose inner thoughts and emotions are conveyed through the third person, but in the absence of an authoritative narrating voice. This method is often referred to as "Free Indirect Discourse", or "Narrated Interior Monologue". Through this technique the city of London becomes part of the consciousnesses of the people who inhabit it. It is thus possible to argue that Woolf has not "lost faith in narrative", but has manipulated the elements of narrative space and sequence in order to present her readers with a multi-dimensional and deeply psychological perspective of the modern world. Of course, the novel is not entirely built upon this technique. Woolf presents us with various levels of representation which guide us into the consciousnesses of the characters, using both direct, and indirect, speech and thought. Although there is no authoritative narrating voice, there is a narrator who subtly guides the reader through the text.
It is possible to apply Walter Benjamin's term "Flaneurs" or "idle stroller" to the individual characters used within Woolf's focalising process, what she called her "tunnelling technique". There appear to be three key "flaneurs": Clarissa Dalloway, Septimus Warren Smith and Peter Walsh. Each of these characters serves to parallel and contrast each other creating a highly complex narrative structure. David Bradshaw considers that, "Even by Woolf's extraordinary standards, Mrs Dalloway is a deeply organized novel." This "tunnelling technique" is evident throughout the novel, whereby an external image will bring return the reader from behind the eyes of one character to a more narrative position and perhaps connect them to a different focaliser. It is such techniques which give the text a sense of structure and a feeling of moving forward. Woolf's novel is a poetic narrative, whereby the diachronic structures of conventional narrative are broken by the application of synchronic, poetic features. This is particularly evident in Septimus's own narrative which is fractured by his own diachronic historical narrative as a soldier, and his synchronic desire to be a poet. Such conflicts throughout the text create a dramatically disintegrated continuum which sets Woolf's work apart from more traditional, "masculine" forms of narrative.
In Heart of Darkness there is also little evidence to support the view that writers of the modern period "lost faith in narrative". Indeed Conrad's narrative is far from being simple, but again it is possible to argue that Conrad has utilised elements of narrative in order to create a "short but rich narrative". Conrad's narrative is problematic partly due to the ambiguity of whose story is being told. Much of the text is spoken by the second narrator, Marlow, who is in turn introduced by a first narrator who remains nameless. It is often questioned whether it is Kurtz's story, as narrated by Marlow, or Marlow's own story, or even the story of the first narrator as he listens to Marlow's tale. However, this is not to say that Conrad has "lost faith in narrative", but that, like Woolf, he experiments with the voices present within the novel as a whole. In his essay, "Discourse in the Novel", Mikhail Bakhtin suggests that the novel can be defined as "a diversity of social speech types, sometimes even diversity of languages and a diversity of individual voices, artistically organised." Bakhtin considered novels to be "heteroglossic"; that is compiled of a number of different voices. It could be argued that Conrad uses the voices of the two narrators to shape his narrative which is dually concerned with the levels of morality and dynamics of imperialism in the modern period, and an exploration into the "fragmentation of the self".
The third level of narrative is that of "time". Paul Ricoeur forms an understanding of time and narrative "as being on intimate terms precisely because narrative is the human relation to time." In both Mrs Dalloway and Heart of Darkness there are two levels of time. In Woolf's novel structural time is indicated throughout the novel by the chimes of Big Ben: "There! One it boomed. First a warning, musical; then the hour, irrevocable." However, there is also a strong sense of temporal time to which Henri Bergson referred as "dure"; the way in which time works inside our heads. Throughout the novel there is a distinct contrast between the public, exterior and structured time, and the temporal time of the characters whose thoughts we follow. This duality of time can also be understood as the actual time of the novel, set in the space of one day - a hot Wednesday in June 1923- and the time outside the novel recorded in the memories of the characters. Ricoeur shares Brook's view of the importance of the "end point of the narrative"; that "the understanding of successive actions, thoughts and feelings in a narrative is dictated by anticipation of the conclusion". In Woolf's novel, the anticipated "end point" is ultimately Clarissa's party for which she spends the large majority of the narrative preparing. It might also be argued that Septimus's suicide is also an anticipated "end-point".
In Heart of Darkness it is also possible to identify two levels of time, stemming largely from the use of two narrators. The first level of time belongs with the first narrator in whose words Marlow's tale is framed. This time is that, in the past, where Marlow and his four listeners are sailing out of the Thames Estuary, and Marlow recites his tale. The second level of time is that of Marlow's narrative which is set further in the past, and is "shaped by the contours of a voyage." This second level of time is further complicated by the nature of Marlow's narrative in which he moves backwards and forwards; it is held together largely by the two divisions between chapters which mark the three stages of his journey and meeting with Kurtz, giving the narrative a more linear drive forwards. Once again, all of the narrated events anticipate Marlow's meeting with Kurtz, an event which is constantly deferred. However, the reader, like Marlow, discovers that indeed this is not the end that was anticipated.
It might be argued that the second part of the given statement, suggesting that the "stories" written at this time were no longer "interesting", could not be further from the truth. Indeed, novels such as Mrs Dalloway observe the lives of "ordinary" people on an "ordinary day". However, the highly imaginative narrative techniques of intertwining and overlapping consciousnesses make the novel one with a wide range of dynamics. Furthermore, the issues raised from the text also provide various areas of interest. Conrad's Heart of Darkness can also be read on several levels: the questioning of imperial morality; the journey into the inner "self"; or even simply as a nautical adventure into unknown lands.
Modernist writers did indeed focus on capturing "mood" and creating "complex characters" but this was not at the expense of narrative, rather it enabled the writer to construct narratives with extremely deep levels of meaning. A key example of the use of mood in this way is the opening of Conrad's Heart of Darkness. As the narrator looks back upstream he comments that "The air was dark above Gravesend, and farther back still seemed condensed into a mournful gloom, brooding motionless over the biggest and greatest town on earth." This "gloom" becomes more "sombre every minute" and when "at last" the sun sets, it does so as if "stricken to death by the touch of that gloom brooding over a crowd of men." The first narrator's description here creates a sinister mood; it also brings into the text what is a key element in many modernist works: the city, in this case is London. Richard Adams suggests that the "inference" in the narrator's commentary" is not that London and everything [...] within its confines are somehow contaminated by the hovering darkness", but that "the darkness is an image or physical embodiment of all that the "monstrous town" (that is devoid of humanity) stands for." The way in which Conrad has captured the contemporary "mood" of the city and his impressionistic use of symbolic imagery is just one of many features of the text which make it an "interesting" story. Frederick Tnnies referred to the urban, modern city as being in a state of Gesellschaft whereby society in the city has become a loose aggregation of people; the term identifies a disintegration of community and sense of alienation. It is possible to suggest that this opening passage of Heart of Darkness powerfully illustrates such feelings that were rife during this period through the capturing of a "mood".
In Woolf's novel, the capturing of mood is quite different. It might be suggested that "mood" in Mrs Dalloway is generated by the characters themselves. The novel considers, among other things the "social and psychological impact" of the First World War. One method used to capture the consequent "moods" is the way in which the present is consistently haunted by the past; Bradshaw writes that: "Like the chiming of Big Ben, the past is both "irrevocable" (pp.4,99) and ever present in Mrs Dalloway. " Clarissa represents a group of people who can "thank heaven" the war is "over". However, there are a number of characters for whom the "hurt is undiminished." In particular, the war lives on inside the psyche of Septimus Warren Smith, whose battle with "shellshock" is a poignant reminder of the horrors of war throughout the novel. The "mood" created by such contrasting attitudes is both tragic and hopeless, evoking empathy for those, like Septimus, who suffer as a result. Bradshaw asserts that "Woolf drives home her sense of the War's ongoing tragic aftermath, its refusal to leave hold of the living" through the "persistence of memory". What is particularly "interesting" about Woolf's technique is the way it embraces the common modernist motif of memory and desire; whilst a majority of the characters show a "desire" to move forward, they are continually lost in "memory".
The final part of the statement points to the construction of "complex characters". In her essay, "Mr. Bennett and Mrs Brown" (1924), Virginia Woolf refers to Mr Arnold Bennett's view that "The foundation of good fiction is character-creating and nothing else [...] If the characters are real the novel will have a chance; if they are not, oblivion will be its portion". However, Woolf's essay is in fact a critique of Mr. Bennett's own methods of "character-creating" which focused largely on exterior description. In her essay "Modern Fiction" (1919), she argues that "an ordinary mind on an ordinary day [...] receives a myriad impression [...]. Life is not a series of gig lamps symmetrically arranged; life is a luminous halo, a semi-transparent envelope surrounding us from the beginning of consciousness to the end." This also provides an argument to support the deliberate restraint to adhere to a linear drive within the narrative. Later she purports the way in which she, herself, would construct her characters in Mrs Dalloway: "Let us record the atoms as they fall upon the mind in the order in which they fall." Much modernist literature shared this tendency to probe "deeper into the unconscious layers of modernity and confront[s] it with its own hidden anxieties." In both Mrs Dalloway and Heart of Darkness this is evident in the creation of "complex characters". Furthermore, it might be argued that it is these characters that, in part, create "interesting stories".
In Heart of Darkness Kurtz, Marlow and his predecessor, Fresleven are the only named characters; every other character is called after their function which might suggest that "they are types rather than strongly individualised figures" emphasising "the symbolic meaning of Marlow's tale." Marlow is clearly the most "complex" character in Conrad's novel, although this is not because of an internal sense of "self", but rather he is complex as a construct. Immediately involved in the text, his own personal reactions to his experiences on his journey to, and in, Africa are "a major aspect of his narrative". It has been much debated as to how close Marlow, his experiences and views are to those of Conrad himself. Some have read Marlow as Conrad's alter ego, although it might be more accurate to understand Marlow as being a complex intermediary between author and text who "subtly directs the reader's response to his tale." It is possible to suggest that Marlow is evidence of Conrad creating characters that resemble human beings; the character contradicts himself a number of times throughout the novel. The most obvious example of such contradictions is how he exclaims: "I hate, detest, and can't bear a lie" yet first lies to the brickmaker, becoming "in an instant [...] a pretence," and more significantly, he lies at the end to Kurtz's Intended when he "laid the ghost of his [Kurtz] gifts at last with a lie". Although a key character, it is debatable whether Kurtz is also a complex character. The tale is told through Marlow's eyes, thus it is only ever his opinions that the reader hears. However, as a construct he remains an important character in demonstrating the "the perversion of idealism that inevitably follows the obstinate and uncontrolled wish to achieve one's end." Marlow functions as a commentator of Kurtz's demise attributing the "transformation from virtue to vice" to the fact that Kurtz's lacks "restraint". Kurtz essentially internalises his "savage" surroundings, exposing his heroic reputation as a lie as the "wilderness seemed to draw him to a pitiless breast" like a dependent baby. Heart of Darkness is ultimately a journey into the self, where by the "heart of darkness" is symbolic of both the unconscious and the Congo. However, it might be argued that what lies beneath the surface consciousness of these characters is never truly exposed; rather Conrad's construction of characters serves to capture the mood of the time.
It is possible to suggest that the narrative of Mrs Dalloway in fact hinges on Woolf's illustrations consciousnesses within the novel's multitude of complex characters. This essay previously referred to three central flaneurs, Clarissa, Septimus and Peter. It might be argued that to some extent these characters are defined by the streets they walk; Clarissa walks in the fashionable shopping centre of Bond Street and is indeed herself a fashionable accessory to social and political power, represented by her husband; Peter journeys through areas of London which are all central and symbolic of imperial power, for example Victoria Street and Trafalgar Square. What is perhaps more interesting when observing Woolf's character constructions, are the parallels that occur between Clarissa and Septimus. Bradshaw suggests that these unfolding links are one of the novel's most "designed aspects" which give the narrative its "deeply organized" structure. One of the dominant threads within the novel is the conflict that these characters share between themselves and the world outside them. Both characters fuse together the internal and external; notions of the "self" and "other", in order to try and make sense of their own realities. Clarissa sees herself as part of her surroundings: "She had the oddest sense of being herself invisible; unseen; unknown". One might suggest that Clarissa's conflict is one of identity; a tension between being the Clarissa from the past, and fulfilling her societal role of Mrs Richard Dalloway. Similarly, Septimus battles with his public role as a heroic war veteran and his private desire to be a student of literature and a poet. Septimus's consciousness is further complicated by the shellshock, or hysteria from which he suffers, a condition supposed to occur only in women. The minds of these characters seem to be "disordered in a similar manner", both of them probing the surface of the external world to find a means of resolving their personal conflicts; for Septimus this is found in death. The fascinating construction of the consciousnesses of these characters gives rise to a vast number of questions about their identities, sexuality, and personal conflicts. Furthermore, it essentially foregrounds the "psychological lesions and social schisms of London" as well as giving "an almost equally strong emphasis on the underlying communality of the city, the latent 'universal love' (pp.57, 125) which Septimus apprehends and in which Woolf passionately believed."
In conclusion to what is an extremely dense exploration of the creative techniques of both Woolf and Conrad's novels, it would seem suffice to suggest that the narrative and creative techniques evident in both texts, conventional or alternative, amount to two wonderfully "interesting stories". What makes them "interesting" is perhaps not the overall "plot", but how they are constructed in order to achieve the popular modernist manifesto of "making new" the external world around us.