"Pan Recipe" is a Caribbean poem written as an extended metaphor, which uses the vehicle of the steel pan to convey a sense of new life born out of the past, and is suggestive of the oppression of black slaves. When I began writing "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", I aimed to re-centre Agard's text and focus more primarily on the Caribbean music itself, as a celebration of freedom, but still express ideas about the oppression of black slaves through metaphor.
"How we have walked, How we have journeyed" should, like "Pan Recipe", be read on both a literal and metaphorical level. The title itself works on both of these levels, and directs the reader to acknowledge the metaphorical tenor through the first person present plural pronoun "we". This deictic suggests that the poem is also about a number of people collectively participating in the acts of "walking" and "journeying". On a literal level this might be related to the way in which large masses of people "walk" and "journey", perhaps in a carnival parade. The use of the past tense in the title might also suggest a metaphorical journey through time; the use of the perfect present forms of both verbs indicates that the journey, both literal and metaphorical, has come to an end.
I wanted the poem to have a strong, driving rhythm to imitate the rhythms of Caribbean music and give it a sense of progression. This drive comes largely from the use of continuous present verbs throughout the poem. In the first verse, for example, the pre-modifying adjectives "flaming" and "flashing" are the non-finite progressive participles of active, and dynamic, verbs, giving a sense of moving forward towards an end. This end is indicated initially in the use of the past tense in the title of the poem. Furthermore, the final verse of the poem moves into the past tense through the past participle "fought". This internal deviation gives the last lines a sense of finality and conclusion. "New World A-Comin" also works with both the present and past tenses to similar effect. The opening lines of the poem are written in the present tense, indicated by the repeated use of the demonstrative article, "this", which gives a sense of immediacy. In line five the text moves into the past tense, through the past participle "met". At this point the text also introduces context sensitive pronouns ("we" and "you"). This is echoed in "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", when in the final line of the ninth verse, the refrain is altered by replacing the definite article "the" with the plural possessive pronoun "our". In both poems, this internal deviation takes the text to a human level. In "How we have walked, How we have journeyed" it also makes more perceptually prominent the metaphorical level on which the poem is working.
My poem also uses paralleled phrase structures, as do both of the poems it draws upon. Parallelism is used as a larger structural feature of the text through the repetition and variation of the refrain. On a more localised level, the phrase structure of the first two lines might be used as examples of such textual patterning. Both lines are noun phrases with one pre-modifying continuous present adjectival verb preceding a noun, both lines consisting of just two words. This structure is repeated in the first line of the second verse, and later in line two of verse ten ("beating bass drum"). In "New World A-Comin'" the extensive use of parallelism in this way acts as is a cohesive device, which helps us to construct meaning from a largely fragmented framework, for example in the first four lines.
"How we have walked, How we have journeyed" uses lexical deviation through graphological deviation, for example in verse four. As a result of enjambment, the function of the word "surdo" is unclear. "Surdo is the bass drum that is used to keep the rhythm together and to provide the deep bass tones" in Brazilian music. However, due to the line break and lack of punctuation, there are several functional possibilities. Both "Solid" and "surdo" could be read as pre-modifying adjectives, with "beat" acting as a noun head within the phrase. It is also possible to read "surdo" as the noun, pre-modified by the adjective "Solid". This in turn would change the function of the word "beat" from the noun head to a non-finite active verb, with "Samba", compounded with "rhythm" in the next line, acting as the direct object, or noun head. This technique is a prominent feature in "New World A-Comin", where there are many examples of words which could have several meanings and functions, often consequent of graphological deviation, for example lines 1-3. The line break between "this" (line 1) and "leader" (line 2) makes us question the functions of both words; it is unclear as to whether "this" should be read as a demonstrative article or demonstrative noun. If we take the former function, "leader" would be read as the pre-modified noun object of the phrase - a "Helpless.../leader"; if we take the latter "leader becomes adjectival and, if read as being hyphenated with "less" into a compound adjective (line 3), becomes part of a second simile. It is likely to be the latter if we look at the paralleled structures between these lines and the repetition of "-less" as a suffix. However, the syntax between lines two and three also confuses the word functions of both "leader" (line 2) and "less" (line 3). This mode of foregrounding through deviation reoccurs frequently throughout the poem, particularly at the beginning of the second verse. I have also experimented with this technique, for example lines 29 - 34, where the phrase structure(s) could work in several ways as a result of enjambment.
Another key example of foregrounding through graphological deviation in "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", is the way in which the first three refrains break, or "fight", the rhythm; the form, here, aids meaning: "native sticks / fighting / the rhythm." The use of full rhyme in the final refrain, and an eventual adherence to the rhythm established by the verses, aids the feeling of finality indicated by the fore mentioned use of the past tense. This is also similar to "New World A-Comin", where the text is broken at the end of line 11 through the use of enjambment; the use of the colon adds to the sense of "silence".
Both of the poems from which I have drawn use semantic deviation through the application of animating verbs and adjectives to non-animate objects. In lines 19 and 20 of "New World A-Comin'" the adjectives "firm" and "fleshed" pre-modify the noun "flame", giving it human or animal like qualities. I have used this throughout my poem, particularly in the repeated refrain, where the animate verb, "fighting", is applied to the non-animate subject of the phrase, "sticks". Furthermore, this is pre-modified by the adjective "native", which we might usually associate with "people". In line 7 of "Pan Recipe" the use of the present simple verb "stifle" animates the "drum", since a drum does not play itself. The verb is usually used in reference to the suppression, curbing, suffocation, or repression of a person or animal. The effect is similar to the use of such semantic deviation in "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", whereby the "native sticks" need a human agent in order for them to be "fighting". We might, then, in both poems, take the "drum", or "sticks" to represent the music of the "people". Music is an abstract noun which, in a sense, is alive or animate when we can hear it. In "Pan Recipe" our reading would mean the stifling of the music which itself is symbolic of the "people"; and in "How we have walked, How we have journeyed", it might be read as a metaphor of the people themselves fighting their oppression.
"How we have walked, How we have journeyed" also demonstrates a use of deliberate grammatical deviation in the form of ellipsis. Agard uses this in "Pan Recipe", for example in line 5, where the indefinite article is missing between the verb and the pre-modifying adjectival noun. ("Add [a] pinch of pain."), which is mimetic of the dialect of English-speaking Caribbean people. In terms of genre this might then be considered as an Anglophonic text, whereby the use of language is used to articulate identity; where identity is expressed in terms of opposition or distinction. Through this technique, the micro-textual level of the poem indicates the broader macro-textual issue of identity to which the poem metaphorically points. In my poem, I aimed to imitate this technique of language being mimetic of dialect in order to "emphasise the social and historical constructedness of [...] relations and the political power (or powerlessness) those relations entail", between the oppressed and those who oppress. The use of ellipsis to reflect a particular dialect demonstrates how language, as used in a society, defines - to an extent - identity. This then foregrounds the macro-textual and metaphorical level on which the text is working.
The extended figurative structure of "Pan Recipe" is further complicated by the use of the term "Recipe", and the semantic language and clause structures associated with cooking. The phrase structures focus upon the use of imperative verbs, as used in recipe instructions. Moreover, they are linked by sequencing devices, for example "First" (line 1) and "Then" (line 8). Similarly, I wanted to incorporate structural devices from another genre in order to emphasise the musical celebration of freedom. The poem takes the structural form of a song with two regular four line verses followed by a repeated, although later varied, refrain. In order to be more specific, I have used a rich variety of language semantically related to the instruments, rhythms, and dances from Cuba and Brazil. These exotic names will be unfamiliar to most readers, and thus, like the use of dialect, they give a sense of identity through distinction. In two instances, the exotic nature of the instruments is foregrounded by means of synecdoche, or metonymy, for example in line three "coconut" refers to the material from which maracas are made. Lines 3 and 4 of verse 8 point to the qualities of a "good" bongo (Appendix 1); these qualities also create a powerful metaphoric image of strength.
One of the dominant cohesive devices used in both "Pan Recipe" and "New World A-Comin" is that of sound patterning. In lines 7-13 of "New World A-Comin'" the use of alliteration and sibilance is mimetic of the "silence" in line 11. The repetition of the unvoiced fricative /f/ and unvoiced sibilant /s/ also slows down the rhythm of the text. In verse two of the poem, the repetition of the fricative /f/ works in a very different way. The way in which the air flow is not stopped in this alliterative passage gives it a sense of heightened action. In the opening two lines of my poem, I have also used alliteration of the fricative /f/, in an attempt to achieve a similar effect of dynamic action and life, in order to suggest the lively rhythms, colours and atmosphere of carnival.
In "Pan Recipe" Agard also uses alliteration to generate rhythm. The repetition of bilabial plosives (/b/ and /p/) in lines three and five, emphasise the "pain" Agard is trying to convey, and echo the brutal acts to which the extended metaphor relates; the alliteration brings out the anger the persona of the poem expresses about the treatment of Caribbean people. This is added to by Agard's use of internal rhyme in lines three and four. The repetition of the diphthong /i/ ("boil", "Foil", "voice") draws out these lines and thus emphasises the sense of time suggested earlier in line two "simmer for centuries". The sibilance in verse four also works in this way as does the repetition of both the sibilant /s/ and bilabial plosive /b/, in verse ten, among other examples. I have also used rhyme and half rhyme throughout the poem to aid rhythm and pace. In verse one, the half rhyme between lines two and four set a rhythmic pattern which is enhanced by the full rhyme in the second verse ("wire" and "fire"). The final two verses, and refrain, contain full rhymes between the second and fourth lines which aid the driving rhythm to give the final lines a sense of finality.