The interpretation of the Bible has been at the centre of political and theological debates throughout the course of history, and remains the cause of various social and cultural tensions in the present day. Probably the most key period in the development of biblical interpretation was that of the sixteenth-century European Reformation. Stimulated by the works of Erasmus and Christian Humanism, the Reformation "sought reform of the universal Catholic Church", and essentially transformed Christianity. Reformers highlighted errors and forgeries within the Catholic faith, and more importantly asserted the intellectual, and ultimately spiritual, independence of the laity. Whilst the doctrinal authority of the Church has been questioned by such movements, there have also been a number of powerful figures throughout history who have used the Bible as an instrument of power. One of the most notable is King Henry VIII who abused the fractious state of Christianity during the Reformation, manipulating scripture in order to enhance his power. In 1531 the convocation of England accepted Henry VIII as Head of the Church in England 'as far as the law of God allows' enabling the King to grant his own right to divorce. This in turn led to the dissolution of the monasteries which not only suppressed some of the most vociferous opponents of Henry's most recent legislation, but resulted in the crown making great financial profit.
The oppression that results from such abuse of power and manipulation of Biblical texts and ideas has been translated into literature through the genre of dystopic fiction. The term dys-topians was first used in 1868 by J.S. Mill, who wrote of them: "What is commonly called Utopian is something too good to be practicable; but what they appear to favour is too bad to be practicable." However, the term dystopia was not coined until much later in the twentieth century. Biblical themes have been increasingly drawn upon in order to address contemporary issues in modern literature. Many authors return to what Jasper calls the "late twentieth century obsession with the apocalyptic", the literature of which "lends itself especially to the genre of science fiction", a key element in the texts I will refer to in this essay.
The imagined nightmarish societies represented in George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four and Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale illustrate clearly the distinctions between a dystopian society and the more conventional ideas of a "Utopia" as envisaged by Sir Thomas More. Atwood combines the dystopic genre with Biblical allusion in her novel in order to highlight a number of contemporary and feminist issues, whilst Nineteen Eighty-Four has been widely perceived as novel of "social comment, and even prophecy". In this essay I will explore the ways in which problems of interpretation and the abuse of scripture have been translated into dystopic fiction and the issues that are consequently unveiled.
Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale is based around the fictional fundamentalist Republic of Gilead. The novel is "set in the near future, in a United States which is in the hands of a power-hungry elite who have used their own brand of 'Bible-based' religion as an excuse for the suppression of the majority of the population." In his book Rescuing the Bible from Fundamentalism, John Shelby Spong argues that a "major function of fundamentalist religion is to bolster deeply insecure and fearful people...by justifying a way of life with all of its defining prejudices." Gilead is indeed presented as a society "under a good deal of pressure, demographic and otherwise". Its consequent fundamentalist approach to the Bible imposes "a patriarchal order on society and family alike." However, what I would argue to be perhaps more disturbing than the simple irony of a terrifying society claiming to live "literally by biblical principles", is how this religious fundamentalism is forcefully imposed upon what Booker describes as "a stupefied populace". Moreover, it is the abuse of women that results from the "use of the Bible as an instrument of oppression, coercion and the sustaining of privilege and power."
As in the Old Testament, "patriarchal authority is justified as the law of God" within Gilead and biblical allusions are abundant throughout The Handmaid's Tale. One of the most poignant intertextual uses of the Bible is the way in which Atwood has reworked the words of Jesus of Nazareth. Kreizer argues that, to an extent, Gilead becomes a "parody of the Kingdom of God." During the narrative of her first shopping trip, the protagonist and narrator, Offred, reflects upon some of the teachings she received at the Rachel and Leah re-education centre: "The Republic of Gilead, said Aunt Lydia, knows no bounds. Gilead is within you." This final statement is taken directly from Luke 17:20-21 where Jesus tells the Pharisees, "The kingdom of God commeth not with observation...the kingdom of God is within you." This parody suggests that like the Kingdom of God, Gilead is "not like an earthly kingdom with geographical boundaries...it begins with... [Gilead's] Spirit in people's lives and relationships." It is made clear here the ways in which the Gileadean authorities are manipulating Scripture in order to justify their social policies and make clear the extent of their control.
//
Possibly the most pivotal aspect of the biblical rhetoric of Gilead is the manipulation of the Genesis story of Jacob, Rachel and Bilhah (Genesis 30:1-3), presented in the prefatory material. Ketterer (see Kreitzer p.152) considers this passage to be "the 'essential seed' of the novel." The passage is one of several stories of surrogate mothers in the Old Testament, another earlier and more famous one being that of Sarah, Hagar and Abraham. This source not only "provides the biblical precedent for sexual practices in Gilead", but, more importantly, "opens the way to a feminist critique of patriarchy where women are regarded as nothing but sexual and domestic commodities." Ostriker suggests that "the recurrent figure of the barren mother", or wife, in the book of Genesis is indicative of "the power of the father-God over fertility, a process formerly female." Gilead is what Jasper describes as "a post-nuclear holocaust America", where the effects of nuclear warfare have left many women infertile. The biblical motif of the servant woman, or handmaid, bearing children for their barren mistress is cultivated into this imaginary dystopic society, whereby young and fertile women are "enslaved as concubines" to stimulate procreation.
Although Ostriker's views on the implications of such practices upon male power are indeed valid, I would suggest that in Atwood's novel, the men involved are not so glorified. As Clarke argues, the way in which Rachel's desperate suggestion that her maid Bilhah "shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her" is disturbingly applied to the "act of conception" in fact imposes "physical and mental humiliation on both handmaid and wife, and also...on the husband."
George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four shares a number of key features with The Handmaid's Tale, offering a strong warning against totalitarian regimes. Orwell was alarmed when he came to realise that "the novelty of totalitarianism lay in the mutability as well as the unchallengeability of its dogmas." This might be related closely to the nature of Catholicism, "with its appeal to papal authority." In 'The Prevention of Literature' (1946) he argued that there was, and had been for some time, a need to defend "the freedom of intellect...against Conservatives, against Catholics...against Communists."(See Oxley p.65) However, like Atwood, Orwell's key satirical target is "the use of religion as an excuse for one set of people to impose their wills on others."
One definition of 'totalitarianism' is "that it is the secularisation of religious aspirations, the attempt to create a Heaven on Earth." Indeed there are a number of religious allusions within the novel's descriptions of totalitarianism. Central to both The Handmaid's Tale and Nineteen Eighty-Four is the restriction of individual freedom, an idea present in More's Utopia, but which, in the modern world, seems a more dystopic convention. This oppression is conducted in Atwood's novel, through a perverted interpretation of biblical texts, and thus disturbingly justified through God. On the other hand, Orwell saw that in his world, "replacing worship of God by worship of Man had been disastrous." This is translated into the world of '1984' where God is replaced by the more sinister, omniscient Big Brother. One woman refers to him as "My Saviour![...]uttering a prayer" for the dictator, "black-haired, black-moustachio'd, full of power and mysterious calm, and so vast that it almost filled up the screen." Further into the novel we see this idea translated through O'Brien who Pimlott describes as "an intellectual construct: not a flesh-and-blood human being at all, but the ultimate black image of totalitarianism." One aspect of the novel that I consider as one of the most disturbing is the sadistic reasoning behind the creation of this society which seems to survive on "an equilibrium of suffering". The ideology of the Republic of Gilead has, at least, the justification - although a dubious one - of the need to procreate. However, the doctrine of 'the Party' in Oceania, named 'Insoc', is frighteningly aimless. O'Brien explains this to Winston:
Everything about the society seems to have little or no real justification: "The object of persecution is persecution. The object of torture is torture. The object of power is power." O'Brien optimises this in one sentence when he tells Winston "Power is not a means, it is an end."
The dystopic societies of both The Handmaid's Tale and Nineteen Eighty-Four reveal how rhetoric interpretation can be used as a means of control. Aristotle defines the art as "the faculty of observing in any given case the available means of persuasion." He continues:
Orwell himself suggested that "Language [...] is a proxy for power [...] those in power use language to disseminate truth selectively through a process of representation and concealment." Orwell's 'Newspeak' is much like the language used in Gilead, in which the true meanings of words are reversed in an "effort to restructure" and control the way people perceive their world. In Nineteen Eighty-Four Newspeak is "a kind of anti-language whose vocabulary will diminish year after year, because the ultimate point of orthodoxy is unconsciousness." During the Reformation, a key point of debate was that of translation. "To the early reformers, the Bible was a central part of religion hidden from the people in the Occult language of the church, Latin." Offred describes the Bible as "an incendiary device: who knows what we'd make of it, if we ever got our hands on it? We can be read to from it, by him, but we cannot read it." This "Controlled access [...] reinforces the Handmaids' enslavement."
Offred recalls one lunchtime during her time at the Rachel and Leah Re-education Centre when the Handmaids heard the Aunts "drilling into their charges" a recording of the Gileadean account of Jesus' words at the Sermon of the Mount:
Offred's reflection is illustrative of the manipulation of the Bible in order to suppress individual freedom.
In Moses and Monotheism Freud suggests that what he calls 'biblical tradition' is consequent of "two opposing desires among redactors: to keep a sacred text piously unchanged regardless of inconsistencies, and to transform the text according to present needs." "The distortion of a text", he writes, "is not unlike murder". This practice, of course, provides the central point of power in the world of '1984'. The purpose of 'Newspeak' and the 'Ministry of Truth' where Winston works is to alter language and history continuously in order to justify political actions and thus maintain ultimate control. Freud proposes that "The difficulty lies not in the execution of the deed but in the doing away with the traces." Indeed, one of several disturbing slogans of the Party is "Who controls the past controls the future: who controls the present controls the past". O'Brien clarifies this: "We, the Party, control all records, and we control all memories. Then we control the past, do we not?" Indeed, McMahon suggests that "As long as the powerful side in this conflict continues to exercise control over the present, it will conceal the history of the "other" as a means of perpetuating its power into the future."
Similarly, in the Republic of Gilead, biblical images are manipulated to justify and legitimate the measures taken by the authorities to maintain control. Jesus's words in Matthew 18:8, "If your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. (NIV)" are taken literally when the Gileadean authorities sever the hand of a person as punishment for committing a third offence of reading. The Handmaid's Tale indeed contains a number of episodes which involve "body mutilation, dismemberment, and shockingly horrific death."
Daniels and Bowen suggest that "Mandatory group leisure" reinforce the Handmaid's slave-like "status as portrayed in the rituals of Birth Days and Salvagings." The bloodthirsty spectacle of the Salvagings is similar to the encouraged attendance at public hangings in Nineteen Eighty-Four, an activity that is described as a "popular spectacle". In both novels members of society are reminded what the consequences of disobedience are and encouraged to scorn alleged dissenters. The use of the word 'salvage' is, of course, another example of the reversal of meanings. This is further emphasised in Offred's description of the 'Particution', "a heinous game in which the Handmaid's must participate or else be perceived as dissenters themselves." Signalled to start by a whistle, the Handmaid's are permitted to do anything to a selected convict until a second whistle is blown. I would also suggest that Atwood is exploring again the ways in which language is used by authorities to legitmate their social practices. By removing the 'l', we get what is perhaps a more accurate description of the ritual, 'savaging'. This episode stands out since Offred's commentary suggests that this ritual is without Scriptural support when she describes the "small red velvet" cushions provided for the Handmaids to kneel upon. Although the act of kneeling might suggest an element of religious worship the cushions have "nothing written on them, not even Faith".
Many elements of Gilead are referred to through biblical allusions. For example, "Milk and Honey", the grocery store, is drawn from "the land flowing with milk and honey" which is used a number of times in Old Testament descriptions of the Promised Land. One of the stores visited by Offred is a former lingerie store, now named 'Soul Scrolls'. "Ordering prayers from Soul Scrolls", Offred explains, "is supposed to be a sign of piety and faithfulness to the regime."
It is possible to relate this element of Gileadean society to the sale of prayers and indulgences by Catholic priests, one of the practices reformers of the sixteenth century wished to abolish. Unlike the Commander, who is permitted to read directly from the Bible, the Handmaids and Wives are forced to, in a sense, purchase their prayers. The way the prayers of women have to be mediated not only relates to middle age Catholic practices, but reinforces the patriarchal structure of Gilead. This, too, is reminiscent of the God - man - woman hierarchy of the Old Testament.
Other, more sinister elements of Gileadean society can also be seen to draw upon scriptural sources. In Chapter 15 the Commander concludes the prayer session with the following passage taken from 2 Chronicles 7:9:
Kreitzer cites this as the likely biblical source for the concept of the Gileadean secret police, the 'Eyes'. Thus, the Bible is used "as a means of emphasizing the Republic's all - pervasiveness...every aspect of life is watched, regulated and controlled."
The key difference between the two novels lies in the fate of the protagonists. Orwell's Winston Smith fails to escape and eventually dies having learnt to love Big Brother. The narrative of Offred on the other hand offers a tale of survival. Her narrative itself is defiant against Gilead's order of female submissiveness. The mosaic of other Handmaid's stories not only provides a "sad subtext to Offred's survival narrative" but allows Offred to pass moral judgement on Gileadean social practices through her reflection. However, an idea that I find perhaps more poignant is that she is speaking defiantly against the overwhelmingly masculine narrative of the Old Testament itself; against what Ostriker refers to as a "startling pattern" of silencing women within the Bible; and ultimately against "the obsessively told and re-told moment of transition from a world in which women were humanly and socially powerful because divinity was in part female, to a world in which that divinity and power were repressed."
Alicia Suskin Ostriker argues that the Bible "conceals, but reveals as it conceals, a collective repression of the female." She proposes that "the biblical story of monotheism and covenant" in the Old Testament is "a cover-up; that when we lift the cover we find quite another story...of erased female power." Phyllis Trible defines feminism as "a critique of culture and faith in light of misogyny." 
The Handmaid's Tale essentially reveals the way in which "women are repressed and silenced" by the patriarchal authorities in Gilead. In the aforementioned distortion of the Beautitudes, the addition of "Blessed are the silent" highlights this key theme. It is possible that this is more than a criticism of the Bible itself but of the "canonizing process", which Ostriker also argues has "throughout history rested, not accidentally but essentially, in the silencing of women." Feminist hermeneutics have been employed to both document "the case against women", highlighting the "inferiority, subordination, and abuse of the female in ancient Israel", and uphold "forgotten texts" and reinterpret "familiar ones to shape a remnant theology that challenges the sexism of scripture." In Trible's discussion of the story of Sarah and Hagar, I found a number of key ideas that parallel those in Atwood's novel. In the final section of this essay, I will explore further these ideas, highlighting both how women are treated in the Old Testament and the parallels that can be found within The Handmaid's Tale.
In an article published in the North American Review Elizabeth Cady Stanton proposed that the Bible "has been interpreted to favour intemperance, slavery, capital punishment and the subjection of women." In Atwood's novel, possibly the most explicit example is that of the monthly 'Ceremony'. Ketterer (see Kreitzer, p.152) suggests that "the description of the ritual coupling between Commander and Handmaid is "modelled directly on the Genesis passage." In Atwood's novel, the women who become Handmaids are essentially "sexually objectified" in a society where "sterility has become the rule rather than the exception" they are "a politically charged commodity." "We are two-legged wombs", Offred explains, "that's all: sacred vessels, ambulatory chalices." During the "grotesque impregnation ceremony" the parallels between the stories of Rachel, Bilhah and Jacob, or Sarah, Hagar and Abraham, become abundantly clear. The Commander assumes the role of the patriarch, the wife the role of the barren woman who offers her slave woman, or Handmaid, to her husband in the hope that "she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her." (Genesis 30:1-3) Indeed, what is the most disturbing element of this episode is the justification provided by the Bible. Rachel's words are taken literally, as Offred explains:
Thus, it seems that in order to aid patriarchal power in the Republic of Gilead, a "literal interpretation of the Bible is used in the language of Gilead which is based upon the phallocentric word made flesh." Trible assesses the circular structure of Hagar's story in one of the biblical accounts of surrogate motherhood, describing it as "a circle of bondage." Like the Handmaids in Atwood's novel are transferred between households, Hagar, Trible suggests, is constantly "moving from bondage to flight to bondage." In this sense, both the biblical and Gileadean Handmaids have "no choice regarding the treatment of their bodies" and ultimately "no control over their lives."
The parallels between Handmaid and the biblical surrogate maid extend further to their relationship with the wives, and furthermore in their ultimate undermining within a male dominated narrative. "Strife between barren and fertile wives is a typical motif in scripture." The maid is presented as a powerless object, with the power residing in the subject of the action, represented through the figure of the barren wife. Trible describes the maid as "an instrument, not a person" that "enhances the mistress". This is echoed in The Handmaid's Tale through Offred's relationship with Serena Joy, who describes it as "a business transaction." Later in the novel, when questioned by Serena "Nothing yet?", Offred's commentary gives further evidence of this:
The absence of conversation is also paralleled in the biblical narratives, "continuing to separate the females." This passage also suggests that the situation enforced by the patriarchal authorities in Gilead is not entirely comfortable for the wives either. This of course, differs from the biblical narratives in which the wives themselves, albeit driven by jealousy and humiliation, suggest the surrogacy themselves. Offred's narrative on the other hand acknowledges the difficult situation of the wives, and indeed Serena Joy bitterly suggests that in fact the situation could have been worse:
Hence, it seems that it is not only the Handmaids who suffer from the patriarchal oppression of Gilead, but women in general.
A key theme in both the biblical surrogacy narratives and The Handmaid's Tale is they way in which suffering constantly appears to undercut hope. Ostriker argues that "Biblical patriarchy...figuratively encodes within its text the repeated acts of literal murder and oppression necessary for its triumph." In Atwood's novel The Historical Notes essentially undermine Offred, as does the narrated ending to Hagar's story which ultimately "silences her voice." Following an ambivalent ending, the notes seem to suggest that Offred does succeed in escaping, although essentially her fate remains unknown to us. Hagar disappears from her own narrative following her banishment, which Trible suggests "is not liberation, nevertheless, it moves her to personhood." Similarly, the act of narrating her own story is not only defiant itself, it allows Offred to find her identity, a luxury denied to her within the Gileadean regime. Daniels and Bowen propose that "Atwood's Handmaids can be said to be in a state of painful self-awareness of their social conditioning"; that "Throughout the novel [Offred] continues an inward battle to retain her sense of self": "I want to be valued, in ways that I am not; I want to be more than valuable. I repeat my former name, remind myself of what I once could do, how others saw me."
Early in the novel, Offred reflects upon her narrative: "I would like to believe this is a story I'm telling. [...] If it's a story I'm telling, then I have control over the ending." However, as Offred herself also recognises, "It isn't a story I'm telling", she does not control her fate, and furthermore, the end of her narrative is taken from her control. The Historical Notes take us into a future beyond that of Gilead, to a discussion amongst scholars who have discovered the recordings of Offred's narrative. The documented academic argument over the validity of the story is compared by Jasper to the way in which "biblical scholarship argues over the truth of the Bible itself." This section of the novel not only undermines Offred's own heroic plight, but also, as Jasper suggests, highlights the ways in which "Our very cleverness blinds us to the human cry of the narrative". It seems Atwood could be drawing parallels with the Bible to form a critique of how "its searing, human stories of love, pain, heroism and loss are often subsumed under the clever historical niceties of academic debate." However, what Jasper fails to acknowledge, is that the story lost, here, is that of a woman. Ostriker notes that "biblical interpretation until the present moment has been virtually exclusively the prerogative of the males" and it has thus been an aim of feminism to "recover a neglected history" of the women 'buried' within biblical narratives. Indeed, Offred's story is undermined essentially through what I would describe as a patronising sexist discussion given by the male Professor Piexieto.
In Nineteen Eighty-Four Winston's narrative is also, in a sense, undermined through a destruction of identity, although during his own lifetime. Stripped of his true self, we are left with an image of him as "the long-hoped-for bullet was entering his brain" and "Two gin-scented tears trickled down the sides of his nose. But it was all right, everything was all right, the struggle was finished. He had won victory over himself. He loved Big Brother." Whilst the ending of Offred's narrative allows her to begin to re-build her identity, Winston is forced to accept his defeat in a world where 'war is peace', 'freedom is slavery', and 'ignorance is strength'.
In both novels the dystopic totalitarian regimes purport ways of living in a disturbingly collective manner. In the world of '1984' the distortion of reality by the omnipresent Big Brother creates a society absent of purpose and without the freedom of individual choice. In The Handmaid's Tale the abundance of biblical imagery, and allusion to various narratives of the Bible generates a harrowing image of a futuristic patriarchal society, which legitimates the humiliation and enslavement of women with literal interpretations of scripture. However, what I would also argue as a key idea in both novels, and also feminist hermeneutics, is the importance of the preservation of the individual self within the larger, collective body. In particular, feminist readings of the Bible, and indeed Atwood's novel itself, demonstrate that the voices of these individuals should not, and will not, remain silenced.