From the late eighteenth until the early nineteenth century, typically known as the 'Romantic' period in the history of literature, nature was used by poets to express to reader's notions and ideas that could not be expressed in the restricted 'rational' terms of conventional forms of writing which had preceded them. This previous preoccupation with rational thought can explain why a mass of critical opinion towards Romantic poetry at the time was seen simply as nature writing. The above quotation attempts to explain that the presentation of nature in Romantic writing is dependent on how it is perceived and interpreted, the 'observing consciousness' being not only that of the writer, but also in the reader's subjective inference. With this in mind, it is easy to see from a critical perspective that a poet's 'overflowing of spontaneous emotion' (Wordsworth, 1798, 22) could have been the product of the direct influence of nature. However, this opinion views descriptions of nature in poetry as 'a principle order, of which the ordering mind is part' (Williams, 1985, 13), but what Romantic poetry typically embodied was the portrayal of nature as a 'principle of creation, of which the creative mind is a part' (13). The period of 1780 through to 1830 was one of wars and revolutions that was to inspire poets such as William Blake and William Wordsworth, of whose poetical works I shall later explore, to convey their own personal experience an environment and society that was drastically changing before them. By using images of nature in their poetry, Blake and Wordsworth were to challenge contemporary values such as the hopes of emancipation carried by the French revolution and the fears of the sweeping changes brought about by the industrial revolution. A period of half a century cannot be generalised into particular views or opinions through, as each individual poet had their own set of ideas, beliefs and ways of viewing the world.
William Blake's use of nature in his poetry was highly symbolic, and left the reader to translate the meaning that images the images conveyed because according to Eugell (1982, 235) it was the 'only way truth can be received or communicated'. Because language itself is a social construction, it was necessary for Blake to use symbolism to reveal the 'truth' about the world because the imagination of the human mind primarily forms understanding about a subject through symbols and images. Symbols are the language of the mind. Symbolism was an effective method of communication for Blake because when the symbols are decoded in the imaginative workings of the reader's mind, the meaning of the poem and the poet's vision are revealed, achieving a deep level of belief and understanding between poet and reader. For example, in the poem The SICK ROSE, found in Blake's Songs of Innocence and Experience, we are told the allegorical tale of a rose being devoured by a worm, in which Blake seemingly illustrates the spiritual destruction of an unknown feminine object:
The 'Rose' that Blake refers to could very well be a woman that he knew, whilst at the same time the word 'Rose' may have been used as a binary opposition to 'sick', for in Sir Geoffrey Keynes's illustrated edition of Songs
 we are able to see that the title reveals this contrast with the words 'The SICK ROSE'. Clearly the capitalisation of 'SICK' and 'ROSE' underscoring 'The' reveals the twin themes of the poem, the 'contrary states of the human spirit' that Blake wished to express through Songs. Yet the true meaning of the poem, perhaps due the shortness of it, has left it open to a wide range of critical interpretation. A popular reading of it assumes that 'Rose' is a woman, who indulges in a passionate affair at 'night' and the 'worm' represents the masculine presence. Damon (1947, 280) thinks that the 'worm' represents the 'lust/love of experience', which can be seen as sexual intercourse, that comes at night to destroy 'innocent/ pure minded love' (281), a notion of love that 'Rose' may have had and experienced prior to her love affair.
A more generalised reading of the poem but one which gives increased scope and significance to its meaning would be that the poem represents 'earthly love in its sickness' (Wicksteed, 1928, 157), envisioning the 'Rose' as a representation of 'earthly love'. This reading can be elaborated on by Gardner (1986), who sees the worm as an agent spreading the disease of 'Urizenic control' by way of the 'intellectual and social effects of false religion'. Urizen, a fictional God created by Blake, constructed from the world's tyrants and dictators throughout the years. Urizen's represented the many different Gods of the religions of the world which were, in Blake's opinion, designed to create a sense of fear in their followers. This in turn creates a degree of 'control' for the dominant figures in the hierarchal structure of a particular religion, which in the case of Blake was the Church of England. The sense of dominant control over the 'intellectual' processes of people can be closely compared to the dominant control that the government or bureaucratic reign had over the population of England, and especially France, the anger of which lead to the revolution.
Whether the 'Rose' is an actual person, a symbol of femininity or the representation of love, the illustration to the poem shows that the rose is restricted by its thorns and a woman in the picture is impaled on them. This could represent the concealment of sexual freedom, the expression of the rose's desires presumably limited by the 'thorns' of social and religious oppression. This restriction is given added effect in the tightly composed poetical structure, and the repressed desires that drive the poem's rhythm seem to pulsate downwards in terms of what Pagliaro (1987) describes as 'her guilty and frightened feelings, in painful compensation of her pleasure'. In this respect, the worm could be the rose's 'guilty' shame' for having sexual feelings, a shame created by an oppressive society and religion. The apparent lack of a stable rhythm in the poem can be viewed as the inner turmoil or 'howling storm' that rages within her, either in an erotic dream or her unconscious, hidden side symbolically referred to as 'the night'.
In addition to using nature to represent his concerns in the material world, Blake also used natural images to symbolise his own beliefs. In the eyes of Blake, the material world was created after a cosmic catastrophe caused the fall of spiritual beings into matter, but a reintegration with cosmic and spiritual oneness was eventually inevitable. The theme of this 'fall' is recurrent in many of Blake's poems, and the contemplation of it is seen in the poem The Tyger, particularly in the opening lines:
The poem, with its simple AABB rhyme scheme and its four beat rhythm is easy to follow, and takes the form of the narrator asking a tiger if it knows of its origins. The narrator seems in awe of its majestic presence, and the 'immortal hand or eye' appears to be God, as he is the only thing immortal to Blake and so the poem would seen to be questioning the nature of the tiger's creation. Friedlander (1999) believes that The Tyger is a message conveyed to people of conventional and rational thought by having their 'reason overwhelmed' by facing the 'reality of the tyger', a creature of such a predatory nature and at the same time so beautiful in its appearance that it defies a rational explanation as to its origins of creation.
However, the poem is, as we have seen with The SICK ROSE, the symbolisation of a deeper meaning, and its simple rhythmic rhyme structure disguises its complex ideas. This becomes apparent upon viewing the poems accompanying imagery, showing a tiger that appears anything but 'fearful'. The spelling of tiger, spelt 'Tyger' is purposeful and this leads to a number of different assumptions of what Blake meant the Tyger to symbolise. As with The SICK ROSE and many other poems, Blake can use 'the night' to refer to a hidden part of the human soul, sometimes known as the unconscious, whether acknowledged in dreams or by meditative contemplation. It would be wrong to accept Friedlander's views, because of our knowledge of Blake's spiritual views of the world and the importance that he places in his reader's imaginative powers of creating meaning through his text. It appears that Friedlander has read the explicit meaning of the poem and not taken into full account the importance Blake placed on symbolism. It seems that Frye (1947, 230) would have a more imaginatively perceptive view on the poem, as he describes its theme as 'the struggle to create, and the loving contemplation of what has been created'. This would assume that the Tyger is merely a concept and product of the narrator's contemplation and thoughts of a material object (a tiger) that is distorted and 'created' by the imagination to form a unique vision in the mind of the individual, hence the sharp impression that the word 'Tyger' appears to make in one's imagination compared to that of the seemingly gentler 'tiger'.
Eugell (1981, 246) elaborates on Frye's idea of creation and contemplation by explaining that for Blake, 'imagination is an energy or force that creates and transforms as it perceives'. This idea of an 'energy or force' associates itself with Blake's religious belief that God, although separate from the material world, in the act of creation has placed an eternal and divine force within each of his creations, and that the 'divine' force within humanity is the imagination. This makes it clarifies the notion that the object of the narrator's thought is internal, rather than external. Eugell goes on to say that in 'seeing nature with imaginative vision, we enliven and rescue it, and save our own souls' (247) and that 'imagination creates reality'. Hence, as the narrator is contemplating the tiger in it's imaginative form known as The Tyger, a transcendence with the spiritual world is being achieved because the narrator is no longer experiencing the restricting boundaries of the material world, and is viewing the world as he knows it through the eyes of a person that is not aware of the dominant and socially constructed rules of space and time. This is what Blake wanted his poetry to achieve in the reader, the deep symbolisation inciting the imagination into a dimension of perception, where reality is perpetually being redefined. This refreshed state of mind leads to a clearer outlook towards the material world, opening the reader's eyes and raising questions about the previously unquestioned and given rules of society. Even if the reader is not physically able to change the deeply hierarchal structures of society, the re-ignition of imaginative passions helps to 'save our own souls'. Redemption and emancipation ran through many of Blake's poems in his prophetic bid to prepare humanity for an eventual return to what he believed was the infinite world of the divine.
Readers of Blake's poetry, especially the Romantic poets that followed him, have been inspired by his way of looking at the world at a time of great social and political oppression by tyrannical governments and religions. One poet that greatly admired his work was William Wordsworth, whose time spent on working on a collection of poetry with Samuel Taylor Coleridge in 1797-8, in a year of passionate creativity, produced one of the seminal works of the Romantic period: the Lyrical Ballads. Within Lyrical Ballads is one of Wordsworth's most well known poems , Lines written a few miles from Tintern Abbey, which is a first person narrated contemplation of the poet's self intermingled with descriptions of perceived natural surroundings. Coleridge (1847, 297) stated that the imagination was considered to act as either 'primary or secondary'. Primary imagination refers to the perception of the world created by the senses. An example of Wordsworthian primary imagination is found in the opening stanza of Tintern Abbey, where the narrator, presumably Wordsworth himself, describes his perceived environment:
The natural images in this passage are not a description of what Wordsworth can see; we know this because he wrote the poem upon leaving the area in which it was written. What is important to note when reading this passage is that the narrative is focused on the centrality of the subject, a viewpoint that most of the poems contained in Lyrical Ballads express. The 'I' in the first line here refers to the poet's self, and in the self-acknowledgement 'I see' we are able to experience Wordsworth's descent from 'primary' into his 'secondary' imagination. The structure of the poem plays a key role in conveying Wordsworth's internal state. The iambic pentameter rhythm regulates the sporadic blank verse, a technique that mirrors Wordsworth's state of half-conscious control over the fluxing images he perceives. The blank verse also conveys a sense of reality and accessibility in terms of communicating thoughts and emotions in the most direct way possible, not restricted by a rhyme scheme in order for it to register at the most basic level of the reader's comprehension. Stabler (2002, 108) notes that in this way the reader is permitted 'a more direct access to what Wordsworth called our 'elemental feelings''.
The descriptions of natural images, which are the symbolic language of Wordsworth's mind, are blended into the self-aware descriptions of Wordsworth's emotional state so that there is no distinction between what is perceived by the senses and what is created by the imagination. This would imply that in the state that Wordsworth is experiencing in this passage, the senses are only half-creating Wordsworth's perception of the environment, and that they are half created by the unifying ideals of what his unconscious mind wants them to appear as. The observation of this state of consciousness is referred to elsewhere in the poem. A grammatical technique used to demonstrate this is seen in repetition of the word 'h', in the line 'hedgerows - hardly hedgerows'. The linking effect produced by the repetition of 'h' allows the poem's descriptions to flow in the same way as his imagination so that there are no distinctions made between his observations, creating a sense of wholeness and forming a unique mental image for the reader similar to the one perceived by Wordsworth himself. In this way the reader is able to experience the poem using nature as a symbolically relevant tool in exploring the creative and emotional inner workings of Wordsworth's thoughts.
The vivid sensation of the intense descriptions are given further strength by the artistic imagery drawn by Wordsworth in the lines 'and wreaths of smoke/ Sent up in silence from among the trees'. Once again we witness the linking of soft sounds in the repetition of the word 's', and the image of the smoke has the quality of a painting, described as a 'wreath'. This associated imagery builds on the impression that Wordsworth is painting a mental picture that comprises of a unifying wholeness, which is due to Wordsworth's thoughts and impressions flowing freely in his mind and in close association. The 'silence' is observed because of the quietness of his internal perception, indicating that the sense of sound is not operating in his acknowledgement of his existence. In reality, the smoke would have come from industrial factories that were built in the area of Tintern Abbey, but in choosing not to admit the perception of industrialisation into his description, Wordsworth's imaginative powers transform his sense of reality into an ideal external environment. Stabler (2002, 110) states that in many of Wordsworth's poems 'comparable moments of transition are usually recognitions of absence'. The recognition of the 'Smoke' provides the reader with the sense that Wordsworth is aware of the industrialisation of the countryside, but chooses to reject the unsightly appearance that the area of Tintern Abbey has developed since his last visit. In this way, Wordsworth is able to create a picture of the surrounding countryside using his knowledge of what it had previously appeared like to him before the factories were built. This is a very subtle use of the technique that Blake employs in his Songs, where states of innocence and experience co-exist alongside each other and are interchangeable. Here Wordsworth expresses his experience of the industrial revolution with the effects it has (smoke) but chooses to view the world through an optimistic and romantically idealised manner by refusing to acknowledge the factories that create the smoke.
It is not only his perception of the area that is recreated, but also his outlook on life through his re-connection with the natural world seen in the lines:
Nature here is seen as a place to refresh Wordsworth's thoughts and clear his mind of modern life, thoughts of which drift around his conscious being as the 'still, sad music of humanity'. The sense of loss that Wordsworth feels for his absent 'thoughtless youth' is given a 'power'. This 'power' is seemingly generated by Wordsworth's 'simply being aware of loss' (Stapler, 2002, 110) and the feeling acquired form this awareness allows the poet to transcend his previous state and recognise a 'different mode of being' (110). The 'power' created is thus not from external influences, but from a descent into the 'secondary' imagination. The poet is no longer speaking on an 'elementary' level of 'I am', or as witnessed in the previously discussed passage, 'I feel', but is now operating on the level of 'I am thought'. The utterance towards the plural subject is the deepest form of self-expression known to human understanding, from ancient times through to our current post-Freud knowledge of the self. The effect that it has in the reader is one of vicarious insight into the way symbolic 'secondary' imagination provides thoughts and language to the 'primary' imagination by working out 'a voice adjusted to the self's intimacy' (Cassagniere, 1994, 238). It is also clear to see how Wordsworth acquired his 'Pantheistic' views on spirituality, a view that assumes that God is the power that runs through all living things in the universe. We see this because as natural images permit his imagination to run wild, he feels a 'power'. This power is not described as a specific deity, as Blake thought, but merely a presence that is felt in his transcendent state of mind. The assumption that there is a force in nature and the mind of man is reached by the association 'of ideas in a state of excitement' (Wordsworth, 1798, p21). This excitement in Wordsworth is comparable to similar notions of spiritual energy in Blake, in that nature manifests 'the same transcendental energy as informs the human mind' (Day, 1996, 45), whilst the same time providing an 'objective, material barrier' (45) for the subject to recognise the transcendence without the risk of being completely overwhelmed by his internal processes. There is a sense of doubt in Wordsworth's belief though, as it is only a feeling that he experiences, and not a certainty. This, however, is typical of Wordsworth's style, a poet whom, even in his beliefs refuses to reduce his thoughts and ideas to fixities and densities.
Although of contrasting backgrounds and different beliefs, the parallels running through the works of the poets discussed have been clearly observed through the use of natural images; revolutionary thoughts and ideas about rigid hierarchal structures such as the Church of England and the government, expressions of the self and of individual perceptions of the world. Through nature, poets have also expressed a belief in the unifying and redemptive power that the self-awareness of creative thought brings, and its subsequent feelings of oneness with a divine or spiritual level of existence, and not merely conventional notions of deity. Even though Blake believed spiritual transcendence needed to be achieved through concentrated thought and Wordsworth was of the opinion that transcendence was a natural reaction to the external environment, both poets have excelled far beyond simple nature writing. They, and many other poets of the period have created works that show that by using natural images a primary and 'elementary' language can be constructed to inform us of the nature of humanity. Price (1964, 104) can provide a suitable summary to encapsulate the notion of what both Blake and Wordsworth attempted to convey to their readers: 'The strength of Experience comes from its ability to sustain or recover the faith of innocence'. In this way, the newly informed reader is prepared to meet the world with either the despair of passive hopelessness, or with a revived sense active dynamism and refreshed perspective.