This essay will attempt to account for the failure of the English colonists to settle on the island of Roanoke on three separate occasions in the 1580s. There are a large number of important reasons for this, many of which were interlinked, but the essay will argue that there were four primary explanations, namely, poor relations with the local Native Americans, the choice of Roanoke island itself as the site at which the English decided to settle, the people who actually emigrated to Roanoke including their aims and motives, and finally the lack of support that the colonists received from their mother country, England. With these circumstances in place, the settlement at Roanoke was all but doomed to fail.
When the colonists first arrived at Roanoke, their relations with the local Native American tribe (of southern Algonquian stock) were relatively good. They were given food which helped them to survive. Relations were positive on the first visit in July 1584, which was purely a short term expedition to see whether the land was suitable for settlement - 'Indians were friendly and not too numerous." When they returned to settle permanently in 1585, the colonists were still initially on good terms with the Natives as they traded products for food. However, soon the Native Americans became upset at the English for their continued reliance on them, as well as the fact that the colonists began to steal crops when they were denied food. The English reliance on the Native Americans was due to the fact that once the colonists had consumed the small amount of produce that they had brought with them on their ship, they relied on the Natives for food because it took time for their crops to grow. The Native Americans responded aggressively to the colonists and 'the settlement had to be placed on the defensive against Indian attack'. Tensions continued to mount and 'a crisis in Indian relations occurred in early June which [Ralph Lane, the governor of Roanoke] resolved by an inroad into the Indians' village and killing the chieftain, Wingina... who had come to fear and hate the Englishmen'. This was clearly not a successful way in dealing with the situation, as although opposition had been temporarily quelled, the English could never expect co-operation with the Natives. The Native Americans responded by trying to starve out the colonists. Without a regular supply of food and a lack of expertise in how to cultivate the land themselves, the colonists soon began to suffer serious shortages. Consequently, when Sir Francis Drake arrived in the summer of 1586, instead of re-supplying the colonists with much needed provisions, he eventually ended up taking them back to England.
The primary reason why the English did not know how to cultivate the land was that they were unwilling to ask the Native Americans for assistance. They also objected to the religious views of the Native Americans - '"Some religion they have alreadie... [but] there is hope that it may bee easier and sooner reformed."' This was due to a feeling of cultural superiority and the notion that they had nothing to learn from the local tribe. Thus, the English failed to learn vital hunting and fishing techniques as well as useful information about how best to farm the land, since the conditions were completely different in America than in England. The English, strangely, also did not even have anyone amongst their ranks who was a farmer or agricultural specialist. Only with the third voyage in 1587, could the colonists count farmers among their number, indicating a greater determination to sustain a permanent settlement. However, by this stage it was too late, as relations with the local Native Americans were poor and this meant that the colonists would struggle to survive. Indeed, when John White, the governor of Roanoke, returned to the colony from England after obtaining supplies in 1590, there was no sign of the colonists and it is highly likely that the Native Americans had killed the men, and absorbed the women and children into their own tribes.
Clearly, therefore, the need to maintain relations with the Native Americans was highly important in order to obtain food in times of crisis as well as to learn techniques to prosper in their new environment. Their inability to do this was crucial in the failure of Roanoke as Britain's first American colony.
A second important factor which was hugely influential in the failure of Roanoke was the actual choice of site that the English had chosen at which to settle. A hugely significant reason for this was the lack of a suitable harbour - 'As a base for maritime operations Roanoke Island suffered from want of an adequate harbour." This meant that whenever the colonists needed supplies from England, the incoming ship found it very hard to dock - 'Without a good harbour, [Roanoke was] badly sited for an agricultural colony." Once relations with the Native Americans deteriorated, the colonists were dependent on England for supplies. The principal reason for the settlement's position was that it was hard for enemy to find. The English were especially worried about the threat of Spanish attacks. The lack of a suitable harbour was illustrated in June 1586 when a storm scattered and wrecked many of Sir Francis Drake's fleet when he was re-supplying the colonists.
The site was also a poor choice at which to settle because it was not a particularly fertile area. Generally, very little was actually known about North America in terms of its conditions and climate. Consequently, the English found it hard to adapt to the American environment, particularly regarding the agricultural conditions - 'History showed that self-sufficiency in food was the condition of survival." Roanoke was not suitable for cultivation probably due to the fact that it was an island and thus the earth was saline, making crops difficult to grow. A settlement further inland would perhaps have been more successful.
Thus, the actual position of the settlement was not conducive to the survival of the colony, especially in terms of a suitable harbour which meant supplies were hard to come by. Also important was the poor farming conditions of the island which meant that the colonists had to rely on supplies from England. The aforementioned lack of a harbour merely intensified the problems of the colonists in terms of obtaining food.
A further problem in leading to the failure of Roanoke as a colony was the nature of the colonists themselves. The people who initially migrated to America from England were predominantly a mix of young male explorers and entrepreneurs whose aims and objectives essentially clashed with the survival of the colony itself. The survival of Roanoke was clearly not at the forefront of their motives. Their primary ambitions were to obtain land and wealth before returning shortly after to England. Very few had the idea of settling there permanently. Consequently, when it became apparent that they would not be able to achieve their aims, as there was no easy money to be made, many simply uprooted and returned back to England at the first available opportunity. The fact that the colonists faced constant food shortages - 'shortages produced discontent and... inaction led to boredom and pessimism' - as well as squabbles with the local Native Americans simply increased their desire to leave as soon as possible, which they did when Sir Francis Drake arrived in the summer of 1586.
The colonists' attitude in terms of not caring about the survival of the colony manifested itself in their approach to dealing with the Native Americans. They felt superior and that they had nothing to learn from those whom they regarded as 'savages'. On the initial two voyages, many of the colonists were soldiers, whilst very few were farmers. Soldiers are by no means ideal to start a colony. It was primarily their bigoted nature which led to the poor relations with the Native Americans. Only with the third and final voyage in 1587, was there a genuine attempt to colonize the island and attempt to construct a permanent settlement. However, by this stage it was too late, as it appears that the Native Americans were not pleased to see the return of the Englishmen due to the actions of the previous settlers. As stated above, the settlers were never seen again after the governor John White left for England. When he returned, there was no sign of the colonists and the people of the settlement have been termed the 'Lost Colony'.
Thus, the majority of the colonists themselves were responsible for the failure of Roanoke including their own inadvertent actions. That is, with regard to the initial two voyages many colonists did not possess the skills to flourish in a new environment (for example, a lack of farmers) but they also contributed to the downfall of their colony with their primary ambition of obtaining wealth, as well as there chauvinistic attitude toward the Native Americans. Only with the final voyage were the colonists more likely to settle successfully, but by this stage the damage had already been done.
The final vital factor which contributed to the failure of Roanoke was the lack of support from England towards the colonists. There was, in general, a lack of drive for a colonizing movement from back home in England, and in particular from the government itself. Also 'From the viewpoint of the queen and her advisors... it was not of any major significance." This was very important in explaining why the colony was not able to survive. The reason for the lack of government support was because it was extremely expensive to finance the Roanoke expeditions. The food shortages and the non-arrival of supplies in 1585 led to the desertion of the colonists when Drake finally arrived - 'Dependence upon the mother country was perhaps inevitable during the years of foundation; but the late arrival of supplies enkindled desires for repatriation." Also the late arrival of White in 1590 meant that by the time he reached the island, the colonists had perished.
There was also only a small scale attempt at colonization which meant that Roanoke was less likely to survive. This can be seen in the number of people who travelled across the Atlantic to settle in America. On the second voyage in 1585, only 108 men travelled to Roanoke. On the third voyage 'In 1587 only something more than a hundred, not the several hundred [that John White] had hoped for made the journey." However, it is understandable that the government did not throw its full weight behind the colony because it had other more pressing issues to deal with. The most obvious example is, of course, the Spanish Armada which threatened to invade England in 1588. All of England's ships were diverted to defend the country from attack - 'The crisis with Spain had involved neglect of the fledgling colony on Roanoke Island.'
The purpose of Roanoke as a clony from England's viewpoint was also not clear. Initially, it was primarily seen as a base from which to attack the Spanish - 'In 1585-6 the Roanoke ventures had been closely associated with the strategy of the sea war against Spain." The lack of clarity regarding the direction of the colony was significant in its downfall. It was not known whether the colony was intended to be a short or long term settlement and it was also unclear if Roanoke was set up for trading, privateering, providing goods for England or another reason altogether.
One objective was to provide materials and foods for England. However, the lack of success in growing products such as citrus fruits, sugar, silk and rice, meant that the English government was unwilling to invest more money into the development of the colony as only grapes and some medicinal plants could be grown satisfactorily, meaning that there was very little '[optimism] about major returns from complementary products'.
Thus, it is patently clear that Roanoke needed the full support of England in order for it to survive in relation to supplies as well as people sent to the colony in terms of occupation (more farmers were needed) and gender (more children and families were necessary for the colony to have a chance of survival). The fact that it was also unknown as to what the purpose of Roanoke actually was, also contributed to its failure. When there was little economic return from Roanoke, the prospects of the colony merely became bleaker.
Therefore, in conclusion, there were four primary reasons for the failure of Britain's settlement at Roanoke Island in the 1580s. The failure to maintain positive relations with the local Native American tribe was probably the most important factor, because they had initially provided food and provisions for the colonists and would be able to show them how to survive. Unfortunately, the colonists thought of themselves as superior and relations soured probably leading to the eventual downfall of the colonists at Roanoke.
Another reason for Roanoke's demise was the choice of Roanoke itself - there was no natural harbour meaning that it was hard for supplies to be brought in from England. Also important were the poor conditions for agriculture. Thus, it was hard to supply the colonists with food as well as hard for them to grow their own.
Also, the majority of the colonists themselves were not ideal people with which to start a colony. They played an important part in the failure of the settlement to survive. Most were looking to make money before returning to England so had nothing major to loose if the colony did not prosper. Their aims were not especially conducive with the survival of the colony. There was also a lack of farmers and families until the third voyage.
Finally, there was a crucial lack of support from England itself in relation to the upkeep and well-being of Roanoke. This was due to the vast expenses involved as well as other more pressing issues, such as the Spanish Armada which delayed supplies to the colony in the latter part of the decade. There was also a failure in committing large numbers of people to the colonization effort - 'The scale on which colonisation took place attempted was too small for it to have much chance of success, but the war was decisive in bringing it to an end." In general, the Roanoke voyages were cautious and experimental, and were unlikely to succeed in establishing a permanent settlement or economically feasible asset to England.
Thus with all these obstacles, the outlook for Roanoke seemed bleak. Although historians do have the benefit of hindsight, it seemed unlikely even at that time, that Roanoke would be able to survive and prosper as an English colony.