The Waste Land is both an apocalyptic vision and perversely difficult attack on the modern world. Several theoretical approaches can aid our interpretation of the complex and obscure images that pervade the text. Davidson argues that; 'The poem's lack of thematic clarity and careful refusal of connections between images, scenes and voices make it particularly open to different interpretations." Divergent and somewhat contradictory readings allow the text to be explored from manifold angles. The plurality of approaches available ensures that there is no one correct method of elucidation that 'makes sense' of the poem's bleak and disturbing thematic content.
Eliot's preoccupation with death dominates much of the poem's thematic content. Death manifests itself in numerous forms and has both a literal and metaphorical presence, representing the death of society and morality. The distinction between life and death is blurred throughout, as death becomes an integral part of life; 'I was neither living nor dead." This echoes the epigraph, in which a prophetess desires only death to end her entrapment in the eternal present. Past and future are indecipherable in The Waste Land. Tiresias embodies this contradiction as Spender believes that he; 'connects the fragments of civilisation scattered through time and space." April therefore becomes the; 'cruellest month,' as the confusion between; 'memory and desire,' leaves the inhabitants of post-war Europe wishing for the merciful oblivion of a; 'forgetful snow." Present tense verbs such as; 'breeding' and 'stirring,' allow Eliot to express the stagnant, motionless nature of their lives.
A Formalist reading of the text allows us to understand how the poem's cyclic and repetitive structure is created through reoccurring images and allusions. Williams justly describes its structure as; 'more simultaneous than developing." Eliot draws on images from the work of Baudelaire, Dante and Blake to impart the repetitive ennui that traps those who live there ;'I see crowds of people, walking round in a ring." The poem's lack of linear direction implies that there is no escape from the wasteland; without structural progression the reader too becomes lost there. The dehumanisation and isolation that arises from mass urbanisation, deprives people of their individuality and spirituality. Images such as; 'the dead tree gives no shelter,' help convey the desolation and melancholic nature of this world. The elegiac tone implies that the poem is a metaphorical funeral for European civilisation.
The Formalist emphasis on the importance of defamilierization facilitates our examination of Eliot's ability to manipulate the symbolic properties of water and make the conventional appear alien. Eliot's presentation of polluted, dirty water perverts its life-giving properties thus distorting water's traditional connotations. Water becomes a paradox, connected to both sterility and fertility, as prostitutes 'wash their feet,' in malignant and pernicious soda water. Whilst there are many parallels between Formalism and Structuralism, Structuralism is of greater use in allowing us to examine the nature of the binary. Structuralism is concerned with deciphering the underlying binary articulated within the poem's linguistic codes. The Structuralist emphasis on binary oppositions allows us to examine the thematic contrasts within the poem. According to Levi-Strauss, it is the grammar logic within a myth that provides the symbolic structure that allows us to understand them. In applying this principle to our examination of The Waste Land, the preoccupation with dryness and sterility therefore defines all that water can promise; life and regeneration. Levi-Strauss believed that binary oppositions explain and reduce a contradiction, and, in a poem filled with contradiction, Structuralism provides an effective way to penetrate the poem's dense and abstruse imagery.
The Formalist assertion that texts exist in a vacuum detracts from its value as a theoretical approach here as it would be inappropriate to ignore the era's social influences. Cultural Materialism provides an insight into the poem's thematic concerns by emphasising the need to understand its historical context. For example, the disruption that permeates the poem's structure is used to mirror the horror and violence of the contemporary battlefield. The Modernist threat to the boundaries of art destabilised the definition and limitations of poetry. Abrupt syntactic shifts confound the poem's underlying insecurity and reflect this ambiguity. The Waste Land is a compendium of literary and mythical allusions. The poem's intertextuality stems from its network of encyclopaedic allusions that highlight the permanency of man's eternal failure to improve himself. Davidson views allusions as; 'a dispersive figure, multiplying contexts for both the present work and the text alluded to, suggesting a cultural, historical dimension of difference." Esoteric prophetic voices and biblical allusions create a moral lyricism and intensity that lends authority to the poem. Eliot successfully conveys the inescapable nature of the past by having the reader's movement around the wasteland haunted by the voices of other writers. The divergent nature of these allusions dislocate history and geography, adding to the reader's disorientation.
I believe Structuralism to be the most appropriate method of examining the relationship between allusion and meaning because it regards language as a self-referential system. Structuralism allows us to centralise language in a poem where it is in danger of sliding into indeterminacy. Eliot himself viewed poetry as a site of difficulty where language must be dislocated before it can make sense, believing that; 'The poet must become ..more allusive, more indirect, in order to force..language into his meaning." Meaning is therefore not inherent in words but given by structure; the allusive and oblique structure of The Waste Land forces language to make meaning. Allusions therefore deploy a relationship between word and image that creates meaning. The significance of certain surreal sound effects such as; 'jug jug jug jug,' only become apparent when put into their allusive context. Successive allusions to Philomel's rape re-iterate the theme of assaulted innocence and danger of lust. In juxtaposing Spenser's idealised depiction of love with images of sordid modern sex in the third section, Eliot succeeds in showing; 'how man's aspirations to a spiritual mode of living are thwarted by his subversive bodily appetites,' according to Macrae. The meaning of certain allusions are therefore only revealed through their relationships with other images. Eagleton is therefore just in stating that; 'Images do not have a 'substantial' meaning, only a 'relational' one. You do not need to go outside the poem..to explain them; they explain and define each other." The poem's equivocal imagery betrays the influence of Symbolism, as Eliot uses allusions to evoke elusive moods and states of minds. Language is used to form complex allusive networks that challenge the reader to explore the cryptic connections between them.
Man's emotional paralysis is explored through Eliot's unsettling portrayal of relationships. The apathetic mechanistic relationship between the typist and clerk reveals how sex has become violent and reductive;'She smoothes her hair with automatic hand." The mechanical rhyme between; 'stare' and 'millionaire,' reflects the monotonous predictability of their rhythm. Mr Eugenides' possible proposition of another man reveals xenophobic and anti-Semitic undertones that expose Eliot's unsettling class and racial politics. Crawford believes that 'cities that traditionally used to promote fertility occur ironically in The Waste Land, punctuating its infertile.. world where previous rituals and beliefs seem to be lapsing into futility." The unsettlingly perverse and possibly necrophilic image of dead 'white bodies naked' heaped upon each other supports this, implying that nothing pure or fertile can arise from sex between metaphorically and spiritually dead beings.
Ornate, decorative language in the 'Game of Chess' creates an artificiality that exposes the essential emptiness of modern life. Eliot's convoluted syntax and complex verbosity draws us into the woman's confusion. Enjambment and sparse punctuation creates her breathless hysteria allowing us too to be; 'troubled, confused and drowned the sense in orders." Board and accustomed to her questions, the man sees no point in replying. The absence of inverted commas in his responses suggests that we are overhearing his thoughts. This macabre, flippant resignation reveals an unsettling lack of communication between the sexes. Disturbing allusions to Philomel re-iterate the theme of male dominance; in refusing to speak he has the power to prolong her claustrophobic anxiety. Ironically, her speech discloses a fear of the death and decay that already traps her. The gruesome image of; 'pressing lidless eyes and waiting for a knock upon the door,' conveys the omnipresent inevitability of death. The word 'lidless' implies that they can't escape or ignore its presence. The barman's impatient call reminds us that time dictates and controls all people and classes; the 'Game of Chess' therefore becomes a metaphor for life.
The poem's dislocated vocalisation arises from continually changing pronouns and tenses that leave us uncertain of the gender, nationality and perspective of certain speakers. A Bakhtinien reading of the poem aids us in understanding the hetroglossic nature of the text. Bakhtin argues that; 'language, like the living concrete environment in which the consciousness of the verbal artist lives-is never unitary." No central voice dominates the narration which makes it difficult to follow the poem's progression. Eagleton justly argues that; 'The diverse divided materials of Eliot's poem are tamed to a coherent narrative, the shattered human subjects unified to a single ego,' as characters' voices merge and are diffused into one another. Spender believes the voices are; 'symptoms of attitudes, reflexes, neuroses..there is one other voice-the voice of the poet in the poem who suffers." Dialogue, monologue and fragmented streams of consciousness coexist confusingly to create the poem's textured pollyvocality. The infiltration of foreign languages disorientates the reader, allowing us to share in the sense of displacement that stemmed from the absence of geographical stability in Europe. This supports Pinkney's assertion that; 'Dialogoism insists that, on its way to the thematic object, one's own world has to enter into all kinds of interaction with alien words.'
Structuralist principals dictate that the relationship between language and literature is one of homology. As a result, language can not be subordinated because it is what creates images and meaning in the poem. Structuralism is more analytical than evaluative, primarily concerned with how meaning is produced. Culler supports this arguing that; 'The type of literary study which Structuralism helps..would be a poetics that strives to define the conditions of meaning." How images are created is therefore of more importance than what they signify. The sinister; 'rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear' that mocks their futile lives, is created through tactile olfactory imagery and the onomatopoeic word 'rattle.' The use of onomatopoeia proves that the choice of signifier isn't always arbitrary.
Imagery in the final section is enigmatic, disturbing and frustratingly complex. In examining Eliot's use of signifiers rather than the signified, we can explore how images are created, thus gaining an insight into the; 'psychological character of our sound images." Eliot pioneered the objective correlative, through which an author can convey emotion directly to the reader by developing an image that delineates that emotion. Nature therefore becomes a metaphor for humanity, 'sunken' and 'limp,' desperate for both literal and spiritual regeneration. Personification conveys that man and nature suffer the same suffocating thirst; 'Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit." Crawford believes that; 'The Waste Land's sounds rather than sights, come closest to enacting... Eliot's 'auditory imagination.'' Repetition and alliteration in the line; 'Drip drop drip drop,' creates an auditory image of the non-existent water that shows how signifiers can create an almost real presence of the signified. Structuralist principals allow us to examine how such a vivid mental representation of the desired water is evoked through certain signifiers. This imparts how powerful the traveller's desperation is, supporting Saussure's belief that language is formative of our sense of reality. The distinction between reality and illusion in this section is blurred. The traveller suffers accumulated delusions, lost in the unnatural confusion between humanity and nature, plagued by nightmarish hallucinations such as those of; 'bats with baby faces.'
Deficient punctuation and images of painful discomfort make the reader long to be released from this torturous and interminable journey. The desert represents a world without God where hope is illusory. The absence of water implies that existence is pointless without the possibility of regeneration through eternal life; 'We who are living are now dying with a little patience." Eliot questions; 'Who is the third who walks always beside you?" only to present the reader with a figurative image of the grim reaper;'There is always another one walking beside you/ Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded." This infers that infinite death alone replaces God and eternal life. False prophets, spiritual impotence and a sense of loss traps; 'hooded hordes swarming over endless plains, stumbling in cracked earth." Macrae offers an interesting and convincing alternative to this interpretation, believing the desert to represent atheist Communist Russia, offering; 'deluded prophecies to the blinded masses as they stumble in a spiritual dessert.... of the cycle of error and destruction in history.'
Coote believes the poem; 'ends with the narrator sitting amid the wreck of urban culture, threatened by madness and longing for the peace of God." I disagree to an extent because the thunder does offer advice regarding a way forward, but Eliot leaves the decision to follow or reject the voice in the reader's hands. The sinister repetition of;'London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down,' implicitly infers that man is destined to sink and fall continuously if he ignores this advice. The ending's frustrating ambiguity is strengthened by Hieronymo's ambivalent and taunting voice. The poem lacks closure, ending without a full stop which infers that there is no one solution to the problems presented. This completes the poem's circular structure, as the paradoxical mocking irony that pervades the 'Burial of the dead,' is encapsulated in the image of the falling bridge.
The structure of The Waste Land has huge impact on how we interpret its images and meaning. I therefore disagree with Stead who believes; ''texture' was all-important and 'structure' only a shadow,' in the poem. Categorising the poem's structure and organisation proves problematic due to the lack of consistent meter, stress and rhyme. American New Critics valued works that promoted unity of form and content, and regard the way the text disrupts and questions itself as a negative feature. Initially, the five part division implies that Eliot may be constructing a tragedy, but the poem's flexibility rejects the constraints of such a style.
Amalgamation of form and technique suggests that its structure has a representative purpose, which is to reflect the new hybrid form of Europe. Ward supports this, describing Eliot's method as a 'complex fusing process." Williams believes his; 'logic of the imagination,' exposes a; 'controlling art behind apparent fragmentation." Eliot's deviant versification allows him to modulate pace and intensity, which in turn creates a purposeful chaos that reflects the complexity of the Modernist world. Williams believes that; 'mythological parallels help to establish a certain a-logical relation between the separate episodes of the poem." In order to support this assertion, the reader would have to view the poem's framework of mythical references and allusions to Vegetation rites as an attempt to create a sense of continuity and ingrained pattern within its structure. Emig disagrees, tracing the poem's fragmentation to; 'excessive use of metonymy which leads to a complex semantic network." The Structuralist emphasis on linguistics therefore makes it the most effective approach to 'make sense' of the poem.
The Waste Land challenges and transcends the boundaries of both poetry and art . It is above all, a pioneering example of Modernist literature that effortlessly captures the despair and disillusion of an age. Using a theoretical approach to open the text creates a framework that allows the reader to make sense of a poem that deliberately rejects coherency. I believe Structuralism to be the most effective way of stabilising its chaotic design due to its emphasis on the creation of meaning. This emphasis ensures that the reader has to examine the inter-textual relationship between language, image and allusion, which leads to a deeper understanding of the poem's thematic content. Structuralism allows us to use the poem's linguistic components to expose and unlock the concealed inferences within Eliot's perplexing and impervious images. In using Structuralism to do this, Eliot's primary concern is revealed to be the decaying morality of the world he inhabits. I therefore agree with Eagleton that; 'Structuralism seemed to make it (the text) a window on the universal mind.'