The current ratio suggests that Bards Hall hotel has more current assets than current liabilities which imply that the hotel has sufficient cash to pay its debt. However, the current ratio may not be a good representative of this as the ratio does not take 'stock' into consideration, this would refer to the liquidity ratio as it excludes stock as it can take a long time to convert to cash. The ratio shows a 5.83:1 which represents that the hotel is liquid and can pay its debts. Both ratios are quite high which suggests that perhaps that there is excessive funds tied up in the working capital and therefore the hotel may incur unnecessary charges.
The measurement of debtor days indicates that it would take on average 40 days for the debtors to pay the hotel. However, debtor days does not take VAT into consideration which according to Drury (1994) 'debtor days should be adjusted by dividing by 1.175 for the impact of VAT if sales are taxable to the amounts payable by the customer as VAT has to be included in debtor balances'. But because the Profit and Loss statement is concerned only with amounts earned by the business VAT is therefore excluded. The same process can be applied to creditors, Bards Hall hotel is estimated that it takes 112 days to pay their creditors which is ideal as trade credit is free.
To ensure efficient use of funds, the level of stock should be kept to a minimum, stock holding ratio signify that it takes 17 days in which stock is used up and needs to be replenished. 11.19% of the profit is the return on capital, this percentage measures the efficiency of the operation and would be most useful when compared to past financial data or against competition.
Bards Hall hotel's total sales are mainly made up of the Rooms Division followed by the Food and Beverage Department. For the month of June, they managed to make 77.54% of profit from their sales despite both payroll and expenses has exceeded their budget but didn't have that much impact as their sales improved by 6.44%. This may be due to the increased occupancy level based on the average room rate being lower than budgeted. The RevPar figure has also increased, RevPar is the average room revenue gained from all the rooms that are available and not just those sold.
Monitoring the volume ratios like occupancy and average spend per day or hour will enable the hotel to observe the 'peaks and troughs' of the hotel. The average beverage spend per customer is relatively low compared to that of food, this could be improved through up selling therefore perhaps requiring staff training or incentives to encourage them to sell more beverages. Davis et al (1998) quoted 'by increasing the average spend of the customer or by increasing the number of customers rather than by reducing costs'. Spends per customer helps us see where the sales are coming from and can be matched with costs.
The sales mix doesn't show the least popular items but help to explain a disappointing gross profit percentage that occurred, the reason often being that each item is usually costed at different gross profit percentages. Looking at the statistics, the gross profits are all positively higher than budgeted which imply that the increase on sales outweighed the cost of sales.
Normally the higher the payroll costs the higher the level of service offered, it is vital that they are tightly controlled as they contribute a high percentage of the total costs of running an operation, however looking at the ratios, the payroll costs are lower than budgeted. As suggested by Davis et al (1998) 'payroll costs can be controlled by establishing a head count of employees per department or by establishing the total number of employee hours allowed per department in relation to a known average volume of business'.