To set the context of this essay is a quotation from Wood (1997: 1) "The hotel and catering industry is one of the largest employers in the United Kingdom and many other developed (and, increasingly, less developed) countries". This demonstrates that the hospitality industry is very important and significant as an employer and is growing fast. The Office of National Statistics (1999) reported that the industry employs over 1.8 million people working in around 300,000 establishments and predicted that a further 170,000 jobs will be required in the industry by the end of 2005.
This essay aims to look at whether this industry makes a good career choice and in order to achieve this; it is necessary to identify the key characteristics of the industry and compares both the benefits and drawbacks of working in this industry.
The industry as Wood (1997) points out is 'heterogeneous', it is made up of many different sub sectors including hotels, restaurants, pubs, clubs, bars, contract catering and hospitality services. This represents an optimistic local labour market offering more and a variety of attractive prospects to employees. It provides opportunities for staff to work in other roles to have a change/break and vary staff contact with different people with different needs in different sub sectors within the same industry. The high levels of competition for jobs within the same industry means that employees are choosing a highly competitive sector to compete for jobs.
"The role of the employee becomes much more critical since to a very real extent the employee is the service, given the absence of any tangible artefact". (Redman and Mathews 1998: 59 cited in Kelliher and Perrett 2001: 425) "The starting point is the recognition that people are not simply one of the factors of production, along with money and machinery, but the major source of competitive advantage. How organisations recruit, train, reward, motivate and discipline their employees is of central importance to business success". (Sisson, 1994: 4 cited in Kelliher and Perrett, 2001: 423). On the contrary, the general approach to management shows too little commitment to human asset (Price, 1994). Gabriel (1998: 3) says that "working in catering you feel sometimes that your job lacks dignity. Kitchen ladies and catering staff in general are treated as inferior people by everyone".
Wood (1997: 2) states that "poor working conditions" as "the true nature of much hospitality industry employment". The hospitality sector is not for those who seek a 9:00am - 5:00pm, Monday - Friday work pattern. It is an environment that doesn't suit all; long hours, shift work and at unsocial hours. "The waiter's workplace is the customer's place of enjoyment and relaxation; the cook's time on the job is the customer's time off" (Gabriel, 1988: 4).
Lucas (2004: 215) points out there are "insufficient time between shifts" and Wood (1997) suggests that reductions in long hours might be a factor associated with increases in employment and productivity. Working long hours along with sleep disruption causes deterioration of task performance because it has a detrimental effect on things such as; rate of error, pace of work and social behaviour.
The most common reasons for working long hours are to meet the needs of the job where overtime is normally not paid. It is just expected that workers carry on working regardless of whether they are being paid and Lucas (2004: 215) quotes: "You are not paid for work done after the time you were meant to finish". According to the Caterer.com (2005) managers in the hospitality sector do nine hours and 36 minutes of unpaid overtime on average each week and "Managers in the sector are usually expected to put in extra hours for nothing" Long working hours also has a negative effect on motivation, absence and labour turnover.
Lucas (2004) suggests a high level of labour turnover could be caused by many factors: inadequate wage levels leading to employees moving to competitors, poor morale and low levels of motivation within the workforce. Referring to Torrington et al (2002), High labour turnover causes problems for businesses, there are significant 'direct costs' involved especially when recruitment and advertising are used.
A new employee needs to be inducted and trained and this will usually take some time to reach the required performance standards. The 'indirect costs' involved are loss of customer service/satisfaction particularly where the employee had extensive customer contact and if the employee had already built up an extensive amount of knowledge about the history, operation and culture of the company which is difficult to replace. Conversely, "The industry has been criticized for having a high labour turnover in staff but this does not imply staff dissatisfaction". (Forte, 1986: 122-3 cited in Wood, 1997: 124). Labour turnover does not just create costs, some level of labour turnover is important to bring new ideas, skills and enthusiasm to the labour force. The business needs to be revitalised with "fresh blood to avoid becoming stale and stunted" (Torrington 2002: 212).
As Gabriel (1988: 3) states "Catering wages are consistently low, waitresses are at the bottom of female wage league - only hairdressers earn less". According to the Office of National Statistics (2002) see appendix 1, employees in the financial sector topped the list in terms of annual earnings. Their average of 38, 493 was just under two and half times the average seen in hotels and restaurants sector which was the lowest paid sector. However, Torrington et al (2002) suggested that people may be motivated to leave an employer who is perceived as paying badly, but once they are satisfied with their pay additional increases have little effect.
According to Agrusa et al (1998), "sexual harassment occurs more often in the restaurant industry than other industries". It is suggested by Wood (1997) that this is due to the 'social characteristics' in the hospitality industry where people perceive this sort of behaviour as 'normal' social interaction compared to in an office setting where this behaviour is known as sexual harassment.
Gabriel (1988) states that management was cited as the major reason for leaving. This was mainly due to managers having poor people and management skills and not enough feedback from the manager. And with reference to Guerrier (1999: 58): "hospitality organisations have neglected to invest in training and development and therefore this low status and poor image of the industry continues".
"Given the crucial role of staff in determining quality in many aspects of hotel work, the need to adopt more sophisticated approaches to managing human resource demands a higher priority... the hotel industry should... be leading towards human resource management rather than being content to follow" (Kelliher and Johnson 1997: 321).
In essence, managers need to develop structured communication processes involving both management and employees to identify organisational issues and develop improvement initiatives in determining the balance between guidance and empowerment.
Guerrier (1998:3) states work in hospitality "is seen as dirty work... and as women's work" Women's participation in the workforce is known as the "pink blanket" as Howe (1977) cited in Wood, (1997: 32) emphasised. Their work reflected their duties at home and was considered the 'norm'. Employers took advantage of this and were able to use their skills at low cost as additional training was not needed and yet the women comprise in excess of two thirds of the hotel and catering workforce and are concentrated for the most part in operative roles whilst men dominate in management. The industry is losing out by not having enough women in senior positions according to a report by Caterer.com (2003).
'Occupational segregation' is best understood on the context of dual labour theories which comprises of two distinct markets; primary and secondary labour markets (Goldsmith et al 1997) see appendix 2.
The broad picture presented so far has shown many employers in the hotel and catering industry rely on drawing cheap, disadvantaged labour (typically women and ethnic minorities) from the secondary labour market to fill operative level positions. This approach is aimed to keep labour costs low and minimise the employers' commitment to employees with reference to the dual labour theories as mentioned above.
The size of this sector is growing globally, and this growth has meant that employers are putting together attractive recruitment packages to attract the right staff. For potential managers the prospects can be tremendous and career progression is rapid.
The poor working conditions; low pay, long unsocial hours, shift work, high labour turnover, lack of training and the higher chance of being sexual harassed all reveal a negative image of the industry and has negative effects such as decreased productivity, poor performance, health problems and lower employee motivation. It also affects staff work life balance and has a negative impact on their domestic relationships, this issue is particularly important where long unsocial hours can severely affect an employee's satisfaction - the happier the employee is at their work, the better and harder they will work, and the benefits such as free staff meals, uniform and free dry cleaning will increase employee's loyalty to their company but the benefits and rapid career progression versus the working environment does not make the hospitality industry a good career choice.
The hospitality sector needs to improve the image of the industry as an employer by reviewing their Human Resource Management strategies, a more comprehensive and systematic training programme linked to qualifications and rewards for learning needs to be put into place. To date it is suggested that very little progress has been made towards the development of equal opportunities policies and programmes to tackle sex discrimination within the industry. The industry needs to implement more training for women and encourage women to network to penetrate to top level positions.