Robinson Crusoe by Daniel Defoe was published in 1719 and is sometimes regarded as the first novel in English. However, as Kristeva poited out in 1960's when she coined the word 'intertextuality', "any text is the absorption and transformation of another". Daniel Defoe was inspired by the life of Alexander Selkirk who remained a castaway for almost thirty years after being marooned on a remote island. It follows that Defoe's novel is not the beginning of the 'Crusoe adventure' and it is certaily not the end. A great number of writers were inspired by the eighteenth-century novelist such as J. M. Coetzee with Foe (1986) or Diana Souhami with Selkirk's Island (2001). Many writers have 're-written' Robinson Crusoe and it is also the aim of the following piece of work. The idea is to produce a short text which 're-visits' the myth of Crusoe. The composition is completed by a commentary which explains how ideas for my re-writing came and evolved, how I made choices and which strategies I resorted to. The commentary then focuses on important issues brought up by the composition and finally reviews other possibilities that could have been explored.
The initial seed of my rewriting came from the very title of the assignment's case study: 'Revisiting Crusoe's Island'. The term 'revisiting' implied going back to the island. In the edition of Robinson Crusoe which is divided into chapters, the last chapter is entitled "I Revisit My Island". At the end of the novel, Defoe's hero briefly returns to his island. As a consequence, I thought that Crusoe could not be used as the 'revisitor' since it would have been his re-revisit. It was the island which had to be revisited - visited by someone else. At that point, I came to the idea that a new protagonist could come to the island several years after Crusoe's took his leave and found what is left of the "eight and twenty Years, two Months, and 19 Days" that Crusoe spent in his own "Country", his "own meer Property". This new 'visitor' would not be acquainted with the existence of Crusoe, so that the re-writing could focus on suppositions and hypotheses. He would be confronted to the signs of Robinson's stay and would have to speculate about their meaning. I had now to find who this "visitor" could be. I first thought of 'creating' him. The action had to take place in the 1720's or 1730's, it means around forty years after Crusoe's departure. It could hardly be after since Robinson Crusoe's 'traces', his habitations, his constructions, his "home-made" objects had to be in a reasonably good state to be recognizable and worth wondering about. The 'visitor' had to stop on the island, it could be for diverse reasons: collecting victuals for his ship, a colonial expedition or a naturalist exploration such as Darwin's in the Galapagos. However, the project evolved differently.
It occurred to me that instead of 'creating' a character, I could borrow one from another novel, one whose story gave the opportunity to visit an island. The idea of my project was now to blend and fuse two novels. The status of my re-writing would be a kind of intertextual hybrid. I would "recast two (...) related texts in a new textual mould". However, I would only produce a mixture; I would remould my chosen novel in order to introduce allusions to Robinson Crusoe. Two titles came into my mind: Swift's Gulliver Travels (1726) and Stevenson's Treasure Island (1881). I had now to make a choice. Swift's hero bears several similarities with Defoe's. Gulliver's ship is caught in a storm and although the hero's companions die, he manages to survive and reaches an island, the country of the Lilliputs. Later in the novel, Gulliver is marooned by the sailors of his ship who turned up to be pirates. It is reminiscent of Diana Souhami's "original Robinson Crusoe", Selkirk, who was marooned on a remote island. Concerning time, the two novels work very well since Gulliver's last travel, in the country of the Houyhnhnms takes place in 1715. Consequently, Gulliver's "Voyage to the island of Robinson Crusoe" could happen set just after, in 1716, which means thirty three years after Crusoe's departure. However, in terms of genre, the two novels are quite different. As some critics pointed out, Defoe's work gives an illusion of reality. Leslie Stephen argued that the novel was "in one sense marvellously like truth", his daughter, Virginia Woolf underlined that "Reality, fact, substance" dominated the story. As for Ian Watt, he wrote that "when the story appeared it is reported to have been universally received and credited as a genuine story". On the contrary, Swift's novel is fantastic and unrealistic. Crusoe's ordinary island would have rung false compared to the Lilliputs, the giants and the flying island of Gulliver's voyages. As a consequence, I turned to Treasure Island.
Stevenson's story shares many issues with Defoe's. Both novelists describe their islands in detail. In terms of wildlife and vegetation, they are different. Crusoe finds in his island "many pleasant Savana's or Meadows; plain, smooth and cover'd with Grass (...), a great deal of Tobacco (...), Sugar Canes" and he is pleased to observe that there is "no wild Beasts to hurt [him]", whereas "oak-like tress", "swampy willows" or "pines" grow on Treasure Island and there are also "snakes". Nevertheless, the general descriptions of the two islands are very similar. Both novelists focus on their hilly landscapes. For his first exploration of the island, Crusoe decides to go to a hill "which rose up very steep and high, and which seem'd to over-top some other Hills" and he decides to build his habitation in "a little Plain on the side of a rising Hill." As for Treasure Island, the first description of it focuses on "two low hills, about a couple of miles apart, and rising behind one of them a third and higher hill". A link could also be drawn between the characters of Robinson Crusoe and Ben Gunn. The latter has been marooned just as Selkirk and has lived "on goats since then" like Defoe's Crusoe. Both have made little boats. In terms of time, the combination of the two novels was interesting. Stevenson is very vague about the precise year of the treasure hunt. His narrator, Jim Hawkins, mentions only that "I take up the pen in the year of the grace 17--, and go back to the time when my father kept the 'Admiral Benbow' inn." This vagueness was an opportunity to seize for my intertextual re-writing since I felt entitled to situate Treasure Island in the 1720's, about forty years after Crusoe's departure. Similarly, Stevenson does not mention where Treasure Island is situated, consequently, I could give it the same location as Crusoe's island, "near the Spanish dominions" of America. Finally, in matters of narration, both novels are retrospectively told. Their first-person narrators are telling events several years after they happened. All these similarities pointed out that Treasure Island would ideally suit for my Robinson Crusoe re-writing.
Now, the next step was to combine Defoe's novel into Stevenson's. I decided that Crusoe's story should be regarded only as an anecdote in Treasure Island. The aim was not to transform Jim Hawkins's adventure, his hunt for Flint's treasure, but only to add another issue to it. The re-writing had to be incorporated into Treasure Island and the challenge was to find a passage in which the Crusoe's anecdote could be added without changing Stevenson's words. The part of the novel that I found is at the very end of Chapter Fourteen. It takes place a few pages after Jim has landed on the island and has witnessed John Silver murdering another sailor. The young hero realizes that his idea to leave the ship and to go on the island was a mistake and that he is probably going to be murdered by the pirates. At this point of the story, he is describing the place in which he finds himself. He mentions that he has "drawn near the foot of a little hill". I decided that this hill would be the one where Robinson Crusoe built his habitation. Jim would discover what remains of Crusoe's stay on the island and then, his quest for Flint' treasure would continue. In order to better define the scope of my project, I have added in the appendix a short epilogue of this new version of Robinson Crusoe. I presented Jim as the future writer of the life of Robinson Crusoe. However, the main focus one my work remained on the finding of Crusoe's habitation.
This re-writing had several aims. The main target was the shift in matters of point of view and narration. In this project, the hero of Defoe becomes a very minor character since he is only mentioned in an anecdote. It follows a complex narrational process. The re-writing brings into play three actual writers - Defoe, Stevenson and myself, and two fictional writers - Crusoe as the writer of his bibliography, Jim as the writer of his adventure and as the writer of Crusoe's story. Two narrators are competing; Jim as a 'verbal' narrator since he is still given a voice and Robinson as a 'silent' narrator since he is no longer narrating his story but his fictional autobiography, Defoe's novel, is still present in the reader's mind. Finally, there are two levels of narration: Jim's adventure and Crusoe's story. Not only Crusoe is no longer the one who speaks but his story is told by someone else. Jim is the main narrator of Treasure Island and it fell on him to find Crusoe's cave and describe it. Consequently, Robinson's world is seen by another person. Jim had to imagine, to make suppositions about the whys and the wherefores. In that respect, the rewriting had to conform to Jim's narrative style. I therefore studied the narration of Treasure Island and wrote the Crusoe's anecdote in conformity with the rest of the story. For example, I kept Jim's use of the grammatical shifter "here". Even if he writes some years after the events happened and if he is no longer on the island, Jim uses the term "here" as if the events were happening as he tells them. I found it interesting and worth maintaining. Similarly, I borrowed some of Jim's words and expressions. Just before the passage that I chose to incorporate my rewriting, Stevenson's hero sees his end near and writes "It was all over, I thought". I gave an echo to Jim's words when I wrote "I thought, maybe it was not all over". Moreover, earlier in the novel, Jim writes "then it was that there came into my head the first of the mad notions that contributed so much to save our lives". This is the reason why I chose to put the sentence "another notion came into my head". Finally, my project explores the notion of time. About forty years are meant to separate Crusoe's story and Jim's visit of the island. Consequently, I had to focus on the state of Robinson Crusoe's habitation after many years of abandon. I thus tried to emphasis the idea of decay and rottenness. I presented the construction which is situated in front of the cave -what Crusoe calls the 'tent', as destroyed. Except for deterioration, the place had to be similar to the way it had been built. Another issue concerning time was the blurring of chronology. Robinson Crusoe was written (1719) before Treasure Island (1881). However, the composition assumes that Jim is going to write the story of Crusoe some years after his treasure hunt. As a consequence, Robinson Crusoe is meant to be written after  Treasure Island. It is with all these ideas in mind that I composed and rewrote.
However, after having completed my rewriting, I found several relevant elements that could have been added. I might have better explored Jim's internal thoughts and his wondering about what he finds in the cave. I could have taken this rewriting as an opportunity to underline the almost absurdness of Crusoe's fortification. Defoe's hero spends so much time in making sure that he can live in security that this part of the story almost becomes more important than his encounter with Friday. Moreover, as the assignment only required a short rewriting, I had to select only one passage and I chose to focus on the habitation. However, there are many other ideas that I wish I could have developed. I thought that Jim or Ben Gunn could have found the traces of Crusoe's plantation or his goat-fences and speculate on them. I could have used Souhami and Coetzee's novels. I only resorted to the Souhami text in my epilogue when I mentioned the Cinque Ports. Defoe does not provide his readers with the name of Crusoe's ship, so I had to find one as was necessary for my denouement. I also used Souhami's book when I referred to Richard Steele. As for the Coetzee text, it was useful insofar as I did not feel guilty to 'kill' Crusoe since it is also what the South African novelist did.
To conclude, this re-writing has been a new and enriching experience. First it allowed me to revisit a myth, Robinson Crusoe, and to remould it. Secondly, it entitled me to realize what I have often wished to do. Many times, I have finished a novel, felt disappointed by the end and imagined an alternative ending. I have now understood that I am not was a 'fussy' reader. Intervening in others novels is in fact common practise even among many renowned novelists.
A small plain stretched on one side of the hill. A little wood was nested between the green of the plain and the rock of the hill. The trees, here, had grown so thick that a person could hardly walk through them. I was about to set off my walk again, when another notion came into my head. It occurred to me that if somebody had wanted to hide something, they could not have found a better place than this little wood. It looked so impenetrable; no men could ever see if something was beyond it. I felt hopeful again, I thought, maybe, it was not all over.
With great difficulties, I started to make my way through the wood. I reached a little winding passage which eventually led me to a raw of trees. On one of them was a little ladder. I rejoiced at the sight of it, this fortification was the work of men. As I was climbing the ladder, the palpitations of my heart were getting stronger and stronger. Maybe just a few paces remained between Flint's treasure and me.
On the other side of the ladder, I found a little open-space of green. At the other end stood a second wall with a ladder. Behind it, at the foot of the cliff, I discovered some kind of buildings. Several pitches were here, probably, they had been used to uphold some sort of roof of which just a few pieces of wood remained, lying on the floor. Judging by the state of decay, no one has been living here for many years.
Behind the ruins, the rock opened into a cave which had been converted into several rooms. On the floor were lying quantities of very old objects, such as nails, ironworks, a sort of mortar and some kind of candles. The walls had been cut into shelves on which were put dozens of baskets and pots in clay. All these objects had curious shapes as if they had been the work of a child. I searched them in the hope of finding worthy articles but most of them were empty and I only found some residue of corn and a little quantity of powder. In the main room stood two chairs and one table, on top of which I found a book, though it was extremely rotten and impossible to handle, I managed to decipher its title, it was a Bible.
Hung at a corner of the cave were several pieces of old and decayed animal skin. As I was looking behind them to make sure they were not hiding something, I realized that they had actually been cut to make jackets and breeches.
I was intrigued by the singular place that I had just discovered. Somebody had lived here many years ago and had made the best of the little he owned. Considering the state of what was left, the construction dated back to before the time when Flint came to the island and hid his treasure.
As I was pondering on all the mystery surrounding this place, I suddenly heard a noise. Fear ran through me at the thought of being found here by John Silver, but I eventually distinguished the shapes of three wild cats huddled in a corner of the cave.
Although I felt reassured, I was still not at ease in that place, it gave me claustrophobic feelings, and therefore, I decided to leave the spot and I went back to the open plain.
However, for me, not everything was solved. After having received my part of the treasure and properly settled my mother and myself, I started to think again of this mysterious habitation hidden between the dense little wood. Who had lived there and why had he, if it was a he, built so many fences to protect him? He probably thought himself in great danger, otherwise it was mere paranoia. I wanted to know more and to solve this mystery.
Benn Gunn turned to be a considerable help in my search. A few months after being marooned, he had discovered the cave, but finding nothing worth in it, he had not attached importance to it and had preferred to establish his habitation in a place where he could observe the sea. He had judged this cave too secluded.
Before we left the island, Benn Gunn had shown me a square post on the beech, on which was written "I come on shore here the 30 th of September 1659". Around the sides of the spot were cut hundreds and hundreds notches. Ben Gunn had showed me how every seventh notch was longer than the others; he had wondered a lot about the meaning of it and eventually understood that it was a calendar, a reckoning of time. Ben had counted them, one after the other, and found that the counting of time had stopped in 1686, twenty-eight years, two months and ninety days after its starting point. It was about twenty years before Flint landed on the island and hid his treasure. Ben Gunn also gave me a considerable clue: the name of a ship, the Cinque Port. He had found it written on a pair of perspective-glass, the only object he had found worth taking.
With these dates and this name, I went to a marine record office and little by little my search led me to the name of a man. The Cinque Ports had left Brazil to go to Guinea on the 1 st of September 1659. After that, no one heard from it until 1687 when a Robinson Crusoe claimed that the Cinque Ports had sunk on her way to Africa and that after the wreckage, he had spent twenty-eight years alone in a deserted island. The story started to gain momentum and Crusoe was introduced to Richard Steele, the author of the Spectator. However, Robinson Crusoe took the sea; he had to go to Portugal for important business. His ship was caught in a storm. All the people died Robinson Crusoe with them and his story with him.
But, Robinson Crusoe and his island could come to life again. A book could be written, I had seen the way he had built his house, I had seen his way to remember the passing of time and I could add so more, the making of a canoe to escape, how he managed to grew corn, his pet animals and why not an encounter with an indigene. So much could be written, an amazing story, the life of Robinson Crusoe.