The following work is a 'critical essay' which focuses on the treatment of London in Dickens's novels and particularly in Oliver Twist (1837-39) and Little Dorrit (1855-57). Raymond Williams argued in an essay on Dickens published by M. Slater in 1970 that the nineteenth-century novelist "was the first English novelist to explore the modern city - in its form as the metropolis- as a social fact and as a human landscape". It is not uncommon to refer to Dickens as a writer of the city. Most of his novels are set in London and the role of the capital is often crucial in the development of the plots. This essay tries and analyses key critical texts - critical books, essays or journal articles- which consider the representation of London and the city in Dickens's novels. By relating and comparing them, the following study forms a basic critical history of Dickens's treatment of London and shows the evolution of critical studies of this subject area. This essay will first focus on a bibliography of Dickensian criticism written by R. C. Churchill in 1975. This book is a valuable material to enter and start to tackle the subject since it provides the references of a wide range of works focusing on it. In a second part, a few critical texts on Dickens's London and representation of the city will be introduced and analysed. Finally, this essay will present and study the main and recurrent themes and ideas on the subject area that critics have underlined through the years.
A Bibliography of Dickensian Criticism, 1836-1975 was published by R. C. Churchill in 1975. It refers to a great number of works on Dickens and it also provides many quotations. These quotes are either the main idea of a critical text dealing with the Victorian novelist or they are a relevant reference to Dickens extracted from a text which is not especially dedicated to him. The bibliography is divided into categories. For example, the first twenty pages are devoted to general criticism of the nineteenth-century. Another section focuses on aspects in Dickens such as "His Characters" or "Dickens and Childhood". Among them, there is a section dedicated to "Dickens's London". It presents around thirty entries and some of them offer relevant quotations. In this section, R. C. Churchill refers to works written between 1837 and 1975. As a consequence, this bibliography provides materials contemporary with Dickens's time but which are hardly available today. However, they imply that Dickens's treatment of London was already a matter of critical concern at the time when the novelist was writing. For instance, Churchill quotes the English journalist Walter Bagehot who wrote in 1858 a review on Charles Dickens in which he stated that "Mr Dickens's genius is especially suited to the delineation of city life... He describes London like a special correspondent to prosperity." As will be shown later in this essay, more recent critics of Dickens do not argue in favour of the association of London with prosperity. On the contrary, they underline the connection of the city with death or hell. The bibliography also refers to renowned writers who have commented on Dickens's London. They can be contemporaries of the Victorian novelist such as Ainsworth and Emerson. In the preface of his novel Rookwood (1837), Ainsworth wrote that "Mr Dickens, with his wonderful knowledge of London life and character, and unequalled powers of delineation, has done more for this metropolis, in the Pickwick Papers and Oliver Twist, than Paul de Kock, in all his works, has done for Paris". As for Emerson, he mentioned during a lecture at Boston in 1848 on 'English Traits' that "Dickens, with preternatural apprehension of the language and manners, and the varieties of street life, with pathos and laughter, with patriotic and still enlarging generosity, writes London tracts." Other quotations come from later writers such as George Orwell who wrote in 1839 in an essay on Charles Dickens "...from the age of nine onwards he was brought up in London in commercial surroundings, and generally in an atmosphere of struggling poverty. Mentally he belongs to the small urban bourgeoisie..." Among the works presented by Churchill, only the last mentioned, Alexander Welsh's The  City of Dickens (1971) was made available for this essay and will be referred to in the following work. Churchill's book establishes a first approach to the treatment of London by Dickens, it mentions useful materials and quotations. Nevertheless, it remains mainly anecdotal and it is only by analysing proper critical texts that the writing of a critical history is possible.
This essay focuses on three major critical books, J. Hillis Miller's Charles Dickens : The World of His Novels (1970), A.Welsh's The City of Dickens (1971) and F.S. Schwarzbach's Dickens and the City (1979).These works were written by academics in the 1970's. They are regularly referred to by more recent studies on Dickens's London. This essay also mentions a non-academic work, the book introduced by Peter Ackroyd and commented by Dudgeon, Dickens's London : an Imaginative Vision (1989). Besides, two other texts were useful for this critical history: M. Baumgarten's essay "Fictions of the city" (2001) and B. Deutschendorf's article "Dickens' Oliver Twist" (2005).
Both Hillis Miller and Schwarzbach present their studies by looking at a certain number of Dickens's novels and proceed by following the chronology of their publication. Miller explores six novels and analyses them as the transformation of the real world of Dickens into an imaginary world with certain special qualities of its own. He argues that "throughout all the swarming multiplicity of his novels", Dickens created a "world which is unique and the same". Miller points out that the element which presides at the centre of the imaginative universe of Dickens is the "great modern commercial city" and he underlines Dickens's interpretation of the city-world. Schwarzbach's approach is similar to Miller's but if the latter analyses the world of Dickens in general, the former focuses on the treatment of the city only. Schwarzbach stresses that London played an important role in Dickens's own life and is at the centre of the novelist creative imagination. His work explores the Victorian writer's approach to the city and examines how it evolves through his novels. As for Welsh, he presents Dickens's treatment of the city as a great metaphor. At the difference of the two critics previously mentioned, he is more concerned by the symbolic meanings of the novelist's portrayal of London than the descriptions in themselves. Welsh divides his study in themes which are symbolically related to the Dickensian city. For example, he underlines the association of London with death and hell, greed and money, or the hearth and home in the different works of the novelist. As far as Ackroyd and Dudgeon are concerned, their study is more focused on the autobiographical dimension. It highlights the fact that Dickens incorporated his personal approach and experience of the city into his work. As for Baumgarten and Deutschendorf, both critics underline the connection between Dickens's characters and London and the way the novelist used the city as a reflection of his protagonists' personalities. All these different critical texts encompass a period of thirty five years, Miller's book was written in 1970 whereas Deutschendorf's article was published in 2005. Despite the gap in time, these various studies share many characteristics, analogies and connections can be drawn between them. The debate over Dickens and London sheds light on a great number of motifs which are recurrent from study to study. The aim of this essay is now to focus on these features and to interrelate the different theories and conceptions of them.
Charles Dickens was immensely attracted to London. His life was conditioned by the city. As a consequence, he incorporated his personal experience of the city into his work. On the one hand, Schwarzbach stresses the fictionalization of some events of the novelist's life. He argues that Dickens's "fiction makes free and creative use of every detail of his outer and inner life". The writer's novels depict characters, places or incidents which were often inspired by the his own life. Similarly, Ackroyd and Dudgeon emphasise the autobiographical dimension of David Copperfield (1849-50) and present the novel as "Dickens's auto-novel". On the other hand, Hillis Miller is more concerned by the novelist's personal state of mind at the time he was writing. He points out that a work such as Pickwick Papers (1836-37) is the verbal expression of Dickens's mood, or sensibility, or spiritual state" when he wrote it. Although Schwarzbach argues that "Dickens could not conceive of meaningful life being lived anywhere outside of the city", most of the critics underline that the novelist also considered life in the city as impossible which is contradictory to Ainsworth's previous comment. Critical books point out Dickens's awareness of the many problems at the heart of the city such as unsanitary problems or the problem of prostitution. As a consequence, Dickens drew a rather dark representation of the capital.
The novelist recurrently interpreted London as a dark labyrinth. This image is often enlightened by critical texts. Schwarzbach stresses an autobiographical impulse in Dickens's vison of London as a labyrinth. He argues that "the London of the dark labyrinth was a precise reflection of the London of the Blacking Factory" where the novelist was sent to work when he was still a child and of which he kept haunting memories. Both Schwarzbach and Hillis Miller regard Oliver Twist and Little Dorrit as the two major novels which underline the labyrinthine city. Hillis Miller points out that the London of Oliver Twist is "the dream or poetic symbol of an infernal labyrinth, inhabited by the Devil himself" who is incarnated in the character of Fagin. In Little Dorrit, the same critic argues that the image of the labyrinth is symbolically represented by the "Circumlocution Office, with its inextricably tangled halls, offices, passageways, and levels of authority through which Arthur Clennam and Daniel Doyce meander hopelessly [...]" whereas Schwarzbach stresses the labyrinthine complexity of the city itself which is reflected in the recurrent images and ceaseless repetitions of words such as "wilderness", "grave", "dark" or "smoke". The image of the labyrinth is often associated with the one of the prison. Schwarzbach argues that Dickens's "fear of the prison had been one of his association with London". As for Hillis Miller, he underlines how the novelist incorporated images of imprisonment into his work. For example, the critic interprets Fagin's den as a "windowless prison, dark and seemingly underground like a cave or a grave", a place of "enclosure". The image of the Dickensian city as a labyrinth or a prison is often related to the actual atmosphere of Victorian London.
In his essay "The Life and Characters of Charles Dickens" (1933), H. C. Dent wrote that Dickens "was a Londoner to the core...as firmly attached to the grimy, foggy, grey old city...as a homing pigeon to its loft." Ackroyd and Dudgeon point out that the descriptions of fog in Dickens are not "some imagined and idealized obscurity : the London fog was real [...] due to a concentration of chimneys and factories". Hillis Miller is more concerned by the metaphorical and symbolic aspect of the fog. He argues that in Bleak House (1852-53) "the fog is both a physical moist and a spiritual blindness, [which] forms an opaque barrier between any one place and any other". Dickens's London appears as a hostile place in which life and survival for the characters remain complex and difficult.
Dickens's representation of the city gives a sense of alienation and dehumanization. Hillis Miller argues that the labyrinthine city is "a symbol of the metaphorical alienation of man." Both Schwarzbach and Welsh underline the anonymity of the city-dwellers. The former argues that Dickens's characters are "devoid of individual identities" whereas the latter comments on the "loneliness of the city-dwellers" in Dickens's writing. Both critics stress the image of a bestial city. Schwarzbach states that in Nicholas Nickleby (1838-39), Dickens mixed "human and animal sights and sounds". Similarly, Welsh highlights "the carnivorousness of men" in Dickens's novels and shows how the novelist related human beings and animals in the market scene of Oliver Twist. The market description is connected to the image of the crowd. Schwarzbach argues that the crowd "is in fact central to Dickens's conception of the city" in novels such as Pickwick Papers, Oliver Twist and Nicholas Nickleby. He pinpoints the "ominous" and threatening aspect of the mob in the novelist's work. As far as Welsh is concerned, he regards the crowd as a corollary effect of the labyrinthine city. He explains that in Oliver Twist, the labyrinth of London is on several occasions "turned into a hostile crowd." The mob is as dangerous as the labyrinth is since it threatens the lives of the protagonists. When Oliver is accused of having stolen Mr. Brownlow' s handkerchief, he tries to run away but is chased by the crowd. Hillis Miller explains that "the aim of the mob is not simply to catch him, but to 'crowd' him to death." Similarly, later in the novel, the "crowd tries to tear Fagin to pieces." If both Schwarzbach and Welsh underline the threatening aspect of Dickens's crowd, Ackroyd, in the introduction of his study, presents a more positive judgement of it. He argues that Dickens's novels "embody the vigour and the disorder of the city. [...] Dickens and his contemporaries were celebrating the sheer spectacle of people gathered together, a celebration of human energy at a time when its possibilities were just becoming apparent". Another recurrent critical aspect of Dickens's city is the links existing between London and its city-dwellers. For example, Deutschendorf underlines the influence of the city on the characters. In his article "Dickens' Oliver Twist", he shows that there is "a connection between the city and the individual", the Dodger grew faster than an ordinary child due to the "fast-paced life of London" while the latter is physically associated with the city because he is portrayed as the mirror image of his dark and dirty den.
Finally, a last popular theme underlined by critics on the Dickensian London is the idea of opposition. Welsh argues that Dickens uses "stock contrasts of satire" in Oliver Twist with his allusions to "wealth and poverty, virtue and vice, housed and houseless, day and night". The city is recurrently apposed to the country. Schwarzbach stresses the "tension between the life of repose, represented by the country, and the life of activity, by the city." He also points out that Dickens associates "innocence with the country and misery with the city." Both Schwarzbach and Welsh present the correlations between on the one hand the city and death and on the other hand the country and life in Dickens's novels. For the former, there is a "neat separation of country and life from city and death" in Oliver Twist
 whereas the latter analyses the city as a place of danger and death and the country as an unreal pastoral refuge, a "Platonic world". As for Hillis Miller, "the city is cut off altogether from the divine, the country is close to Heaven". These associations with death and hell are even more singular when Dickens's readers take into account the analogy between the city and society in general. This last idea has been studied and highlighted by many critics. Both F. Harrison and Schwarzbach present Dickens's conception of London as a microcosm of the entire society. In "Dickens's Place in Literature" (1984), Harrison wrote "... It is quite true : London is a microcosm, an endless and bottomless Babylon; which, perhaps, no man has ever known so well as did Dickens. This was his library : he gathered that vast encyclopaedia of human nature which some are inclined to call 'cockney', but if it be, 'Cockayne' must be a very large country indeed." If Harrison's judgement is rather positive with its connection to Babylon, Schwarzbach has rather a pessimist view when he writes "the world could be seen to exist in microcosm - the world's metropolis. London. [...] the epitome of the world at large, containing every human type or, more usually every human vice." All in all, these critics show that Dickens provided his readers with a negative image of London and consequently of society in general.
Literary critics have been and are still interested in the treatment of the city and London by Charles Dickens. Some of them consider it as a crucial element in the plots of the Victorian novelist's works. Murray Baumgarten argues that "no wonder that London, the modern city writ large, is the central protagonist of [Dickens's] fiction and one of the defining elements of his popular success." Similarly, Pritchett points out that "the first thing to say about the comedy of Dickens is that London, the city itself, becomes the chief character..." This essay has tried to present the main ideas of some Dickensian critics as far as the representation of London is concerned. It has shown that many theories are recurrent from critic to critic, for example the labyrinthine dimension of London or the analogy between city-dwellers and the city. If approaches to Dickens's London are different, academic or not, symbolic or textual, it follows from this essay that they usually concur and lead to the same ideas. This last remark is probably an approval of Hillis Miller's statement that Dickens created a "world which is unique and the same". Dickens's London is unique and interpreted by critics just as the novelist conceived it.