Underlines the connection between industrialism and novels during the Victorian Age. Argues that literature gave the middle-classes access to the conditions of the working-classes, novels presented the contrasts between social classes. Reading about the factory was easier than actually experiencing it. Asserts that Dickens is a novelist of the city and Hard Time belongs to the industrial novel genre. The novel offers comments on the political unrest linked to industrialization. Industrial culture reached into the lives of the novel's characters and threatens to turn society into a kind of factory.
Presents some characteristics emerging from the industrialization of Victorian England and their influence on literature. States that industrial novels depict working-class life. Argues that strikes became the dramatic centre of most industrial novels whose plots usually turned to members of the middle-classes forming affective relations with individual workers. The idea was to control potential revolutions. Asserts that if many Victorian writers complied with the technological wonders of their time, some artists, such as the Pre-Raphaelites, decided to turn away from the factory.
Stresses that Dickens was the first writer to put the city into his fiction and to focus on urban life. At his time, London was subjected to many changes due to the Industrial Revolution. States that Dickens described this emerging urban world and that the capital became a determining element in the plots of his novels. The novelist also used the city as a reflection of his characters' personalities. Argues that Dickens' technique to describe the city gives his work an illusion of motion.
Stresses that if London and the city played important roles in Dickens' own life, they are also at the centre of his creative imagination. Explores the writer's approach to the city and examines how it evolved throughout his literary career. In novels, such as Oliver Twist or David Copperfield, London is portrayed as a dark labyrinth, a place of terror in which individuals remain anonymous and struggle for survival. In other novels, such as Martin Chuzzlewit or Bleak House, the capital is described as a model of social organization -the novelist drew analogies between buildings and society.
Presents Dickens' portrayal of the city both as a historical reality and as a metaphor. Shows that the writer was aware of the problems - being economic, social or political - which were at the centre of the Victorian city and explains how he integrated them into his work. Dickens associated the city with death and hell but also greed, money and selfishness. "Good" characters can also dwell in the city but they are earnest, charitable and they forgive their enemies. Also examines how the writer treated the Victorian ideal of hearth and home and incorporated into his work by connecting it to the city.
Focuses on Dickens' depiction of London in Oliver Twist. Analyses the role that the city plays in Oliver and the other characters' lives. Shows that the Dodger and Fagin are connected to the city: the former grew faster than an ordinary child due to the fast-paced life of London while the latter is physically associated with the city because he is portrayed as the mirror image of his dark and dirty den. States that even if Oliver gets connected to Fagin and his nefarious surroundings, it does not damage his identity and the hero still prospers.
Argues that Dickens' Hard Time is a realistic representation of the conditions in industrial societies and the novel allowed the writer to criticize industrial capitalism. Demonstrates that Dickens' depiction of the factory metaphorically represents the destructive forces at work in the characters' lives. The main protagonists, Stephen and Louisa are both defined by the factory: they are often connected with images of smoke or fire and they are metonymically presented as the fuel and eventually waste of the factory. Stephen is presented as fuel for the system of production while Louisa is fuel for marriage and reproduction.
Explores the characteristics of Dickens' style and stresses his linguistic creativity. Focuses on the writer's grammar: underlines his tendency to reclassify countable nouns into uncountable or vice versa, his alternations between indirect speech and free indirect speech and his use of collective nouns or "string-compound". Presents Dickens as a lexical innovator: many words which have now entered English language were first coined in his novels. Stresses the writer's style to turn nouns into verbs or vice versa and reviews numerous terms created by the novelist. States that Dickens' contribution to language history should be better recognized.
Underlines the unique scope of Dickens' repertoire. His characters' linguistic behaviours often deviate from the norm which allowed the writer to present linguistic oddities. Points out idiosyncratic pronunciations and the writer's skill to play with the sound of words. Stresses Dickens' treatment of strings of words. Focuses on the putting together of prestige terms with colloquial or slangy words. States that the novelist offered his readers extensive but realistic and convincing specimens of substandard English. Finally asserts that Dickens -commented his own style in his work through some remarks of his characters.
Stresses the unprecedented style of Dickens' prose. Argues that the writer transformed and reshaped language. Presents examples of "grammatical mimesis" - passages where external descriptions are filtered through the consciousness of a character. Shows how the writer managed to blur the boundaries between people and things. He resorted to metaphors to bestow animation on objects. Points out the Dickensian approach to double meanings, to play with the literal and the metaphorical senses of a same word. Highlights his skill to create "syllepsis"-to join together unlike things- and his fondness for adjectival triads, the use of three successive adjectives.
d