The project started with the idea to work on Charles Dickens's Oliver Twist (1838) since it is the subject of my dissertation for the English Masters. I first thought not to intervene in the text itself but in the 'before'or in the 'after'text. Nancy and the Artful Dodger have important roles in the development of the plot; however, little is said about them and their origins. Their actions are related to Oliver's story. Consequently, it might have been interesting to focus on the reasons why they became a prostitute for Nancy and a pickpocket for the Artful Dodger. An intervention of that kind would have been a prelude, the extension of the "text 'before' (...) the events it represents." A postlude, the extension of the "text (...) 'after' the events it represents", was not possible with the character of Nancy since she is killed by Sikes at the end of the story. However, a postlude concerning the Dodger's was a possibility. When he is taken to prison, the young pickpocket replied to the Bench's sentence "You'll pay for this, my fine fellows. I wouldn't be for you for something!" The postlude could have focused on the Dodger's imprisonment and could have included an escape for example and his 'return' and 'revenge'. All these ideas sounded very pleasant to explore but they were not of great interest for the subject of my dissertation since it is on Charles Dickens's treatment of London. As a consequence, the following project took another turn and I chose to work on the notion of time and to set Oliver Twist in modern times. Hence, I would have to study Dickens's London as it was in the nineteenth-century and as it is in his novel together with today's London and try to combine them. Hence, the ideas of writing a prelude or a postlude were given up, however it might have been interesting to develop them and consequently I chose to mention them in the introduction of the commentary.
Peter Ackroyd wrote "London created Dickens, just as Dickens created London. (...). London entered his soul; it terrified him and it entranced him. It became the material for his fantasy and the arena for his polemic. And, in the end, it was truly Dickens's London." As for Elaine Saunders, she argues "To Dickens, London was a loving, breathing entity of which he had an enduring fascination. He loved its diversity yet hated its inequalities, and his descriptions of sights, sounds, and smells of the city are among the more evocative passages in English literature." In Dickens's novels, London became a character in itself; it was treated almost as an animate presence and thus became what Ackroyd calls "Dickens's London". The aim of the project was to rewrite Dickens's London as it might have been if it had been written today and not in the nineteenth-century. The idea was to choose a passage in Oliver Twist and to 'translate' it into our present world and words. A first rewriting was made, if the result tackled aspects different from the initial plan, it nevertheless, did not work on London and a second rewriting became necessary. The aim of this commentary is to explain how ideas came and evolved. It first focuses on the novels and films which helped me in the composition. It then comments on the two're-written' passages and on the important issues brought up by these compositions but also on the problems which I encountered.
My first work was to find some materials which could help me in the 'modernizing' process of the action and would give me a better idea of today's image of London or the city in general. In order to stick to the spirit of Oliver Twist, the research had to focus on children or teenagers in poor or low areas. The study of their daily lives, activities and their language could be helpful tools in the Oliver Twist rewriting. The first two sources turned to be useful for the composition but to a certain extent. To start, I watched Sweet Sixteen (2002). Ken Loach's film presents the lives of today's teenagers in poor suburbs. Liam, the young hero, has many problems facing him every day, including small time crime such as stealing cars and vandalism. The story relates his descent into the criminal and drug underworld. As far as the rewriting was concerned, it could re-use some aspects of Ken Loach's film, concerning teenager's daily life such as eating fast-food or smoking but also their physical appearances - wearing cap and trainers for example, and their language - the use of slangy if not rude terms. I then turned to literature and to Irvine Welsh's Trainspotting (1993). The novel is similar to Ken Loach's film in many respects. Similarly, it presents problems of drug, antisocial misdeeds. Nevertheless, both the film and the novel were inadequate for the main purpose of the rewriting since their action takes place in Scotland and the idea of the composition was to work on London. Moreover, the characters speak in Scottish and their language and vocabulary is probably very different from those of the Londoners. However, both sources eventually became key elements in the project, since they brought up the idea to work on language and accent. This aspect would be explored later in this commentary.
Materials which could be considered as helpful had to be set in London. Hence, I came to Zadie Smith's White Teeth (2000). Smith deliberately rewrites Dickensian London from the perspective of immigrant communities, however her novel turned to be poor in descriptions of London and the focus is more on certain groups of people living in the capital. White Teeth well underlines that today's London is a multicultural city, a place full of people from different origins. The novel particularly focuses on Indian and Caribbean immigrants. Zadie Smith makes her character Clara speak English with Caribbean accent. This linguistic devise brings a lot to the novel which sounds more exotic but also realistic. I thus decided to integrate the multicultural landscape of London in my rewriting since it is indeed an actual contemporary aspect. However, Zadie Smith's novel turned to be not very helpful in terms of external descriptions of the city, of its atmosphere. In that respect, Sam Selvon's The Lonely Londoners (1956) proved to be a wonderful asset for my composition. Sam Selvon is himself part of the great Caribbean immigration to Britain after World War Two. His novel deals with the Black British experience, telling the story of a group of Caribbean immigrants and their struggles in postwar London. Both the characters and the narrator's language follow Caribbean idioms and rhythms. In that respect, it is similar to Zadie Smith's White Teeth, but Sam Nelvon's novel also focuses on London and its atmosphere. His treatment of London is reminiscent of Charles Dickens's. Sam Selvon writes "London is a place like that. It divide up in little worlds". Dickens's London is also divided with its class division between the rich people such as Mr. Brownlow or the Maylies and the poor such as street children. Both the nineteenth and twentieth novelists pay close attention to the fog as "London particular". If we consider the two following descriptions "one grim winter evening, when it had a kind of unrealness about London, with a fog sleeping over the city" and "the ground was covered, nearly ankle-deep with filth and mire; a thick steam, perpetually rising from the reeking bodies of the cattle, and mingling with the fog, which seemed to rest upon the chimney-tops, hung heavily above", at first sight both quotes seem to be from the same pen, however more than a century separates them. Both Dickens and Selvon are careful in their treatment of London. The capital takes an important part in the general atmosphere of the plots. Hence, The Lonely Londoners was the perfect source for the rewriting of Oliver Twist in today's world. This novel gave me a clearer idea of the kind of rewriting my project was aiming at. After looking for helpful materials, the second stage was to tackle Oliver Twist itself. As the aim of the composition was to rewrite Dickens's novel as it would have been today, the idea was to find a passage and rearrange it . The result had to sound as a contemporary work but it had to be done in keeping with the original Oliver Twist's spirit. The passage had to be selected carefully, the rewriting would be all the more relevant if the chosen extract presented several characteristics of Dickens's treatment of London. This is the reason why I finally decided to work on two different passages as the first that I had chosen did not eventually cover all the aspects I wished to tackle in the 'modernizing' process. The following lines of this essay focus and comment on the rewritings of the two chosen passages of Oliver Twist and explains how they took shape, evolved and eventually became what they are.
The first scene selected is extracted from Chapter XV. It takes place just after Oliver has been taken in and nursed by Mr. Brownlow. At this point of the story, the young hero is sent by the elderly gentleman to return back some books to the shop. On his way to the bookstall, the young hero takes a wrong turn and is captured by Nancy and Bill Sikes. To chose this passage proved to be advantageous for several reasons. First, it takes place in the streets of London. Secondly, it combines dialogue and narration. This gave me a larger scope for the rewriting since I could work on characterization - the way that the characters are represented and the setting. However, I eventually realized that it was particularly the dialogues which had made me select this passage. In the readings that I had done at first, I had encountered so many references to multicultural society, read English spoken with different accents that my first concern was now to work on language rather than anything else. White Teeth presents two different groups of immigrants: Indian and Caribbean people. These latter are also the focus of The Lonely Londoners. In Charles Dickens's Oliver Twist, only Fagin, also called 'the Jew' belongs to a different culture and has his origin given. I decided that the rewriting should underline London as a multicultural landscape, a phenomenon which is true today. A whole set of different origins had to be included. Fagin became 'the Hindu man' even if Dickens makes him look miserable, I viewed him as a very cunning person and I thought that the piercing black eyes of an Indian would suit him very well. The Jew's "matted red-hair" had just to be turned into black and he was a perfect Indian. Barney is a very minor character who is little mentioned in Oliver Twist. However, he became one of the key elements of the rewriting. Dickens makes him speak with a peculiar accent. Barney's n's become d's and his m's turn out to be b's. The reader is not told his origin or the reason of the character's pronunciation. It might be the accent of the lower class or simply a speech problem. Nevertheless, it gave me the idea to make him a Caribbean man. Barney's pronunciation were reminiscent of Clara's, Zadie Smith's heroine who is unable to say correctly the th's, for example "I alreddy say : if ya nah like it, den send da damn ting back. I bought it'cos I taut you like it." Finally, because I had watched Sweet Sixteen and read Trainspotting, I had studied Scottish accent, and I was wishing to use this new knowledge. I thus decided to make one of the characters a Scotsman. Being the only remaining man present in this passage, Bill Sikes became a Scottish man. Moreover, to a certain extent, Sikes could be associated with the drug dealer and abusive boyfriend of Liam's mother in Sweet Sixteen since he is also a criminal who abuses of Nancy.
Once I had given different origins to the characters, I had to work on the language, the pronunciation and the vocabulary in order to make the 'rewritten' characters' words sound realist. With the help of the novels that I had read before and several internet websites, I made up some kind of Caribbean and Scottish English dictionaries and I then translated almost verbatim what Dickens's characters say or I kept at least the same idea when it was too complex. As far as the Indian/Jew was concerned I did not give him any accent for two reasons. First, Zadie Smith makes her Hindu characters speak English with the classic accent and secondly it might have been excessive to present three different pronunciations in such a little passage. Hence, I had my Caribbean/Scottish version of Oliver Twist. The multicultural aspect of today's London was recaptured, however, the 'Scottish dimension' was not really satisfying. In literature as well as in real life, it is not commonplace to hear of Scottish immigrants in London, especially when compared to Indian or Caribbean immigrants who actually form important communities in the capital. I thought that it had to be replaced by something more related to London and the idea of making Sikes a Cockney came. He would not be an immigrant, on the contrary he would be a Londoner -a real Londoner. I thus started to study Cockney pronunciation and vocabulary and I rewrote Sikes as a Cockney "droppin h's, g's and doin the glo'al stop" or speaking in rhyming slang. This new composition was more in keeping with the focus of the rewriting since it added a contemporary phenomenon of London. Moreover, I discovered that Oliver Twist had been a source for some rhyming slang. 'Oliver Twist' is the rhyming slang for 'fist' while 'the Artful dodger' is the one for 'lodger'. If Oliver Twist had made Cockney, Cockney could make my rewriting.
Adding to the linguistic exercise, I had to adapt the passage and the story in order to make it sound normal for today. Modern objects were introduced such as the television or the 'baked beans' tin which is so popular today and also modern notions such as The Big Issue. Concerning the notion of orphan, it seemed to me that it also had to be adapted. I resorted to insert the idea of a host family which sounds more modern than the system of the parish. Mr. Brownlow would be referred today as Oliver's host family and because of the term 'family' I created a Mrs.Brownlow.
Finally some changes were needed as far as the plot was concerned. The anecdote of the sister looking for her runaway brother does not sound credible today. People would not walk the streets for days but would simply go to the police. As a consequence, I made up the story of the group of children in holidays and visiting London. The supervisor looking for a runaway child seems more probable today than the sister after her brother. Moreover, this scheme allowed me to keep the reference of Nancy being dressed up. In Dickens, she is dressed as a 'good girl' with her "bonnet, apron basket and street-door keys." In the modern rewriting, she wears the clothes of a supervisor of a holiday camp with her orange cap, her shirt and her banner bearer. Secondly, I decided to relocate the scene. As I had introduced the touristic aspect, I chose to set the rewriting in Soho instead of Clerkenwell. As Soho is close to Regent Street, I could easily include the allusion to Hamleys toy shop. Moreover, today's pickpockets are more likely found in such tourist places. If the Artful Dodger and Master Charley Bates steal a silk handkerchief from Mr. Brownlow in Dickens, they would probably have stolen his mobile phone or digital camera if it was today. Instead of the bookstall episode, I imagined that the elderly gentleman would be in front of a Chinese shop giving his wife a ring to know the ingredients she needed for their dinner. The young pickpockets would steal his mobile while he would be looking at the shop-window. Hence, as in Dickens, the rewriting presents Oliver going back to the very same place where he met Mr. Brownlow and for an errand similar to the one which brought the old man there that day. The 'rewritten' Oliver goes to Soho to buy cooking ingredients. To maintain the idea of Oliver's having a book with him, I introduced the anecdote that he takes a cookery book with him in order to have the list of the ingredients required for the recipe. Having a book was necessary for the rest of the action since Sikes uses it to bully the young boy.
In order to rewrite Oliver Twist in today's life several aspects had to be adapted - modernized and updated so that the story was still credible. I had now completed my rewriting but I realized that I had eventually missed my main focus: London itself. The rewriting might include the multicultural dimension of the capital and mentioned a district (Soho) and a shop (Hamleys), but it was all. It did not explore the peculiar atmosphere of the Dickensian city and try to recreate it in today's world. Consequently, I decided to make a second composition and I looked for another extract.
The second passage chosen takes place in chapter VIII, earlier in the story than the first one. Oliver has just runaway from his native town and reached London "- that great place!". He meets the Artful Dodger in Barnet, a coaching town near London. From there, the two children walked to Fagin's and Dickens relates their journey through London by night.
This passage was interested for several reasons. First, it mentioned the names of several places, streets or buildings of the capital. Secondly, it describes the streets of a poor and squalid neighborhood -Saffron Hill- at Dickens's time. Finally, part of the passage takes place indoors, in Fagin's house.
At first, I wished to relocate the scene in a different area; maybe Harrow Road to give an echo to The Lonely Londoners or simply in a sector which is today a red light area, a poor sector or a place associated to gangster activity such as Brick Lane. However, I eventually judged that it might be a too important intervention. Keeping Dickens's locations and geography would be more interesting in terms of evolution.
My first task was to find what the places mentioned by Dickens had become today in order to adapt the rewriting. For example, at the time when Dickens wrote, the Angel was "a coaching inn, the first post outside of the City of London (...) a new building in pale terracotta stone with a corner cupola replaced the old building in 1899" and stayed the same untill now. Dickens mentions it because it was a "local landamark", however, today, it is only the building of a cooperative bank. Consequently, if I wanted to keep it in the rewriting, I had to refer to what distinguishes it today, its cupola. Concerning the turnpike at Islington, I was unable to find what the building is now, so I had to genearalize and I replaced it by the Tube station located in Islington - Highbury & Islington. Similarly, I included Angel station and in terms of building, the workhouse became the job centre. Hence I modernized the boy's journey through London. Added to that, I introduced the anecdote of the terrorist events. It seemed to me that the very long journey that the boys undertake was an anachronism. People would rather take the Tube or the bus today. The mentioning of the potential terrorist attacks could justify the walk. The Artful Dodger chooses to go on foot for fear of being searched by the police watching over the Tube after recent terrorist attacks. Moreover, this reference was in keeping with today's reality. As far as Oliver is concerned, he thinks that the Artful Dodger does not want to take the underground for fear of a bombing. This version also maintained Oliver's innocence and naivety underlined in Dickens when he thinks that the Jew is an honest man for example.
The second task was to work on the descriptions of the streets of Saffron Hill. Dickens describes them as "dirty", "muddy" and writes that "the air was impregnated with filthy odours". In the 'modernizing' process, the mud was replaced by the bins spilling out, the "filthy odours" changed into the nauseating smell of frying food and the polluted air. I added the allusion to the restaurants - Chinese, Kebab, fish and chips because we can find them today in almost every popular street. Concerning the inhabitants of the place, the rewriting remained faithful to Dickens, I just included the notion of prostitution with "the women scantily dressed and wearing heavy make-up".
Finally, I had to rewrite Fagin's house. First I had to modernize it: the candle became electricity and light, the fire became a heater and a microwave, and the table's material became plastic. In terms of food and alimentation, I tried to emphasize the modern notion of fast food with "the loaf and butter" being replaced by KFC but also tins and cans. Concerning the stolen wipes, they became mobile phones and cameras which, instead of being washed as the wipes,are taken apart in order to resell the pieces for example.
To make the rewriting more challenging and to use my reading of Selvon's novel, I decided to do an exercise of collage - "the sticking together of potentially relevant bits of texts." I selected some passages of The Lonely Londoners and included them in my rewriting word for word. These added 'bits' brought several new aspects to the composition, political party signs in the streets, cigarettes on Fagin's floor. Moreover, it allowed fusing the voices of these two novelists - Selvon and Dickens, who both give such a peculiar attention to London.
Another challenge was to maintain Dickens's style, in other word to recreate his long and complex sentences. For example, if we take the following extract "There was a deal table before the fire: upon which were a candle, stuck in a ginger-beer bottle, two or three pewter pots, a loaf and butter, and a plate", the rewriting modernizes almost everything mentioned in the original text while keeping the same grammatical structure : "There was a plastic table before an old oil-filled radiator: upon which were a heap of ash, stuck in a used baked-bean tins, two or three coke cans, a greasy KFC bag, and a plate." Similarly, I tried to keep to the idea of the string holding the frying pan on the fire with the electric wire linking the microwave to the plug. Concerning the "toasting fork", I wished I had found a modern equivalent but as I did not, I preferred to keep it as it was since it has a strong symbolical meaning. It presents Fagin as an Ogre ready to eat the little boy.
Hence, my second rewriting was completed and was a good counterpart to the first one since it tackled different aspects. However, once again, I realized that I had not explored some issues that I had initially planned to introduce in the composition. For example, I wished I could have worked on the character of Nancy. What would be her situation today? Would she be a prostitute? Similarly, how could I explain a gang of waifs converted into pickpockets in today's London? Orphan children are no longer in the streets. Still a lot could be said but I had already discovered so much by only rewriting two very short passages. I have watched a film, read several novels, 'learnt' English spoken by Scottish and Caribbean people, I knew "everythin' about Co'ney and would be'er understand East Enders!" I had learnt about immigration in England. I was now familiar with London in Oliver Twist, I could now picture exactly where the characters are in London at any time of the story. The composition was short but all I had leant was great...and what would it have been if I had rewritten the whole novel?
"Is anybody here, Barney?" inquired Fagin; speaking now that Sikes was looking on; without raising his eyes from the television.
"Mi a go check dat" replied Barney whose accent confirmed the origin of his back complexion. After a few minutes, he came back and informed that the Kebab shop was very quiet.
"Nobody?" inquired Fagin in a tone of surprise : which perhaps mean that Barney was at liberty to tell the truth.
"Nubady, jus de likkle ooman", replied Barney.
"Nancy!" exclaimed Sikes "Where? Ain't seen 'e today. 'av to see'e. She's bloody amazin'!"
"She a heat jus a plate o'hegg an beans" replied Barney.
"Send 'er 'ere", said Sikes, pouring out a glass of whiskey. "Send 'er 'ere."
Barney looked timidly at Fagin, as if for permission; the old Hindu remained silent, and not lifting his eyes from the television, the Caribbean man retired and returned, ushering in Nancy, who was still wearing her 'Holidays 4 Kids' shirt and her orange cap.
"Awright, darlin'? Ye still o' i'?" inquired Sikes, proffering the glass.
"Yes, I'm still on it Bill" replied the young woman, disposing of its contents; "and so fed up of it, too. The little chap is probably feeling sick or something and just staying at home or"
"Ah, Nancy, love!" said Fagin, looking away from the screen.
Now, whether a peculiar contraction of the Indian's raven-black eyebrows, and a half-closing of his deeply-set eyes, warned Nancy that she was disposed to be too communicative, is not a matter of much importance. The fact is all we need care for here; and the fact is, that she suddenly checked herself, and with several gracious smiles upon Mr. Sikes, turned the conversation to other matters. In about ten minutes' time, Mr. Fagin was seized with a fit of coughing; upon which Nancy put her cap on her head, and declared it was time to go. The Cockney, finding that he was walking a short part of her way himself, expressed his intention of accompanying her; they went away together, followed, at a little distance, by the dog, who slunk out of a back-yard as soon as his master was out of sight.
The Indian thrust his head out of the room door when Sikes had left it; looked after him as he walked up the dark passage; shook his clenched fist; muttered a deep curse; and then, with a horrible grin, re-seated himself at the table; where he was soon deeply absorbed in the interesting pages of the Sun. Meanwhile, Oliver Twist little dreaming that he was within so short a distance from the Brownlows' cosy home, was on his way to his benefactors' favourite Chinese shop, situated in Soho, in order to buy the special soy sauce required for tonight's supper. When he got out Oxford Circus Tube station, he accidentally turned down a by-street which was not exactly in his way; but not discovering his mistake until he had got halfway down it, and knowing it must lead in the right direction, he did not think it worth while to turn back; and so marched on, as quickly as he could, with the cookery book mentioning the soy sauce under his arm.
He was walking alone; thinking of the supper he would enjoy later; and how he would have done everything to share the meal with little Dick: who unloved and mistreated , might be bitterly weeping at that very moment in front of his plate of baked beans; when he was startled by a young woman screaming out very loud. "Oh Oliver! Thanks God!" And he had hardly looked up, to see what the matter was, when he was stopped by having a pair of arms thrown tight round his neck. "Hey", cried Oliver, struggling. "What's your problem? What do you want?"
The only reply to this, was a great number of loud lamentations from the young woman who had embraced him; and who was wearing a shirt of some children holiday camp, an orange cap and who was holding a banner-bearer.
"Oh, great!" said the young woman, "I found you at least! Oh! Oliver! Oliver! Don't do that ever again!" With these incoherent exclamations, the young woman burst into such a kind of hysterical fit, that a couple of elderly women who came up at the moment asked a Big Issue vendor with a shiny lip piercing, who was also looking on, whether he didn't think he had better run for a psychiatrist. To which, the Big Issue vendor: who appeared of a lounging, not to say indolent disposition: replied, that he thought not. "Okay now, let's be quick" said the young woman, grasping Oliver's hand; "we might still be on time for Madame Tussaud's. Come on! Come!"
"What's the matter, dear?" inquired one of the women.
"Oh, ma'am," replied the young woman, "I told Oliver not to go to Hamleys because we had no time but he's such a stubborn little chap that he didn't listen to me and runaway when I turned my back. I've been looking for him for three hours and we missed the London Eye!"
"Ah! The new generation!" said one of the women.
"You must listen to your supervisor, you naughty boy," said the other.
"I am not," replied Oliver, greatly alarmed. "I am not with her; I am not here in holidays. I live in Pentonville with my new host-family." "Only hear him, how he argues with me!" cried the young woman. "Why, it's Nancy!" exclaimed Oliver; who now saw her face for the first time; and started back, in irrepressible astonishment. "You see he knows me!" cried Nancy, appealing to the bystanders. "He's making fun of me! What would his parents say if they could see him, they pay him wonderful holidays to their son and that's the way he thanks them!"
"Blimey! Good job! Ye finds the boy" said a man, bursting out of a pub, with a little dog at his heels; "Oliva! Never do i' again! Now come wiv us!"
"I am not with them. I don't know them. Help! Help!" cried Oliver, struggling in the man's powerful grasp. " 'elp!" repeated the man. "Wud ya adam an eve i'! Stop tellin' porkies! Ill 'elp ya, dipstick! Where did ye' alfinch this book? Yav been stealin'it, 'av ye?" With these words, the man tore the cookery book from his grasp, and struck him on the head. "That's right!" laughed a young man passing-by. "That's the only way to cool him down"
"Not so sure! It could make you into trouble" said a street-sweeper, casting a disapproving look at the Cockney. "It might do him some good!" said the two women. "An'e 'll get a bi'more!" rejoined the man, administering another blow, and seizing Oliver by the collar. "Come on, ye young devil! 'Ere, Bull's-mince, mind'im boy! Mind 'im!" Weak with recent illness; stupefied by the blows and the suddenness of the attack; terrified by the fierce growling of the dog, and the brutality of the man; overpowered by the conviction of the bystanders that he really was the naughty boy he was described to be; what could one poor child do.
As John Dawkins objected to their taking the Tube, arguing that it was not safe at the moment, it was nearly eleven when they reached Highbury & Islington. In front of the Tube station, Oliver noticed a police car and a few policemen from which he inferred that the underground was under police surveillance following the recent terrorist events and as the Dodger had argued before, staying 'over ground' was safer from any attacks. They headed to Great North Road and passed before the former building of the Angel inn building with its distinctive cupola. They then crossed from Angel station into St. John's Road; struck down the small street which terminates at Sadler's Wells theatre complex; through Exmouth Street and Coppice Row; down the little court by the side of the job centre; across the classic ground which once bore the name of Hockley-in-the-Hole; thence into little Saffron Hill; and so into Saffron Hill the Great: along which the Dodger scudded at a rapid pace, directing Oliver to follow close at his heels.
Although Oliver had enough to occupy his attention in keeping sight of his leader, he could not help bestowing a few hasty glances on either side of the way, as he passed along. A dirtier or more wretched place he had never seen. The street was very narrow and dirty. Rests of food and filthy papers were spilling out of public bins. The air was impregnated with queasy odours of frying food mixed up with pollution. Some of the walls of the buildings had signs painted like Vote Labour and Down with the Tories. There were a good many small restaurants, Chinese, kebab shops, fish and chips and a few shops; but the only stock in trade appeared to be heaps of children, who, even at that time of night, were crawling in and out at the doors, or screaming from the inside. The sole places that seemed to prosper amid the general blight of the place, were the pubs; and in them, the lowest orders of London were wrangling with might and main. Covered ways and yards, which here and there diverged from the main street, disclosed little knots of houses, where drunken men were positively wallowing in filth and women scantily dressed and wearing heavy make-up were loudly chating; and from several of the door-ways, great ill-looking fellows were cautiously emerging, bound, to all appearance, on no very well-disposed or harmless errands. Oliver was just considering whether he hadn't better run away, when they reached the bottom of the hill. His conductor, catching him by the arm, pushed open the door of a house near Field Lane; and, drawing him into the passage, closed it behind them. "Now, then!" cried a voice from below, in reply to a whistle from the Dodger. "Plummy and slam!" was the reply. This seemed to be some watchword or signal that all was right; for the light turned on at the remote end of the passage; and a man's face peeped out, from where a balustrade of the old kitchen staircase had been broken away. "There's two on you," said the man, switching on the entrance light and shading his eyes with his hand. "Who's the t'other one?"
"A new mate," replied Jack Dawkins, pulling Oliver forward. "Where did he come from?" "Greenland. Is Fagin up stairs?"
"Yes, he's a sortin' the stuff. Up with you!" The light was switched off, and the face disappeared.
Oliver, groping his way with one hand, and having the other firmly grasped by his companion, ascended with much difficulty the dark and damaged stairs: which his conductor mounted with an ease and expedition that showed he was well acquainted with them. He threw open the door of a back-room, and drew Oliver in after him. The walls and ceiling of the room were perfectly black with age and dirt. The floor was dirty with footprints and cigarette butts. There was a plastic table before an old oil-filled radiator: upon which were a heap of ash, stuck in empty baked-bean tins, two or three coke cans, a greasy KFC bag, and a plate. In a microwave, which was on a corner of the table, and which was plugged in by a long and patched-up electric wire, some sausages were being reheated; and standing next it, with a toasting-fork in his hand, was a very old shriveled Indian, whose villainous -looking and repulsive face was obscured by a quantity of straight black hair. He was dressed in a jacket that was brown one time, but black now with grease, and corduroy trousers, his throat was bare; and seemed to be dividing his attention between the microwave and a tool box lying open next to a great number of mobile phones and cameras which were probably being examined and repaired. Several rough beds made of sleeping bags and old mattresses, were huddled side by side on the floor. Seated round the table were four or five boys, none older than the Dodger, smoking roll-ups, and drinking spirits with the air of middle-aged men. These all crowded about their associate as he whispered a few words to the Indian; and then turned round and grinned at Oliver. So did the Indian himself, toasting-fork in hand. "This is him, Fagin," said Jack Dawkins; "my friend Oliver Twist."