Many authors have tried to define entrepreneurs. Bygrave (no date) sees entrepreneurship as "...initiative, imagination, flexibility, creativity, a willingness to think conceptually and the capacity to see change as an opportunity" (Bygrave, no date). Morrison et al (1999) claim entrepreneurs have creative ideas, drive and dedication to put them into practice. Cooper & Mehta (2003) state entrepreneurs are individuals, who seize emerging opportunities, experiment and learn during the process, thus maximizing the opportunity. Baum (2003) incorporates the above notions claiming entrepreneurs have innovative ideas, intrinsic skills and abilities, take risks and adapt their objectives to emerging challenges and opportunities.
Although there is no exact definition of an entrepreneur, recently, cognitions influencing entrepreneurial activity have been identified. These have been found to help understand how entrepreneurs think, attempting to justify their behaviours, actions and decisions (Mitchell et al, 2002). Apart from intrinsic characteristics, there are many other factors which form entrepreneurs, like family background, education, ethnicity, culture, and financial conditions (Cooper, 1966).
Therefore, this essay reflects on the probabilities of me becoming an entrepreneur. It looks at relevant theory analysing my family background, social conditions, and personal attributes and traits. Finally, by evaluating the factors above, and considering my barriers to becoming successful, it determines my probabilities to becoming an independent entrepreneur. These are self-employed, autonomous, and express themselves through work (Morrisson et al, 1999). They seek to improve society through their businesses and growth is an outcome of personal satisfaction and development.
De Clerq & Arenius (2003) state society influences our up-bringing, thus affecting our entrepreneurial behaviour. Many are the societal factors influencing us, like culture, gender and education. Mitchell et al (2002), claim that culture can be seen as how societies behave and manage information. Because different cultures tackle difficulties in distinct methods, Mitchell et al (2002) relate culture to analytical cognitions. However, they also claim that culture cannot be seen as a rigid characteristic, and can vary depending on distinct regions within the same country. Hunt & Levie (2003), however, argue culture is a secondary influence on entrepreneurial behaviour. They suggest entrepreneurial behaviour is an outcome of a country's economy and population growth, mainly because increased economic activity generates new opportunities (Opportunity) and individuals' need to survive (Necessity). My education at home, highly emphasized on success, setting goals and persisting to achieve them, independence and self-reliance but also strong moral values, seems to contrast with the Portuguese culture, where autonomy is not promoted, and students to not acquire knowledge about markets or entrepreneurship (GEM, 2001). Universities do not provide degrees on entrepreneurship and management ones are poor. Also, the Portuguese culture regards entrepreneurship as high - risk and an indeterminate source of income:
Further, dependence on government to give back the country's produced capital (GEM, 2001), re-emphasizes the lack of initiative, thus differing from my education. The Portuguese attitude towards entrepreneurship increases market gaps, because lack of autonomy ensures that although consumer needs exist, these are not met due to inexistent initiative. In this sense, my Persian culture and education represent an advantage as I have the motivation to persevere and challenge emerging set-backs.
According to Delmar & Gunnarsson (2000), self-employed parents inspire entrepreneurship in their children. They motivate them and offer several resources needed for the set-up. Both my parents became self-employed many years ago, doing so out of necessity but also because they wanted to balance work with family, reap their own profits and simply, be independent. Being close to my parents and their work, and identifying myself with the values and ethics they practise, fostered confidence and a perception of efficiency in me (appendix 1). My parents also identified market opportunities for growth, thus increasing their success by developing their businesses. These factors act as additional encouragement because Delmar & Gunnarsson claim (2000) that people who recognize their parents' success are more inclined to becoming entrepreneurs. Furthermore, not only are my parents self-employed but so are most of their friends and my family. De Clerq & Arenius (2003) add that knowing entrepreneurs may act as a positive influence and a source of increased knowledge.
Baker et al (2003) also see gender as influencing entrepreneurial activity. They state that women do not take as many risks as men, however, they evaluate growth opportunities more optimistically. Baker et al (2003) further emphasise that men and women evaluate the same opportunities differently. However, Carter et al (2001) argue men and women generally think equally. The slight differences Carter et al (2001) identify include women starting their businesses at a much younger age and the originality of their concepts. Carter et al (2001) also claim that women have more difficulties in generating financial resources than men, hence representing a barrier for start-up ventures and justifying the increased number of men entrepreneurs compared to women. Smallbone et al (2000), state that discrimination by staff, consumers and resource providers also represents a tough barrier. Nevertheless, they identified in Portugal, several projects offering "training, advice, counselling or other types of support activity targeted solely or primarily towards women owner/managers who are already in business." (Smallbone et al, 2000, pp: 49). They also identified Portuguese programmes supporting women to start businesses in specific industries, e.g. tourism, and two organizations focused on encouraging women entrepreneurs. Delmar & Gunnarsson (2000) argue that self-employed parental influence is "gender related" (Delmar & Gunnarsson, 2000, pp: 1), i.e. if a daughter's mother is self-employed it is more likely she will be too. There is evidence of both difficulties which are overcome and changes implemented to support women entrepreneurs. However, literature also shows that many authors still raise considerable differences between genders. More research has to be done in this area, yet, my mother's success and the improvements noted above to motivate women entrepreneurs, encourage me to believe that other factors will represent stronger barriers to my entrepreneurial activity than gender.
Kirby (2003) states that entrepreneurial development originates with motivated individuals striving to attain their objectives. Although there is no definition of entrepreneurs, parallel characteristics and traits have been identified. Stanworth & Gray (1991) and Kirby (2003) recognize that entrepreneurs take risks, need autonomy and display a strong ambition to succeed, locus of control (Kirby, 2003, pp: 112), and innovative ideas. This view of born entrepreneurs is challenged by Beaver (2002) who claims entrepreneurs emerge as a response to economical factors (made entrepreneurs). Cognitive research suggests that a combination of distinct behavioural patterns and personality characteristics form entrepreneurs (Kirby, 2003). Nevertheless, even these change, because individuals are continuously progressing and subject to societal influences (Morrisson et al, 1999). Furthermore, Beaver (2002) states behavioural patterns and personality characteristics are combined in numerous forms to originate various types of entrepreneurs. Cooper (1966) however, proposes a more functional view, claiming entrepreneurial behaviour includes intrinsic motivations and skills (antecedent), however the individuals' previous experience, and gained knowledge (incubator organization) as well as external factors (environmental factors) vastly affect his entrepreneurial activity. Burns (2001) supports Cooper (1967) adding that just as society and motivations influence entrepreneurial behaviour, over time, these will affect society and those who come into contact with the entrepreneur. Although Cooper's (1967) view is also considered restrictive (Morisson et al, 1999), it emphasizes the need to regard the process of entrepreneurship formation as comprising a range of internal and external factors, which need to be regarded as a whole (Morrisson et al, 1999). Thus, my entrepreneurial propensity is formed by my stimulus, personality and social conditioning. Society and my experience in organizations nurturing my passion for pastry further contribute to shaping my entrepreneurial tendencies. Finally, the previous aspects add to economical conditions I am put through, and consequently affect my entrepreneurial behaviour.
Reflecting on my traits and ambition to be autonomous and independent, lead me to believe I could become an independent entrepreneur. Further, my need to continuously develop as well as my personality, education and the Portuguese culture, show that despite existing barriers, I have incentives to start my own business (appendix 1). The passion I have for pastry/bakery is my key drive and what will ultimately enable the development of a new concept. There is a huge need for quality patisseries/bakeries in Portugal, where demand is high, however, supply is identical and of very poor quality. The population's dissatisfaction and frustration leads me to believe there is a gap in the market which I intend to fill. Growth will initially focus on introducing breakfast and light lunch menus. Although my enthusiasm for the pastry sector and the apparent market needs seem to fit perfectly, barriers impeding entrepreneurial activity must also be considered. According to Bangs (no date), as shown below, the main reasons for business failures are managerial incompetence and unbalanced expertise:
Morrisson et al (1999) recognize that, especially in hospitality, limited resources (funding and expertise knowledge) are a barrier to start-up ventures. Further, Kirby (2003) has identified many barriers to growth including shortage of management skills, lack of market research, inaccurate goals and further resources. Therefore, reflecting on the above barriers, an average of 6-8 experience years is projected to develop skills and concepts by working in key bakeries and patisseries abroad. Further, because there are not many start-up public offerings in Portugal (GEM, 2001), the time will be used to generate a minimum amount of capital, thus enabling me to secure loans and possible grants.
In conclusion, there is no specific definition of entrepreneurs. They can be defined psychologically (Stanworth & Gray, 1991), economically (Beaver, 2002), socially (Kirby, 2003) or a combination of all three (Cooper, 1966). Likewise, there are many similar characteristics put forth to define entrepreneurs. Independent entrepreneurs are considered to be highly motivated, self-employed, autonomous and wanting to improve society through their business (Morrisson et al, 1999).
This essay has identified a combination of needs, motivations and attributes that support my possibilities of becoming an independent entrepreneur. Furthermore, existent barriers are acknowledged and will be overcome through a process of personal development before the venture start-up. Finally, my compelling passion for pastry/bakery refutes whichever possibilities of engaging in any career other than entrepreneurship.