Human Resource (HR) practices are said to improve performance, therefore recently recruitment and selection methods have become important (Gonzalez & Tacorante, 2004). Also, mounting competition and increasingly complex consumer demands have made companies focus either on service quality or cost reduction to attain competitive advantage (Redman & Mathews, 1998).
Within service industries, service quality and recruitment & selection become even more crucial, mainly because of service characteristics. Inseparability, intangibility, heterogeneity and perishability (Lashley, 1998), require service excellence, therefore, managers aim to recruit and select ideal employees, to differentiate themselves. Further, Goldsmith, Nickson, Sloan and Wood (1997) assert service companies' success is connected to their employees' personal abilities. However, Redman & Mathews (1998) argue that because the service industry includes a wide range of different businesses, different approaches must apply to diverse industries, depending on the amount of customer-employee contact.
The hospitality & tourism industry is similar to "secondary labour markets" (Goldsmith et al, 1997, pp: 16). Comprising mainly small businesses that rely on fluctuating demand, profitability is uncertain and production, wages and skills are low. It is also characteristic of "weak labour markets" (Goldsmith et al, 1997, pp: 20) with informal recruitment methods, such as word-of-mouth, employee recommendations, and past applicants, which lead to high employee turnover.
According to The HR and Development Website-CIPD (2004) in 2003, the highest rates of employee turnover (over 50% per year) were in low paying private service businesses, including hospitality-related ones. Also, the lowest cost of employee turnover is 750 (a considerable amount especially for small firms!). Price (1994) and Goldsmith et al (1997) claim poor recruitment & selection originates high employee turnover, leading to a "vicious circle" (Price, 2004, pp: 57) characterised by cost reduction strategies, which in turn minimize quality and production. Jameson (2000) states that with the expansion of hospitality & tourism industries, the importance of good recruitment & selection practices and the role of HR in them is emphasized.
Having considered the characteristics of the industry and the costs and consequences of employee turnover, the importance of appropriate recruitment and selection becomes evident. Therefore, this essay aims to examine current recruitment and selection practices in hospitality & tourism, assessing their suitability to achieve "employee fit".
"Employee fit" refers to staff integration in the business strategy to achieve business goals (Torrington, Hall & Taylor, 2002). It automatically implies modifying human resource management (HRM) strategies to sustain the match (Kelliher & Perrett, 2001). There are two attitudes towards strategic HRM (Torrington et al, 2002). The "best practice" (universalist) approach suggests there is one "best" method to manage staff. The contingency ("best fit") approach, according to Kelliher & Perrett (2001), suggests the adaptation of HR approaches to the organisation's structure and its' stage of life-cycle. The resource-based view (RBV) is a variant of the best fit approach, which considers employees as unique, resources to achieve competitive advantage (Redman & Wilkinson, 2001). Staff planning can be based on "hard" models that match demand and supply of staff to maximize the number of employees, keeping costs down and profitability up (Torrington et al, 2002). "Hard" models are job-related and linked to RBV. However, "soft" models are system-based and suggest nurturing employees, by developing a sense of commitment in them, to achieve differentiation (Worsfold, 1999). They relate to total quality management (TQM) because employee commitment generates increased customer focus, cooperation and constant development, thus achieving competitive advantage (Redman & Wilkinson, 2001).
Different authors disagree on the suitability of "best practice", and even more on improving recruitment & selection methods to achieve "employee fit". Hoque (1999) claims, that due to the growing importance of service quality, hotels and possibly the hospitality industry, are practising HR procedures. Price (1994) however argues that the hospitality industry is known for having a basic approach towards human resource management (HRM) that deviates from principles of "good practice". Price (1994) adds that although some evidence of "good practice" is seen in larger organizations, such as interviewing, application forms, job descriptions and person specifications, these are applied inconsistently.
Kelliher & Johnson (1997) confirm the increased attention towards HR practices. Companies now seek employee commitment, employee integration in business strategy, incentives to retain employees and a change from a bureaucratic approach to a human relations one. However it is unclear if these improvements represent a move towards HR practices (Worsfold, 1999) or a response to other changes (Kelliher & Johnson, 1997). Furthermore, given the importance of employees in determining service quality, hospitality & tourism managers should lead HR practices, rather than follow other industries (Kelliher & Johnson, 1997).
Price (1994) claims an improvement of personnel practices breaks the "vicious circle" mentioned above, encouraging quality and productivity whilst seizing opportunities offered by economic growth. Additionally, "good" recruitment & selection practices fight off competition from international organizations which have integrated TQM in their HRM strategy (e.g. Marriott). Ultimately, improved personnel practices lead to competitive advantage and increased market share thus originating a "virtuous" (Price, 2004, pp: 60) cycle, based on quality and profitability. McGunnigle & Jameson (2000) add that appropriate recruitment & selection encourage employee commitment and develop a strong organisational culture. They identified in their study that although hotel managers were willing to implement effective recruitment & selection methods, their practices were still far from an HRM structure. Therefore, McGunnigle & Jameson (2000) suggest new recruitment & selection methods, like psychometric tests, personality questionnaires and assessment centres (Redman & Mathews, 1998) to be continuously used alongside traditional "good practice" to develop high commitment. By integrating these methods in a "bundle" (Redman & Wilkinson, 2001, pp: 15), managers can better predict future performance and attain "employee fit" (McGunnigle & Jameson, 2000). Bundles also include employee retention practices, training, high performance and quality rewards, high commitment incentives, job security and employee integration in the business strategy (Redman & Mathews, 1998). Prt-a-Manger, which only recruits 5% of all candidates, effectively integrates its employees in the company's strategy by including them in the selection process of new recruits (Rolfe, 2002). However, Redman & Wilkinson (2001) claim bundles vary widely and no "best" bundle has yet been identified.
Redman & Wilkinson (2001) believe that although "best practice" seems like the perfect solution, companies find it hard to implement. Lockyer & Scholarius (2004) disagree with the "best practice" approach claiming it disregards the characteristics of the hospitality & tourism industry, and becomes challenging because of diverse property "size, location and ownership" (Lockyer & Scholarios, 2004, pp 126). "Best practice" overlooks the differences between customized and standardized service and disregards the different roles recruitment staff have in branded properties and independent ones. Further, the ease with which employees are made redundant discourages the enhancement of recruitment & selection methods (McGunnigle & Jameson, 2000)
Lockyer & Scholarios (2004) concluded from their study that while managers recognized the increased validity of formal methods of assessment (e.g. work samples, ability tests) and regarded them as positive selection methods, these were not used much. Despite the importance attached to these efficient methods, managers still preferred methods with low validity, inexistent predictive ability and objectivity, such as application forms, interviews, references, recommendations and personal knowledge (Lockyer & Scholarios, 2004). This preference may relate to the high costs of formal methods and Torrington et al (2002) question the validity and predictive ability of some tests, where the correlation coefficient is not so accurate. Also, the criteria used to define performance standards, in tests, is subjective. Tests are very job-related, so if the job description changes, the tests can no longer be used. Consequently, Lucas (2004) claims tests are most effective when used for jobs requiring expertise, hence inapplicable to hospitality & tourism where secondary and weak labour markets prevail. Lucas' (2004) perspective is supported by Gonzalez & Tacorante (2004) who conclude from a study they performed that "best practice" is not applied equally to all employees. It varies according to the skills needed for each position. Where high skills are required, companies use psychometric tests, references, recruitment consultants, more interviews and recruiters and the process generally takes longer. However, Gonzalez & Tacorante (2004) add that for positions where "good practice" is not applied, other HR practices are used to recruit & select staff. This approach suggests a RBV where "bundles" of practices are used to determine "employee fit".
Jameson (2000) and Price (1994) emphasize "best practice" challenges by highlighting the link between business size and the degree of "good practice". Because of hospitality & tourism's nature, small firms rely on informal and inconsistent recruitment methods (e.g. word-of-mouth, local press), whilst larger firms are starting to take a more holistic approach towards "best practice", including formal processes, explicit standards and training and development opportunities (Jameson, 2000). Therefore, Newell & Shackleton (2001) suggest using improved interviews alongside tests. Measuring all candidates on the same criteria, and asking similar questions (Newell & Shackleton, 2001) as well as, defining the appropriate setting, establishing a reciprocal conversation, structuring time and using attentive body language, add validity and consistency to interviews (Torrington et al, 2001).
In conclusion, it is unlikely for "best practice" to be effectively implemented in every hospitality & tourism organization (Lockyer & Scholarios, 2004). The characteristics of the industry (Goldsmith et al) as well as external forces (McGunnigle & Jameson, 2000) impede the implementation of one best strategy. However, there is growing evidence of signs of "good practice" in larger organizations (Jameson, 2000; Price, 1994). Nevertheless, it appears that introducing systematic HRM practices in an industry characterized by low skills and informal recruitment is not the right solution (Gonzalez & Tacorante, 2004; Lucas, 2004). In hospitality, recruitment & selection methods may depend on business strategy. If the company wants to gain competitive advantage, then increased investment in formal recruitment & selection is needed (Redman & Mathews, 1998). However, if a company's strategy is to maintain market share and steady profits, a new approach towards recruitment & selection may not be justified (Price, 1994). Finally, Lockyer & Scholarios (2004) suggest that if "best practice" is regarded holistically, establishing a relationship between external factors, strategy and the recruiter, then "employee fit" will be more achievable. However, current evidence of HRM practice remains weak and unbalanced.