Culinary taste may be thought of as a combination of particular characteristics, such as our food preferences, the way we act towards them and our lifestyles that will define what we eat, how we eat it, when we eat it and why we eat it. As simple as the definition of culinary taste may seem, it has been causing a great deal of controversy over the decades.
Some sociologists such as A. Warde (1997), D. Seymour (2003) and specially P. Bourdieu (1984) defend that the construction of taste is a result of our socialisation process, into a determined class and that, regardless of any changes (ex: wealth or occupation), our taste will always remain the same, because it is inherent in us.
Others, such as Z. Bauman (1988, 1990), and M. Featherstone (1991), suggest we have reached a stage where the limitations of social class no longer tie us down and the socialisation process we go through, does not have the influence stated by Bourdieu. They advocate that there is much more freedom in making consumer choices and that with the right amount of economic independence, we can define our own cultural and culinary taste, and adopt whichever lifestyle(s) we wish. This essay will try to conclude how taste is constructed and the factors that influence its construction.
Socialisation is the process through which we learn what is correct and how we should act according to different situations. It starts at childhood and according to Bourdieu (1984) it is what will define our social class and our consumer behaviour. He determines that culture establishes food preferences and that there is no room for individual taste. He advocates that food is a reflection of social aspects such as status, wealth, group partisanship, and therefore, our customer behaviour towards food should be regarded as having a cultural meaning rather than constituting a necessity. Warde (1997) proposes that social positioning can be recognized in eating procedures, and that our consumer behaviour can be defined by our class positioning and through social evaluation. Bourdieu (1984) argues that socialisation constitutes the basics for our construction of taste and concluded that different social classes have distinct culinary preferences and that they are influenced by factors such as lifestyles, class positioning, geographic location, religion, income and interests. He stated that gender differences also have a strong impact on culinary taste engaging the issue of meat consumption. Men would abundantly consume meat as a sign of their status and women would be deprived thereof, reflecting their inferior position. Fish, however, would mostly be consumed by women, as it was not manly, and would remount to eating procedures not applicable to men. However, according to Mennell (1996), this was mostly noted in the past, where hierarchically higher positioned classes had a strong consumption of meat, and working classes had their nourishment restricted to cereals, vegetables and rich foods (Seymour, 2003). Mead (1931) notes that this differentiation was noted in Britain where "the poor ate to live, while in too many cases the rich lived to eat" Mead (1931:p9)
Bourdieu (1984) defends structuralism, in which he reinforces, that taste, apart from being moulded according to culture is also controlled depending on social limitations. Seymour (2003) suggests that Bourdieu's view comprises other forms of capital rather than just economical, therefore introducing cultural capital. Bourdieu (1984), states that our social class depends on our financial independence and social background, and that we are designated to a determined class according to those conditions, leaving little opportunity to make our own consumer choices and that the lifestyles we choose are dependant on our social classes. According to Seymour (2003), our taste is constructed within a particular structure defined by a specific set of laws and that although tastes may differ within that structure; they have certain limitations, due to class positioning. However, according to Mennell (1996), Bourdieu's view is rather "synchronic" (Mennell 1996:p12), because it highlights the power that money and wealth have on hindering transformations (Marxist structuralism). Goody (1982) and Ross (1978) propose that structuralism categorizes culinary likings instead of defining them due to Elias's concept of process reduction (Elias 1970:pp 111ff)
There is, however, one concept which is intensely related to the socialisation process, and that is of habitus. Bourdieu (1984) defines habitus as being the connection between our socio-economical classes and how we act according to them:
Therefore, we may act in a certain manner in distinct situations and not know why. Seymour (2003) defends that these dispositions influence our behaviour; however, they do not define it. She goes further and concludes that people with equivalent lifestyles, have a similar habitus, are positioned in the same social class, and consequently, act in comparable ways.
Bourdieu (1984) suggests that social and culinary taste formations walk hand in hand and one reflects the other. He emphasizes the influence that certain social classes may have on the construction of taste, specially the bourgeoisie. These are considered to influence the course of culinary taste and define what is "in" and what is not, and therefore possess, cultural capital. Their influence is advocated to be so great that their decisions are to be followed by society in general. According to Seymour (2003), cultural capital is directly linked to habitus and is a result of it. Bourdieu (1984) proposes that the bourgeoisie have the freedom and power to define what is culturally acceptable, due to their position in society. He considers that, social classes with cultural capital have clear differences in the consumption of food (ex: inclusion of different food items in their diet) and service, when compared to the lower classes. He also states that working classes refuse to explore more sophisticated taste, as an opposition to the bourgeoisie and defends that class differentiation is due to social differentiation and not income, therefore, not being influenced with changes of wealth, meaning that food behaviour is socially embedded and regulated, being shown through class dissimilarities. One interesting factor is the "paperchase effect" (Featherstone 1991:p18) caused by higher classes in an attempt to maintain social distance which is shortened by lower classes striving to achieve a superior positioning. This causes constant changes and evolution in consumer taste.
He also says that, social mobility within classes is very restricted, regardless of any changes we may come upon. Bourdieu (1979) implies that, from when our socialisation process initiates, we are designated to a social class according to our symbolic and economical capital. This legacy is pre-defined and social mobility plans can only alter it to a certain limit. Although people may want to change their lifestyles and undertake the way things are done socially (defined by the bourgeoisie!), their social mobility is restricted because of their origins and background; which means that as much as people may want, they cannot redefine themselves, because their cultural taste is dependant on their social class positioning.
Warde (1997), however, suggests that social classes no longer reflect characteristics of status like morals, honesty, trustworthiness, friendship, or entertainment. Bauman (1988) proposes that there are no rules in consumption, giving people the option of making their own choices. It becomes as a doorway to freedom. People are no longer tied down to boundaries which restrict their choices, but have the opportunity and "duty" to create their own self-identity. The habitus is no longer an issue and social class is unimportant. This introduces the theory of individualization, which may be considered as a tendency originated by the continuous degradation of the importance of social class and breakdown of family, causing people to choose their own identity and express it through consumer behaviour (Beck, 1992). Warde (1997) proposes the regeneration of identities, the new approach on food-people being more health conscious-, the differences surging in gender relations-with women having more freedom and responsibilities (apart from the household!)-and increasing differences between generations and social groups as some plausible causes for these hypothesises of change. If consumer behaviour becomes the main distinction among classes, then the lower classes become more affected (due to less economical possibilities) and this is a much worrying concern than previous differences stated by Bourdieu (Bauman, 1990).
Featherstone (1991) sees postmodernism not as a consequence of non-existing discipline, though as a stronger intensely incorporated rule. Therefore, there may be systems of confusion, enabling a balance between the two extremes, which was previously considered intimidating. Bauman (1988) faces postmodernism as an exact reflection of producers know-how, who see their position and image threatened as a consequence of the decrease in need for their products, obliging them to be more consumer driven, and to produce in accordance with the customers' needs and not their own. According to Featherstone (1990), postmodernist consumers are encouraged to have more than one lifestyle. Due to the freedom in consumer behaviour, people may very well express their style detached from any preconceived idea, therefore, expressing more than one lifestyle. Their identity is reflected through most material aspects of their lives and is to be continuously improved. Gouldner (1979) proposes that "the new middle class" is trying to raise the importance of symbolic and cultural capital in opposition to economical. Consumer behaviour is the way to communicate with the world. Warde (1997) invokes that aestheticization is becoming more part of life; concluding that looks and presentation now define class differentiation. He continues by stating that our consumer behaviour is now influenced by exterior aspects of society rather than our own taste. According to Mennell (1985) this leads to a reduction in dissimilarities and a growth in diversity. He states reasons for declining differences in consumer behaviour such as a reduction in disproportional amounts of food consumption, standardization of taste, increasing availability of food items to all social classes. He explains rising diversity by the emergence of a number of procedures such as parallel likings-influenced by factors such as media and fashion-the growth of worldwide restaurants, the augmentation of interconnection between specialist and home cooking, and the large selection of cookbooks.
However, some may think that this will produce a situation where the importance of social positioning reduces-democratization (Warde, 1997). Jameson (1987) considers democratization as a characteristic of postmodernism whilst Mennell (1985) understands there has been a decrease in "showing-off" and excesses regarding cooking and food habits, as an outcome of democratization and generalization of eating habits, and as an example he states the vanishing of exquisite and exaggerating meals for the bourgeoisie in the last part of the 19 th century. Finkelstein, J: "Consumerism has a democratizing effect when we can all own a car, television, fashionable clothes and dine out in restaurants."(Finkelstein,1989: p 121). Elias (1978) considers democratization as a change in the stability of supremacy of the higher classes, in favour of the "plebs" (Elias, 1978:pp 64) In essence, democratization refers to the decline of social positioning changes and its outcomes resulting from disparities between social classes (Sloan, 2003).
Warde (1997) introduces therefore the concept of stylization, which he sees as a result of individualization. He considers that, apart from the liberty in making our own choices-which seem to be more in accordance with what is socially pleasing, rather than our choice (Sloan, 2003)-we tend to form groups of people who have similar consumer behaviour tendencies as us. According to Warde (1997), stylization involves regulation in order to maintain social demarcation. People adopt certain principles in order to become part of a group considered "in style" and be recognized as so. Bauman (1990) sees individualization originating "neo-tribes", which are groups in which people are linked through the similarity of their appearances, describing better stylization. People are not obliged to follow a set of rules, however, while they are part of a neo-tribe, they comply with principles in order to confirm and accentuate their partisanship. Fashion and media output (Warde, 1997) contribute to stylization, especially regarding food habits. He states that advertisement plays an important role, through the constant projection of food related to everyday life, therefore, involuntarily establishing social identity. Fashion can be especially reflected in the continuous rise of different thematic restaurants, almost like in a succession. Featherstone (1991) states that fashion can be seen as a way of incorporating "aesthetics" (Featherstone 1991:p74). He proposes that the exaggerated rate of fashion make us more aware of style and its importance, therefore reflecting it in our consumer behaviour, including food preferences.
This essay has tried to explain two contrasting views on how taste is defined-either socially or through expressions of free will. Research shows that although social positioning may be a starting point, it does not constrain us to certain limitations. It seems that those social restrictions exist; however, they are not related to social class and hierarchies, but with the need and preoccupation of consuming and representing what society accepts.