The Collins English Dictionary defines the word 'doom' as to condemn to death or a terrible to fate. Although many Native Americans still live in North America today, proving that as a race they have not been eradicated, their culture and significance have been eroded to such a degree that they can be deemed to have suffered a terrible fate as a people.
For several millennia Native Americans prospered on the continent of North America without interference. In the early sixteenth century, however, they came into contact with Europeans and within a few centuries they had effectively been wiped out. It cannot be denied that it was the Europeans settlers who caused the demise of the Native American peoples. But was it inevitable? Could they have survived the presence of European explorers and settlers on their shores? This essay will argue that they were ultimately doomed but not, however, from the outset, in that they could have taken measures to ensure their own future and push the settlers from their continent, as it was impossible for the two cultures to co-exist. A vast array of factors combined to cause the demise of the Natives, all of which will be given close attention in this study. These include European diseases, missionaries promoting Christianity, the superior technology and weapons at the disposal of the colonists and trade between the two peoples. These all had devastating effects on the Native Americans and meant that in the long-term they were doomed, particularly due to the dependence that developed out of trade with the Europeans. However, had the Natives actively and forcibly resisted European settlement on their land from the start, it is highly likely that they could have prevented their downfall. The colonists were almost utterly dependent on the Natives for survival in the early years of settlement. Without this life support, it was they who would have been doomed.
One of the most devastating factors in the eventual demise of the Native Americans was that of disease. In terms of resistance to disease, North America was a virgin land through which pandemics were able to sweep. Once the disease-bearing Europeans arrived, there was massive devastation, accounting for millions of deaths. Any survivors were significantly weakened when facing European colonization. Through a series of calculations, Henry F. Dobyns estimates the Native American population to number eighteen million before European contact. This number is huge considering that 'by the late nineteenth century only about one quarter to one-third million Native Americans survived'. Disease was the prime factor in this massive population decrease. Indeed, it has been described as 'the greatest catastrophe in history, far exceeding even the disaster of the Black Death of medieval Europe'. Sickness made conquest far easier for the European settlers.
Smallpox was the most lethal pathogen introduced by Europeans to North America in terms of the number of casualties. As with the vast majority of diseases brought to North America by the Europeans, Native Americans were one hundred per cent susceptible. Dobyns states that the 1617 Native American population of Florida probably numbered only five per cent of the 1517 population, indicating how vulnerable the Natives were to disease. This was noticeable to the Spanish explorers who first came to settle here during the 1590s and found that the East Coast of Florida was almost entirely deserted. The most terrifying aspect of disease was that it wreaked most harm before there were even European settlements in North America - 'Native American depopulation during the sixteenth century far exceeded that of later times." It was often first transferred by European explorers and fishermen and was spread by Native Americans themselves. Deadly illnesses devastated Natives weeks and even years before they came into direct contact with foreigners. Many fled to escape disease but unwittingly helped to transfer it. The area from Florida to New England has been described as an 'epidemic region' since disease spread unmitigated along the coast as tribes interacted frequently, giving reason as to why so many of the estimated eighteen million Native Americans were killed by disease. Noble David Cook estimates that more than ninety percent of Natives were killed by foreign infection. Disease was also transferred during trade between Europeans and Native Americans and when Natives traded among themselves. Many who fell ill but did not die directly from disease, were physically unable to fetch food or water, or even tend crops, so died anyway due to starvation or dehydration in combination with the fever-generating pathogen. Also the Native American practice of visiting sick relatives and friends only helped to spread the disease further.
Other diseases which claimed the lives of millions were measles, influenza, bubonic plague, diphtheria and typhus. Amazingly, 'A serious contagious disease causing significant mortality invaded Native American peoples at intervals of four years and two and a half months, on the average, from 1520 to 1900. Many of the epidemics were continentwide." The fact that, especially during the sixteenth century, visits to North America were sporadic was accountable for this. After a disease such as smallpox had affected the Native population, which had gained a degree of immunity as a result, it might be decades before the same disease struck again, meaning that that the population was at great risk, particularly the younger generations who lacked resistance. This was devastating to the survival of the Native Americans. Disease also weakened Natives who were more liable to succumb to other, normally less deadly, infections.
Disease undermined Native American faith in the superiority of themselves over the Europeans and in their Gods. They saw epidemics as divine punishment for human transgressions. As the Europeans did not seem to be afflicted on such a scale, they concluded that 'the God about whom the Christians talked in fact possessed greater power than their own'. Many Native Americans even blamed clergymen for the disease that was afflicting them in such great numbers. They believed missionaries were able to control sickness and health. This had grave consequences - 'Alien disease did more than decimate the native population; it effectively prepared the way for subsequent phases of European contact by breaking native morale and, perhaps even more significantly, by cracking their spiritual edifice." Another way in which disease affected Native Americans was that technical skills, leadership, and the group's corporate memory were lost when adult members died, especially elders who possessed the least resistance. Disease and its consequences could even lead to the dissolution of whole tribes - 'the demographic losses combined with the psychological shock and cosmological confusion... cause[d] the collapse of aboriginal Southeastern cultures.'
Thus, disease was hugely important in leading to the eventual downfall of the Natives. It killed millions and had huge psychological effects which were extremely difficult to overcome. Dobyns argues that, 'Native American numbers did not merely become thinned; biological disaster struck." The remainder were greatly weakened making foreign conquest far easier.
However, despite the enormity of the effects that disease had on the Native American population, they still far outnumbered the colonists for many decades and were in a far superior position, from which to assert themselves and overcome the settlers if they so wanted. Disease had not wiped them out by any means - 'In each colony, hundreds of colonists faced thousands of Indians." The colonists were utterly dependent on the Natives for survival. For example, they were taught how best to use the land and cope with the conditions of North America with which they were completely unfamiliar - 'The Europeans would not have survived, let alone thrived, had not Indian assistance reinforced the umbilical cord that connected each colony to its respective imperial systems." The colonists were often in perilous positions, as starvation and ill health constantly threatened. On many occasions, particularly at the English settlement of Jamestown, it was the Natives who helped the English to survive and overcome periods of famine - 'Out of kindness... tribes supplied the inept settlers with corn, bread, fish, and meat.'
Another reason which, many historians have argued, led to the demise of the Native American population was the gradual erosion of Native culture and religion, mainly due to the work of missionaries who attempted to convert 'heathen savages' into Christians through civilization. Although there were massive variations throughout the colonies, some areas experienced a great deal of success, particularly in eastern Massachusetts with the 'praying towns'. Here Native Americans left their tribes to live in a Christian-dominated world. Many 'used Christianity to revitalize their lives in a world growing more and more unfriendly'. There was a strong focus on children, who, Europeans thought, could be converted more easily 'early in their development, before the hereditary stain of "savagery" became indelible'.
Probably the most successful attempt at Christianization was 'the Jesuit experience in Canada, where superior numbers, wealth, and skills brought them thousands of bona fide converts before 1763'. 2700 Natives were baptized by 1643. The success of the French Jesuits was down to a vast knowledge of Native American culture, and they were able to undermine and supplant the local shamans. They were also able to capitalize on the Native American fascination for print, arguing that Christian doctrine was immutable and not subject to change, as was the case with the spoken word. This fascination for European print and technology meant many Natives saw Christianity as stronger than their own religion - 'The fact that Christianity was the religion of the white man, who, with his impressive technology and greater success at manipulating life to his advantage, was believed to have recourse to a greater Power (manitou) than the Indian." James Axtell argues that conversions were bona fide as many Native Americans 'turned to Christianity because that world religion satisfied new emotional needs and intellectual hunger'. Evidence of a committed belief in Christianity can be seen in a primary source written by John Williams, who was taken captive by Native Americans in New England during Queen Anne's War, in which Natives were frightened by the prospect of going to Hell - 'They told me that an Indian had died... and the dead rose and informed them that at his death he went to hell... They said the Indians were frightened and very melancholy." Axtell declares religion to be highly important in the demise of Native American culture, as, in certain areas, they seemed to be giving up on their age old Native American world views in favour of the European form of religion - Christianity.
Thus, religion can be seen to be important in the demise of Native American culture.
Although there were a significant number of Native American conversions to Christianity, it is imperative not to over-emphasize the point. Many historians argue that Natives accepted Christianity into their lives only to a certain degree, and still held true to their original spiritual beliefs. That is, they merely incorporated Christianity as another element of their religion. Often this was undertaken to curry favour with European settlers who treated them more like humans and less like savages after their 'conversion'. Indeed, Natives in Northeast America
Many Natives converted for incentives such as political and military alliances, guaranteed land, economic aid, and trade advantages. This can be seen by the coastal Algonquians of southern New England who converted en masse, but still preserved their ethnic identity. 'The Indians ensured the survival of native culture by taking on the protective coloration of the invaders' religion." As mentioned earlier, many Natives converted because they felt that Christianity was more powerful than their own religion. However, this often had negative connotations - 'the Micmac came to associate Christianity and civilization in general with their numerous misfortunes, together with the fact that they never clearly understood the Christian message but always saw it in terms of their own cosmology.'
Despite claims to the contrary at the time of European settlement, Native religion was an important obstacle to overcome - 'The traits within Indian culture that resisted change should be emphasized... The first and most serious obstacle was native religion." The Native American religion was bona fide itself and more than capable of explaining, predicting and controlling the world emotionally and intellectually. They did not, therefore, need to convert to Christianity. In some areas, conversions were virtually non-existent - 'The English religion... spread only very slowly through the Maryland Eastern Shore tribes." Also, the language barrier meant it was hard for missionaries to convert substantial numbers of Native Americans. Each tribe had its own language or dialect that was subtly different from its neighbours', intensifying problems for missionaries. In general, there was much indifference to Christianity. Any genuine Native converts were still not fully accepted into colonial society no matter how 'civilized' they were. Overall, 'At the end of two centuries of effort, both the French and the English were forced to admit that they had largely failed to convert the native Americans to European religion and culture.'
The superiority of English technology, particularly in relation to weapons, has long been considered an important factor in contributing to the demise of Native Americans. Axtell even goes as far as to say, 'The second and most important source of the white man's power in native America was his superior technology." It was not uncommon for Natives to literally worship guns and knives that came into their possession; such was the feeling of admiration towards these objects. Native Americans were often in awe of European technology. The most noticeable and immediate affect of guns was a psychological advantage due to the roar created when firing as well as the physical destruction they could cause - 'time would soon show how lethal lead balls were and how horribly they shattered bones and tore tissue.'
Whenever the English sought to impose their will in Virginia they used firearms. James H. Merrell's study of the Catawba tribe of Carolina shows their reluctance to engage in warfare with the Europeans in order to defend themselves - 'Speeches were poor weapons for mounting a defence of one's homeland." Evidence of English strength in battle can be seen 'in a two-day battle in July 1624, sixty Englishmen cut down eight hundred Pamunkeys on their home ground' and, more generally, in King Philip's War where the Europeans were ruthless in killing approximately three thousand Native Americans (about half the local tribal population) as well as in the significant losses incurred by the Native Americans in the Anglo-Powhatan Wars in the first half of the seventeenth century. Direct military confrontation with European powers was considered suicidal. Native Americans were always likely to come off worst in a traditional European battlefield sense.
However, far too great an emphasis has been placed on European weaponry and technology in their conquest of North America. Despite great admiration for European technology, Native Americans 'had a terrific superiority complex, not only at first contact but long after'. They preferred their own lifestyle without the many complications that they believed the Europeans brought upon themselves. Natives 'very soon realized that Europeans were... seriously flawed in their character and culture... The idea that the native stood in rapt, prolonged awe of Europeans has been exaggerated'. Despite the psychological advantage of guns, as well as their enormous capacity to inflict injury, they were less reliable in many other aspects. Native American bows were far more accurate and were able to operate in all weather, unlike guns which were rendered useless in rain. Also arrows from bows could be fired at a much faster rate than guns, which were often slow and cumbersome to reload. The English were also forced to learn many battlefield tactics from the Native Americans, indicating Native military superiority.
The Native Americans were notably stronger in this sense, particularly during the early years of European settlements which were often at the mercy of the Natives.
This can be seen when the Apalachee chiefdom inflicted heavy defeats on Spanish exploring parties in the early sixteenth century, forcing them to reconsider further exploration and abandon notions of settlement. If the Europeans wanted to survive and prosper they needed to maintain positive relations with Native American tribes. They were forced to seek Native assistance when at war with other Native American tribes and even other European powers. The Spanish, English and French all fought for control over the South and united with Native tribes in alliances. However, intertribal warfare led to the downfall of the Native American in the long-term, the causes of which will be discussed later. 'The Creek, Cherokee, and Chickasaw did not come to fear the English as much as they feared one another. No English army could come against them.'
As stated above, the English inflicted serious damage to the Powhatan but the reverse was also true. In the early stages of colonization in Virginia, Powhatan's Confederacy was so powerful that the English, despite their superior weapons, needed to make peace just to remain alive. They could easily be defeated and even wiped out altogether. For example, in Jamestown on 22 March 1622 Natives killed 347 Virginia colonists out of a total of 1240 in a single surprise uprising whilst also confiscating arms and ammunition.
The Natives also had means other than violence to endanger the colonists, such as starving them out. These were often extremely successful ventures. For example, the Powhatan attempt on the English colonists in the winter of 1909-10 meant that 'after six months, only sixty cadaverous survivors remained from the nearly five hundred' initial population. The colony was close to extinction, and its inhabitants had even set sail for England when three hundred new settlers arrived intercepting their ships. Had they not arrived in time and the colonists abandoned Jamestown, the incentive to come to America would have decreased considerably, thereby hindering the settlement of Europeans in America and putting the Natives in a much greater position of strength, making their demise far more unlikely.
Having analysed and discovered that although disease, Christianity and superior European weapons all had significant effects on the demise of the Native American, they were not crucial. It seems probable that the Natives could have survived and overcome these obstacles. So what caused them to be doomed? Trade was undoubtedly the single most essential factor. It had a number of important side effects which triggered the downfall of the Native Americans. Initially, 'The flow of European merchandise began as the tiniest of streams' but trade with the Natives grew enormously with devastating effect.
One of the items which Native Americans developed a taste for was alcohol. It had a disastrous impact on tribal structure and culture. It often ignited conflict within individual tribes and led to countless deaths through accidents. Alcohol was blamed as a 'prime cause for the soaring death rate of the natives. Bedlam usually resulted when the Indians got hold of a quantity of liquor, as the inebriates usually tore into each other in spectacular drunken brawls'. Many also developed a dependency, despite efforts from both sides to limit Native access to it. As it was such a precious commodity, there was great competition between tribes to obtain it. This ignited intertribal conflict as in the 'scramble for precious cargoes competition replaced comity at the foundation of every encounter'.
A similar pattern also emerged over the struggle for weapons, as an arms race of sorts developed almost as soon as the Europeans set foot in America. These destructive European weapons were much sort after among Natives, but due to European reluctance to trade guns to Native Americans they were in relatively short supply. When they did reach Native hands, the impact they had on intertribal warfare was dramatic, as 'the firearms gained through access to Anglo-America warped relations among Indian peoples even further'. Frequent battles developed between tribes over which was to be the chief trading partner of the European power located in the region - 'The rising tide of contact, competition and conflict in the sixteenth century... pitted native against native for access to the Europeans' technology and its attendant spiritual power." This led to a huge increase in intertribal conflict, perhaps the most significant legacy of trade with the Europeans. The region in which trade had its greatest impact in terms of wars between Native Americans was in the South:
The European powers all used Native Americans in their battles which ultimately led to their downfall. They could be considered as pawns in a wider game. Thousands were killed in conflicts such as the Tuscarora and Yamasee Wars. For the most part, they lost their lives in these battles, not because they were fighting directly against Europeans but because they were fighting each other.
The fur trade also had a hugely debilitating effect on Natives. This is the topic on which Calvin Martin chooses to focus - 'the trade was a disaster for the Indian tribes involved: severe cultural disruption and often physical dislocation were commonplace." The demand for European goods, particularly alcohol and weapons as mentioned above, was the prime cause of the over-hunting of furbearers. The fur trade became crucial in obtaining weapons, tools, and other basic commodities of everyday life. The side effects, though, were huge, causing permanent changes in the Native American habitat and psyche. The most obvious change to the ecosystem was the unrestrained slaughter of certain game, especially the beaver. This had significant side effects, such as increased soil erosion 'which destroyed complicated habitats and made scarce the deer, fish, and fowl that exploited them'. These had long been important food resources for Natives. The use of European hunting equipment only caused to exert even greater pressure on the resources of the area - 'The function of the Indian within his ecosystem now changed from conservator to despoiler: certain game animals were heavily exploited while others were virtually exterminated." The fur trade also altered the leadership structure within tribes because skillful young hunters were able to trade the most with Europeans meaning that they had greater power and influence, undermining the traditional age and kin-based headship.
As time elapsed, the Natives became increasingly dependent on trade with the Europeans. European goods became necessities, not luxuries - direct replacements for traditional Native items rather than raw materials from which to fashion something else. Long-established Native skills were eroded meaning that further tools and goods had to be bought as they could no longer be made. For example, 'they employed European weaponry - when skills with the bow and arrow were lost, they could not be reclaimed." The dependence of the Natives on trade gave the Europeans a significant degree of control over them. This was the turning point in the destiny of the Native American people. They were at the whim of the Europeans - 'Increasingly [the Natives']... dependence upon English trade and their dangerous proximity to English settlements... threw them ever more firmly into the political embrace of the English." It was a dangerous path to tread, and 'it became clear that native independence was a thing of the past; the days when Indians could trade or leave it were over. Trade was king.'
During the latter stages of the seventeenth century, the Europeans no longer had such a desire for Native goods, of which they had already acquired a great deal. This is signified by wampum becoming almost worthless. The Natives, as explained earlier, were still, though, highly dependent on European goods. The only commodity that the Europeans wanted and the Natives had was land. More often than not, the Native Americans were forced to trade it away. The Wampanoags, for example, 'were now "dependents on, rather than partners in, New England's business," one historian concludes. "And that business... was strictly land development."' Clearly, therefore, the Native dependence on trade led to their downfall, because as European demands increased, they were forced to trade away ever more precious commodities.
Had the Native Americans chosen not to embroil themselves in trade with the Europeans, and instead banished them from North America upon their arrival by force, it is highly unlikely that they would have been doomed - 'They chose not to conquer the Europeans because they perceived that they gained less by conquest than by trade." This was ultimately the wrong decision and led to their demise. As they became dependent on European trade, which certainly did not occur at the outset, their fate also became dependent on European needs - the two were intertwined.
With the Natives in a perilous position, it was merely a matter of time before their demise. Since thousands were dying in wars and many were willing to trade land to the Europeans, the frontier was moving ever further westwards. A vicious circle developed. The more land acquired by the Europeans, the more settlers arrived, putting ever greater pressure on the Natives.
Livestock, including horses, cattle, pigs and chicken, which were introduced by the Europeans, also had a hugely detrimental effect on the Native way of life. They trampled Native American crops and 'gobbled everything that deer, elk, moose, or bear might have dined on'. These were traditional staples of the Native food supply, but were decreasing in numbers due to European livestock. This 'sudden injection of European civilization into this balanced system initiated a series of reactions which, within a little over a century, resulted in the replacement of the aboriginal ecosystem by another' further undermining the existence of the Native Americans.
It became a question of numbers, a struggle which the Natives were always likely to lose after the deaths of millions of their peoples from disease and wars.
There was gradual but steady encroachment by the colonists due to a lack of precisely defined boundaries. Indeed, frontier settlers were more of a problem than the actual colonial administrations. This can be seen in Bacon's Rebellion where Nathaniel Bacon led a group of settlers against Governor William Berkeley in the Chesapeake over a perceived 'lax' policy towards Natives.
Increasingly, land was set aside for cultivating crops on which the settlers subsisted, as well as for growing tobacco when its profitability was realized. Natives were increasingly placed on reservations surrounded by European settlers. This cut them off from resources and made their way of life untenable. Many were forced to give up their reservations as a result, further giving the advantage to the Europeans. Daniel K. Richter argues that, 'The Indians eventually lost the contest for territory, not because of military victories by the English but because they were flooded out by hordes of English squatters." This process gave increasing power to the Europeans over the Native Americans, the beginnings of which can even be seen with Jamestown in the first half of the seventeenth century. Previously, the Natives had very nearly wiped out the colonists in 1622. On 18 April 1644 nearly five hundred settlers were killed, but by this time, the colony was too strong to be severely affected, as the population probably numbered around ten thousand. The lesson that was learned, but too late, was that the Native Americans should have struck earlier to rid themselves of the English.
Therefore, in conclusion, there was a vast array of factors which led to the demise of the Native Americans, the most important of which was not in effect from the outset. Factors include disease brought to North America by Europeans, the erosion of Native culture and religion through the spreading of Christianity and the superiority of English technology, in particular, weapons. However, they have all been over-exaggerated in explaining the downfall of the Native tribes. Native Americans outnumbered the colonists for many decades in North America despite disease; Christianity did not make as great inroads into Native life as has been previously claimed; and European technology, although superior, did not always give them considerable advantages when in battle with Natives. Trade was undoubtedly the single most important factor. To be precise, the turning point at which the Natives became dependent on trade with the Europeans was the defining moment in the demise of the Native Americans. It led to intense intertribal conflict, the erosion of the Native culture and ecosystem, and even the trading of land to colonists. Perhaps, one could argue, that trade was the most powerful weapon that the Europeans were able to wield - more powerful than disease, Christianity and weaponry. It was not an obvious threat and this was the key to its destructive capabilities, leading ultimately to the downfall of the Native American - 'European trade had triumphed.'
This turning point marked the beginning of the end for Native Americans as ever greater numbers of European settlers arrived, exerting greater pressure on the land available. It tipped the balance against the Natives who were unable to recover. 'In the 1760s many Indians yearned to destroy the Euro-Americans and drive them from the continent' but by this stage it was too late. They should have acted sooner, but made the wrong decision in choosing trade over annihilation. Had the Natives crushed the Europeans upon their arrival in North America, instead of choosing to tolerate them, they would not have been doomed at all.