This essay will consider if coffee shops mirror existing social inequalities and if they further contribute to them by providing additional scope to such inequities. It will explain how there are factors which influence our leisure choices and draw upon evidences on bourgeois women to explain the feminisation of society as a factor influencing the demand for coffee shops and their increased growth over the years. It will further consider the standardisation of leisure choices and the McDonaldization thesis to explain the dissemination of class structure within society and the importance of other measures, such as lifestyle, to re-define class.
Leisure has become an important aspect of life regardless of the factors that influence choice. Haywood et al (1995) state that leisure may be what is done after all other duties have been completed, or a measure to achieve an aim within society hence being seen as why it is applied, rather than what actions define it. It can also be regarded as a goal, therefore emphasising on independence and the ability to choose leisure as a form of personal development. They also analyse the relation between leisure and work, suggesting that in some cases they become intertwined, in others they are totally contradictory and in some there is no relation at all. The definition of leisure is in no way linear, and many aspects such as age, gender, social class, ethnicity and disabilities, which are internally linked, may constrain our choices.
Coffee has been a conventional beverage since the seventeenth century (Mintel, 2004), following the emergence of coffee houses and according to Scarpa (2004), the aim now is to improve the taste of what is already a trendy drink. The sudden increase of coffee shops is a concept worthwhile analysing because although corporate brands are appealing to almost every market segment, there are underlying differences regarding the experience of going to a coffee shop.
Clarke & Critcher (1985) define age as being socially constructed, therefore influencing other important factors such as time, money and social interaction. Haywood et al (1995) show stages in life which influence our leisure choices and claim that adolescence is a period of indecision, an identity crisis, where youth use leisure activities as a form of expressing themselves and stating their individuality.
Equally, retirement and old age are also defined by society. Retirement refers to an end in paid employment, which is many times socially associated to being old. However, nowadays society urges people to start employment later and retire sooner, which in accordance with a longer life, increases the period of retirement (Haywood et al, 1995). Naturally, this brings many concerns for the retired who, being rather young in comparison to the elderly, have different needs which are now being considered by leisure providers.
Mintel (2004) shows that there are many differences in the consumption of coffee, differing between the type of coffee, region and income. Generally, instant coffee is preferred by the +20 age group, and is most popular amongst +34yr olds which are possibly employed and have work status (appendix 1). With regards to location, Mintel (2003), states that although there has been a rise in all coffee serving venues, branded coffee shops have seen the most steady growth (appendix 2) being mostly frequented by 20-34yr olds (appendix 3).This demonstrates that coffee shops may segment their target markets, even if unwillingly.
Adolescence is a restraining stage for some youngsters as they find it difficult to transform their spare time into leisure, due to limitations brought upon by insufficient freedom, social contacts and financial resources (Haywood et al, 1995). Coffee shops could provide the perfect setting for relaxing with friends (Casper, 1996) protecting teenagers from considering youth as a once in a lifetime opportunity, therefore becoming a cause of distress and anxiety for those responsible, such as the police force and educators (Haywood et al, 1995). Nevertheless, it is important to note that commerce developed through a need of generating profit and aims to deliver whatever the consumer desires to spend money on, so long as it produces return and is legal. Specialty coffee shops charge a premium and this may highly limit youngsters choice (appendix 3). Market segmentation is further noted in the negative response of third aged people when asked if they would visit branded coffee shops (appendix 4). The retired go through a set of worries that they try to overcome, and which apart from the financial setback due to lack of disposable income, include the psychological effects of being denied work and not having a profession which are fundamental factors associated to personal identity and an intrinsic feeling of value within society. The purpose of their time becomes irrelevant as their time structure which separated work time from leisure time, representing recreation and recovery, becomes disrupted. Furthermore, some fall into isolation as there is a reduction in their social network, a decrease in their social relations, and a removal from their social environment which were all related to their leisure (Haywood et al, 1995).
Although the elderly also struggle, their problems are clearly different from the retired. They experience a decline in their physical, financial, and social resources, fall into isolation, experience a rise in their powerlessness to do domestic work and in distress related to their own health (Haywood et al, 1995).
Mintel (2003) shows that age and the degree of employment are crucial factors on deciding where to have coffee by demonstrating that the 55+ age groups prefer to in-store coffee shops and that branded coffee shops are more associated with a younger age (appendix 3), consumers in full employment, highlighting social differences especially when the premium charged is taken into account and related to disposable income.
Gender also influences leisure choices in many ways. Rojek (1993), states that it was only after the 1860's that women gained more rights and freedom and the feminisation of society came underway. He defends that until that period, society was regulated by patriarchal regulations which subordinated women and deprived them of life provided opportunities. There were many disparities in society between men and women such as unequal job opportunities and lack of political representation.
After the 1860's (Rojek, 1993), changes in allocative and authorative resources, created a women's leisure class. The growth of middle class women's free time gave them the possibility to contradict many state regulations, which banned them from participating in community life, overcoming aspects of sexual prejudice which saw them as the inferior sex. Also, the evolution of birth control methods, the development of communication systems and small opportunities in employment gave women increased influence and independence. The increase of household workers offered women more time to experience leisure and there was a growth of disposable income which allowed men to withdraw from work and develop their own leisure time. Rojek (1993), however, states that these changes were noted in the bourgeois class, and that working class people did not have these opportunities. Nonetheless, even middle-class women were still not completely freed from domestic chores as it was their duty to supervise all the work done by the household servants.
Deem (1986) views women's leisure as intertwined with other activities. It seems that women have to fit their leisure activities while working and do not have a framework which determines work-time from non-work time like men do. Although the concept of work and leisure for women cannot be generalized as there are people who are not included in this outline (Deem, 1986), Clarke & Critcher (1985) suggest leisure is regarded as a reward for paid-employment, and knowing that women mostly worked at home and did not earn money, this was a cause for lack of confidence and disposable income, making them reliant on the wage earner (Deem, 1986) and leading them to think they did not deserve leisure (Rojek, 1993);
Nevertheless, coffee shops may be the ideal location to attend the needs of fast-pace lifestyles, and even to combine short leisure experiences with work. Jones (1996), states that coffee shop experiences are mostly between a quarter to half an hour and do not last for long. Mintel (2003) shows that women are more enthusiastic about coffee shops, stating they represent a good substitute to pubs and are a pleasant location to meet friends (appendix 5). According to Hall (2000), the growth of coffee shops has to be mainly attributed to the feminisation of society, by responding to women's demands of a clean, smoke-free and safe atmosphere. The demand for a secure environment initiated when bourgeois women were not allowed to go out of their homes as this represented a threat to their safety and integrity (Rojek, 1993). Public space was seen being dangerous, it was where one would be in contact with drifters and exposed to illnesses, associated to shame and was considered part of the outside world which had to be banned from bourgeois life. Casper (1996) refers that the intention of coffee shops is to provide a safe place from home offering services and facilities such as comfortable seating, newspapers and magazines, to suggest a place where people can meet.
Class differences may also influence the consumer markets visiting coffee shops. The concepts of modernism and post-modernism help explain the differences in class and how important it is to influence leisure choices. Rojek (1995) on the one hand, states that modernity reflects the need for social regulation where leisure is educational and rewarding and to have leisure with that propose is the only path to freedom. On the other, there is a divergent theory which claims that leisure focuses on a series of experiences which can be repetitive and annoying whilst at the same time, exhilarating and enjoyable. The leisure industry is seen as focusing on distracting consumers and rather than concentrating on individual development, leisure is considered a futile means to satiate free time (Rojek, 1995).
Featherstone (1991) sees post-modernity as a set of manners which reflect an innate approach towards social integration. He sees the lack of order and freedom from constraint not in a negative way but as providing the possibility to change between the two extremes of social structure and control, and freedom of choice.
With regards to class structure, Veblen (1899) states there is a predisposition to reflect the actions of the bourgeoisie, concluding that cultural capital stems from economical capital and therefore social class and structure become explicit. Pakulski & Waters (1996) however, imply that class differences have weakened as social disparity becomes defined through the development of standards of consumption instead of fabrication. According to Roberts (2004) leisure advances have not always depended on commerce. In fact, in the nineteenth century Britain, the aim was to develop good conduct, civilised behaviour, and spending money on forms of self-improvement. Activities where organised by churches, social groups and unions, aspiring to avoid the "dark side of leisure" (Roberts, 2004, p.15) which included mostly illegal activities. However, and based on the postmodernism theory, Pakulski & Waters (1996) claim that patterns of consumption are now based on the symbolic value of commodities rather than their utility. They propose the formation of subcultures founded on common interests rather than class, gender and other unchangeable factors, suggesting that leisure becomes a means of differentiation and economic culture does not influence participation. Beck (1992) states that it was after the 1950's that consumers became more conscious about their identity and sought to differentiate themselves from others, as individualized people rather than a reflection of social inequalities. Reduction in work-time, increased patterns of consumption and a broad variety of choices lead to such changes.
Coffee shops are a good example of how these changes may re-structure class. Although it has been referred that the feminisation of society promoted the growth of coffee shops as safe alternatives to bars and pubs (appendix 3), commerce and corporate advertising and promotion have highly contributed to placing coffee shops in the reach of all. Furthermore, television series such as Friends, Frasier and Ellen (Casper, 1996) have defined coffee shops as a trendy place, and due to their nature, they have portrayed the image that these are places of easy access for everyone. Such opportunities have been seized by leisure providers to shape demand through their impact over the development of communications, thus substituting the middle class as the major innovator and also give the idea that consumer culture is all about a non-stop display of contemporary goods (Rojek, 2000). Additional strategies used to stimulate demand and provoke a rise in market growth include poetry reading, book clubs and live music in the evenings, or internet access and board games (Casper, 1996).
Rojek however dismisses the notion that leisure culture is under total control of the providers, as this would contradict the consumer's freedom of choice, however he states that our experience of leisure commodities is a result of impulses created by leisure providers, the nature of the culture in which we are inserted and our own perceptions. He suggests that leisure choices must now be seen through a culture perspective rather than class differences and that it is obvious to try to flee from corporate capitalism, yet due to lack of disposable income, only the higher classes of society are able to achieve this, as all the options that are available to the working class are structured and controlled by the providers. Although coffee shops, and specially branded ones, do not spend on advertising and promotion (Mintel, 2003), they are relying on new distribution channels and promotions in store to broaden their markets. This is reflected in the availability of coffee shops in new strategic points such as pubs, sandwich bars (Mintel, 2003), or even drive thrus' (Casper, 1996), and in the percentages of people visiting them in distinct locations (appendix 3). Nonetheless, Haywood et al (1995) imply that occupation is a key marker of social class. They claim "class imagery" (Haywood et al, 1995, pg.127) relates to characteristics such as social interaction, education, status and income and that leisure activities also associate to class, however, their significance will not only differentiate among classes but also within them. Mintel (2003) further proposes that differences become more apparent when looking at the socio-economic groups using coffee shops. Such venues illustrate an up-scale and fashionable market, and whilst attempting to attract a broad range of market segments, they unconsciously shut out groups with less disposable income. This approach is noted in Mintel where 44% of those inquired referred that coffee sold in specialist stores is expensive (appendix 4). Knowing that the affluent visit branded and specialty coffee shops more, this will impose constraints on the working class, the elderly and the retired (appendix 6). According to Mintel (2003), the most frequent visitors are highly educated consumers in mostly managerial jobs rather than labour, in the pre/no family life stage, and are further reflected in Mintel (2004), where a tendency towards a further growth in freshly ground premium coffee is shown, charged at an expensive price and preferred by those with high disposable income. These facts are consequences of the weaknesses of commerce which has no particular dedication to providing pleasure (Roberts, 2004) and holds profit as an inherent feature in its provision. Its weaknesses are mainly caused by State provided forms of leisure (voluntary and public sectors), which in a way, control its limits and these alternatives are needed due to the growing concern of how commerce is altering types of leisure in which it is involved. Commerce may possibly stimulate inertia because it separates the consumer from the provider, but this also demands commerce to continually transform itself to keep consumers interested. Furthermore, semiotics is an important asset in achieving the commercial providers profit goal, hence only supplying for demands which will meet their need for revenue. Commerce influences and manipulates consumers to spend more and increase their expenditure each time, whilst having them regard it as a means of differentiation (Henry, 2001), therefore seeking to create a consumer culture. Henry continues that the constant reproduction of leisure commodities has led, over the years to a mass standardisation of products. It has also spread demand into an unbalanced arrangement of money and time, thus dividing society into four groups: those who have abundance of time and economic resources, reduced time and high disposable income, meagre economical resources and ample time, and finally, reduced money and time (Martin & Mason, 1998) therefore differentiating patterns of consumption and emphasizing the importance of lifestyles.
The McDonaldization theory defends that consumers are controlled to think they are free to make their own decisions when in fact their decisions are moulded unconsciously (Ritzer, 2000). Roberts (2004) disagrees with Ritzer stating that McDonaldization is a result of profit and cannot influence consumer's rational thinking. He defends that commerce will endeavour repeating the same formula to profit, however, this will not be similar to the food industry every time. Finally, he claims that this process of standardisation could simply never be attached to consumer culture routines. He goes further to state that commerce provides new experiences, diversity and stimulus to consumers, therefore broadening markets in their benefit, gives them the opportunity to create individualized lifestyles and that there are always substitutes to the commercial sector such as State provided forms of leisure, though, people choose to be attached to consumer culture.
Coffee shops can have an important role in suppressing some constraints felt by ethnic women and Haywood et al (1995) refer that minorities, such as Asian and Afro-Caribbean women, have felt at some stage, oppression towards their leisure choices. Much of this (Barrett & McIntosh, 1985) was on behalf of white feminists and based on pre-conceived opinions. This has obviously changed to some extent; however, there is a need to further understand different cultures and ethnic groups (Deem, 1986). Clarke & Critcher (1985), state that many minorities, although different, have similarities with regards to the significance attributed to religion and family. They add that due to differences between western cultures and ethnic groups, there was a need for minorities to adopt certain leisure spaces and adapt them to their needs, thus, cafes and cinemas were purchased and became more widespread. In many ways, these changes allied to the development of commerce and the renovation of conventional recreation over the centuries, have provided safe environments for consumption, therefore state regulations have been eased and going out is now a widespread activity (Roberts, 2000). Hot beverages have become trendy over the last two centuries and are linked to a decrease in alcohol consumption (Casper, 1996); therefore coffee shops seem to be the perfect place for minorities whose beliefs are seemingly different from those of the western culture.
Although coffee shops strongly developed through the feminisation of society, they have the potential to play an important role in bringing together different social classes in the same setting (Bellamy, 1994), and can easily provide something for everyone. However, due to the different factors that influence leisure choices, there is a need to withdraw from the wants of providers (Roberts, 2004) to profit, in order to fully meet demand. Gender, age, social class and ethnicity continue to influence leisure choices although possiblly not to the same extent, because of the intense growth of standardised products (Henry, 2001) and the emergence of a consumer culture. Although society seems to now be structured in terms of similar interests and lifestyles (Pakulski & Water, 1996; Beck, 1992), it appears that prices charged (appendix 4) are one of the main constraints (Mintel, 2003) felt by the majority of coffee consumers. Coffee shops must improve their quality as harsh competition persists (Bellamy, 1994), lower their premium as a consequence of growing supply, thus genuinely appealing to diverse markets rather than aiming to attract all, but only being affordable to some.