This portfolio provides an insight into the author's career aspirations and how she plans to achieve them. By examining her skills, motivations, strengths and weaknesses it is determined where she stands, where she wants to go, and how to get there, and incorporated into a final Action Plan which establishes her path to achieving her career goal, that of opening a bakery where gastronomies of different cultures are incorporated in one product.
The first section focuses on general competencies needed for success. It analyses graduate attributes and compares them to managerial competencies and entrepreneurial traits. The hospitality industry and the bakery sector are examined and specific qualities required in setting-up a bakery are identified.
Following is an updated CV and a covering letter, aimed at securing a loan for the business set-up. A past CV aiming at a Graduate Training Programme is also put forth, showing the changes undergone in its presentation and also in the author's previous objectives.
Finally, based on the ENGAGE model (Jenner, 2001), gaps are identified between the author's skills and those needed to secure funding. The results are then compared to the skills in the first section and areas for improvement are identified, consequently being integrated in an Action Plan, along with career aspirations. Ultimately, gaps are eliminated by transforming them into goals.
A CV's main objective is to offer the recipient a lucid but succinct perspective of the sender (Jenner, 2000). It should provide information on past achievements, but also give an insight into aspirations and goals. CV's must sell the senders, generating interest in the receivers, they must be personalised and establish a connection between who the sender is and what the receiver is searching for (Jenner, 2000). Covering letters are then used to enhance the main points of the CV and ensure it gets to the right person. They must directly relate to the CV however, not repeat it.
The lay-out of the updated CV was changed to show investors the author's motivation, drive and achievement so far. Placing Work Experience first, emphasises initiative and willingness to work in hospitality and specifically, bakery/ pastry departments (Jenner, 2000). It shows the development of basic bakery skills and consequent progression into management experience. The Education section follows, demonstrating continuous focus on career interests and a path especially devised to achieve them. Finally, the Extracurricular Activities part, puts forth further personal attributes in non-career areas but also re-emphasizes the author's commitment to a constant learning cycle, where grabbing every opportunity is decisive for personal growth and future success. Appendix 5 shows a previous CV and the progression to the current personalised one.
The covering letter (Jenner, 2001) emphasizes areas the author wants to draw attention to. It explains why she was attracted to the particular bank, why she needs the loan and why she should obtain it (appendix 4). Specific points in the CV have been highlighted by cross referencing them in the covering letter (Jenner, 2001). These are intended to focus on the author's selling points and convince the bank about her motivations and capabilities.
Although our career objectives remain the same, our choices to pursue them vary as we progress in life. I've always wanted my own business, however, when I came to Brookes I wanted a strategic management career in an international hotel company, and then to have my own business as a hobbie. Management would provide me a more comfortable, easy-to-do job, with fewer worries, no need for start-up capital, and generally an easier lifestyle. Nevertheless, I was never able to convince myself it would make me happy. Having to comply with rules and work for someone else, never (as much as I tried!!!) appealed to me. This past year showed me that unless I follow my true aspirations I will never be satisfied with life. Therefore, though recognizing it is a tough and challenging path to tread, I believe I have found my way to achieving my dreams, and just that is enough to keep me motivated.