The focus of this essay will be the identification of the business orientation adopted by Caf Noir (a caf/restaurant located in Headington, Oxford).Various concepts will be identified in an attempt to recognize the focus implemented by the business; different approaches will be evaluated, concluding with the assessment of the suitability of the concept preferred.
Many business orientations can be found in literature, being the most important: product concept, production concept, sales concept and marketing concept. There are others such as the societal orientation, relationship marketing and ethical marketing which will also be covered.
According to Adcock, D., Halborg, A., & Ross, C. (2001), one of the oldest business concepts is the production concept, which lasted until the 1950's, characterized by large quantities of production in order to reduce costs and improve efficiency. Lewis, R.C. & Chambers, R.E. (2000), state that this concept is also typified by an easy-flow in production, considering that companies following a production concept see customers as hindering their profitability. Brassington, F., & Pettitt, S. (1997) state that companies presume clients rely only on price as the differentiating factor between products and therefore choose the cheapest one. The problem is to maintain customers, because in an ever-changing environment, consumers are not content with the same product over and over again, and although in a long term view, this approach may seem profitable, soon its consequences will be clearly visible. Lewis & Chambers (2000) go further to recognize that these enterprises have instructions for every procedure and do everything by the book and they are so concentrated with efficiency and production that the customer becomes secondary. Although recognizing the use of manuals, they suggest that these sometimes come in the way of customer satisfaction and refer to the lack of flexibility. An example of this practice is a hotel in Switzerland (Kotler, P., Bowen, J., and Makens.J. 2003) where customers are discouraged to eat on the balcony through highly poor service. These organizations think they're highly efficient however, Lewis & Chambers (2000) consider it as "customer blindness efficiency" (Lewis & Chambers, 2000 p13), as such companies harm their customers, in order to gain an increase in revenue. Eventually, these companies lose market share which becomes practically impossible to regain as they're always one step behind their competitors.
This situation led to the product concept which lasted until the 1960's (Adcockal. 2001) and has quality as its primary concept. Mawson, S.(2000) states that organizations are not concerned about making a product that will meet customer requirements; rather, they settle with trying to sell already existent products, which he defines as "marketing myopia" (Mawson, S. 2000 p5) and holds responsible for the failure of companies too blinded to see their customers bored out and won over by competitors. Brassington & Pettitt (1997) refer to this situation as the company guessing that the product it sells is what the customer wants, when in reality this is not always true. The uncertainty about whether there will be demand or not (Adcockal. 2001) often leads to fiasco when products are launched, when companies having promising markets and faced with disappointment slide into a production concept, leading them to even more complicated situations in an attempt to make a comeback when sales drop; they finally tend to invest in large budgets concerning promotions and advertising heading to a sales concept.
The sales concept lasted until the 1950's/60's and is characterized by prioritizing sales (Lewis & Chambers, 2000).Kotler et al (2003) suggest this concept believes that consumers do not purchase adequately except when experiencing a large sales campaign. According to Adcock et al (2001) organizations that practice such an orientation already have a product and hence the sales staff task becomes almost to force the customer to buy.
A marketing orientation should start by the company defining what it can sell. Consequently, it is essential for an organization to understand, identify and respond to the customers' needs. An enterprise is market orientated when it is both customer orientated but also competitor orientated, only this way will it be able to satisfy customers and maintain a competitive advantage. Reid (1989) supports that in a marketing concept, selling becomes secondary as supply meets demand and there is symmetry, with both parties' objectives being met. He suggests that if customers' unsatisfied needs are met, the company's goals will also be accomplished as satisfied customers increase revenue, and therefore continuous profits. He states that observations made by costumers greatly affect consumers' view of the enterprise, making it essential for customers to leave the business delighted. According to Adcock et al (2001), it is only when everyone involved in the company believe in the concept and in satisfying customers that the concept comes to life.
Lately, other concepts have emerged such as the societal concept which Adcock et al (2001) believe results from the development of the marketing concept, and apart from responding to the customers' demands, it takes into account society's welfare. It is never possible to keep everyone happy, and this should be taken into consideration by companies adopting such a concept, as they may find themselves being criticized by minority groups forcing them to constantly work towards the improvement of their policies. Alternatively, relationship marketing focuses on building a strong relationship between the customer and the enterprise, leading the customer to go back; the time spent between the two parts becomes therefore crucial to guarantee the customers return (Adcock et al, 2001). It leans towards costumer retention, and maintaining constant contact with the client, and comprises the dedication of all to better assist the customer. There are many techniques to relationship marketing, a few being loyalty cards, and vouchers which customers receive upon purchase. Ethical marketing may be considered as a higher level of societal marketing as it not only strives to satisfy the customer but takes into consideration moral and ethical values; a code of conduct may be a way to ensure an ethical approach of staff towards both the customer and the company itself. It is mainly characterized by the practice of high moral and quality standards (Adcock et al, 2001).
Following an initial interview with the owner of Caf Noir, it seems that the company practices a product orientation; however, indications of other concepts may also be apparent. Caf Noir's goal (provision of good food, service and a nice atmosphere for the customer) shows that they focus mainly on food quality. Also, when asked to rate several aspects in terms of importance (food quality, product presentation, customer experience, service quality and customer satisfaction), food quality was the highest rated and customer experience the lowest. Caf Noir emphasizes on product improvement rather than removing it from the menu, in order to increase profitability; however, the management also tries to provide new products (unknown by the general public or of their own creation), instead of serving standard known dishes with higher quality, lower price and cost. But, when asked if their goal is to focus on what the customer wants or to provide existing products, the reply was "How do we know what the customer wants?" .This leads to believe that although trying to offer what suits customers demand, the company does not have a technique on how to achieve it, simply providing what they imagine the customer would like. Another reason that leads to believe Caf Noir practices a product concept is the management only changing the menu once every couple of years; no sort of promotion or advertisement is used, as they consider word-of-mouth the best form of publicity. There is only a board in the restaurant with specials which the staff informs the customer of, however never do they recommend or try to encourage the customer, because the management feels customers might feel persuaded. They state the focus is on customer satisfaction in order to achieve the company's goals, though, customer satisfaction questionnaires are only used every few months and on a very informal basis; the staff talks to the customer and they believe this is an efficient way to evaluate their satisfaction. Concerning feedback towards unsatisfied customers and their suggestions, these are only taken into consideration if they are in a majority, not all questionnaires are read and final actions will always depend on the owner. When asked about societal issues such as noise levels and smoking in the restaurant the reply was that no measures are being carried out, however, it is being taken into consideration for future thought. They also concentrate on serving products which everyone can access and this leads to believe they consider wide distribution (production orientation) as an important factor. It seems there is an attempt to meet demand, nevertheless there is no knowledge of what demand is, and therefore too many approaches are adopted.
It would seem sufficient if the company concentrated on target markets rather than trying to satisfy everyone and adopted a marketing strategy in order to attract those customers. A realistic and sales attitude with the goal to let consumers know about the products available appears appropriate and if not too aggressive, could be constructive for the business. Actions should be planned and there must be a type of organization when taking decisions and these should be pondered and evaluated in advance and thought of more seriously. A flexible protocol could be the start of a structured strategy.