The following report analyses the business environment in South Korea, by comparing cultural and institutional factors, to those found in the UK, as part of a market assessment strategy for expansion. The results of the initial environmental analysis impact people management approaches, and therefore recommendations and justifications have been put forth to assist the evaluation of changes needed for a bakery group, Saint Fusion, when considering entering the country.
Using the PESTE framework it was found that Korea is a significantly attractive country for business investment, especially in hospitality, as tourism is one of the country's fastest growing industries. Its increasing levels of growth, rising consumer disposable income and expenditure, which adding to economic reforms and encouraging foreign direct investment policies have contributed to making Korea the current twelfth biggest world economy. The emphasis on education has created a pool of highly skilled professionals which in combination with vocationally trained staff provide the basis for Saint Fusion's core staff. Further, employment law reforms introducing flexible work further encourage hospitality investment.
However, cultural differences and their impact on people management approaches are significant. Characteristics including high power distance, uncertainty avoidance, feminism, long-term orientation and collectivism should result in a hierarchy-based organizational structure and the use of personnel management for operative staff, to meet collectivist and feminist needs, with a consequent progress towards soft human resource management as hierarchical levels progress. Further implications include: a focus on intrinsic rewards (motivation and reward), opportunities to acquire and develop new skills (training and development) and the management of equal opportunities at operative level diversity management at managerial.
In conclusion, the incorporation of the above factors in a polycentric/regiocentric approach would guarantee the transformation of differences into opportunities and provide competitive advantages for Saint Fusion.
This report analyses the business environment in South Korea, by comparing cultural and institutional factors, to those found in the UK, as part of a market assessment strategy for expansion. The results of the initial environmental analysis certainly impact people management approaches, and therefore recommendations and justifications have been put forth to assist the evaluation of changes needed. Appendix 1 gives an overview of Saint Fusion and its marketing strategy for Korea.
The PESTE framework was chosen to compare UK and Korean business environments and analyse the impact of cultural differences on people management approaches as it provides an overview of the countries' macro-environment, pinpointing challenges and opportunities and suggesting the level of adaptability needed for people management techniques (Rowley & Bae, 2004; Brewster & Tyson, 1991; Zhu & Warner, 2004). Elements of business systems theory, which suggests a country's institutions affect people management (Brewster, 2006), are used alongside cultural differences to justify diverse practices (Sorge, 2004).
Many definitions of 'culture' exist because it is a term applied in various social sciences and domains. Nonetheless, these are cohesive in stating culture as a combination of different factors, implied (i.e. morals and customs) and apparent (i.e. conduct), where fundamental beliefs are portrayed in behaviour (Groeschl & Doherty, 2000). Hofstede & Hofstede (2005) add that culture is so deeply-rooted it explains national differences (e.g. the role of the government, approaches to work, legislative structure, economy and demographics). A connection is then established that the culturalist and the institutionalist perspectives are interdependent and both influence HRM policies (Brewster, 2006; Sorge, 2004). Consequently, cultural justifications are provided throughout the analysis to validate UK and South Korean institutional differences. Important to mention however, that Hofstede's arguments are based on research performed over two decades ago and their reliability (Brewster, 2006; Pizam, Pine, Mok & Shin, 1997), especially in South Korea's case is questionable due to recent changes.
Korea's favourable economic situation with rising rate of growth and GNI per capita offers many business opportunities for foreign direct investment (FDI)-appendix 2. Recent government efforts showing the country's openness to internationalisation are proven by policies restructuring the economy and reforming employment laws (World Bank, 2004), free trade agreements (FTA), mainly with the US (Foreign Relations News, 2006)-appendix 2-and sanctions on businesses (for restaurants the max. fine is 500.000 won) if they do not adopt the international metric system (Nation News, 2006). These changes have resulted in Korea becoming the twelfth largest world economy (BBC, 2006), and adding to the mentioned positive political and economic changes, assist hospitality organizations entering the country. Korea, however, was not always this "open"; until recently it had major government corruption, suggestions of which still remain (U.S Library of Congress, 2005; appendix 2). A striking difference in policies between the UK and Korea is the amount of strict regulations, detailed formalities and government intervention in public and private affairs (taxation, education, politics-appendix 2) in the latter in comparison to the apparently deregulated UK (appendix 2). Hofstede & Hofstede (2005) suggest this is typical of collectivist societies (appendix 3), where government intervention is justified by protecting the interests of the whole over the individual. Economic indications of collectivist societies (predominant in Asia) include reduced wealth (Korea's GNI per capita is lower than UK figures-appendix 2), the existence and influence of chaebols in a country's economy and the use of force to implement new economic practices-e.g. severe fines for small business if they do not implement the international metric system-(Hofstede, 2001). On the other hand, the UK's political environment and low government intervention propose a high regard for individual interests reflected in strong values for social justice and human rights and each council determining its planning regulations (appendix 2). Economic evidences of individuality are seen in free-market policies which encourage competition, significantly higher levels of wealth (appendix 2), and emphasis on freedom (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). The UK's lack of formality and rules suggests people are more relaxed and ambiguity tolerant, the absolute opposite is seen in Korea and reflected in the degree of uncertainty avoidance (UA)-appendix 3. Collectivism is also reflected in the existence and power of trade unions. Although Korea is highly-unionized, this is mainly in manufacturing (Rowley & Bae, 2004) with no evidence of unions in hospitality and the federations of tourism and women workers having the lowest numbers of affiliated unions and members (appendix 2). The UK in contrast, has a union for bakers and associated food workers; however its role seems to be to provide information for individual workers rather than intervention (BFAWU, 2006). Certainly the UK offers favourable conditions for investment though its market competitiveness poses survival challenges for some companies. Korea's recent government policy changes shown in increased westernization and business transparency suggest an inclination towards more individualist ideals, which certainly has major advantages, when competing with some neighbouring Asian countries, to attract FDI. Comparing the two countries' political and economic landscapes, and contrasting the UK's prevalent values of autonomy, self-interest and competition, with Korea's control, formality and group values, it is clear that Saint Fusion Korea's people management approaches should be contextualised and include group management and strong manager-staff relationships where status is emphasized yet moderated with goodwill (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005).
In response to neighbouring booming and large-scale economies, which highlight high cost production and constrain export potential (Tong-soo, 2006), Korea is tackling its internal problems, to attract FDI, by improving labour market policies (About Korea, 2006a), introducing flexible work (appendix 5) rising the retirement age, and legislating age/women discrimination acts (About Korea, 2006a). Further efforts include opening job centres, the introduction of an annual pay system (Rowley & Bae, 2004) and making work insurance available to everyone-only implemented in 2003 (U.S. Library of Congress, 2005). These new policies significantly affect hospitality (especially greater female participation) and mainly the bakery sector which needs flexible shifts and working hours to maximize labour productivity. However, despite the improvements, there are still many stiff regulations regarding employability in Korea (appendix 4). Nonetheless, apart from reflecting greater gender equality, flexible work (appendix 5) demonstrates Korea's feminism, where a work/life balance is crucial, both genders have the same opportunities for the same vocations and there is a prevalence of service industry jobs (appendix 2)-Hofstede, 2001. The UK on the other hand, is a masculine country (appendix 3), where gender roles are still rather differentiated, competition dominates and returns are impartial. As female participation in the workforce is not a reflection of feminism (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005), the UK's tightening gap between male and female work participation is attributed to improving attitudes towards working women, their increasing qualifications and returning to work after having children (UK National Statistics, 2005). The OECD (2006) asserts wage differences between male and female workers relate to the amount of time women spend in the labour force, the jobs they choose and the high incidence of part-time employment (appendix 2). Further evidence suggesting masculinity and specific gender roles is the very low number of working mums, especially with children under five. To adapt to Korea's feminine culture Saint Fusion should foster pleasant relationships between superiors and subordinates and cooperation, opposing its UK aim of inculcating a sense of accomplishment and job recognition- typical of masculine societies (Romani, 2004).
Socio-cultural challenges for hospitality businesses in Korea include a homogeneous population, predominance of the national language, social class and Confucianism (appendix 2); which refer to different aspects of culture (Usinier & Lee, 2005) and prove high levels of UA (appendix 3)-a geographical characteristic (Hofstede, 2001). Conversely, UK's high immigration levels have brought diverse languages, ethnicities, nationalities, levels of education, types of profession, and religions, and consequently innovation and diversity (UK National Statistics, 2005), proving much tolerance towards difference and uncertainty (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). Further implications lie in how people regard social disparity and their association with power. In the UK, status and power are unimportant, however in Korea, these are differentiators of social class, linked to greater respect, formality (Usinier & Lee, 2005) and believed to bring stability through social inequality (power distance-PD), though also balanced with a greater sense of responsibility (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). PD is found in societies where there are wage discrepancies and evidence of violence in the country's politics (Hofstede, 2001). Korea, which ranked above average in PD (appendix 3), shows recent evidence of oppression, violence and corruption in its government and women earn half of men's wages (appendix 2); however, this figure is contradicted, at least in the hotel industry, with the ILO's (2006) figures on male/female wages (appendix 2), and importantly, Hofstede (2001) states PD relates to wage disparities at an organizational level and not gender differences. The situation in the UK is much different (low PD-appendix 3), there are no indices of internal political violence, and emphasis is on low hierarchical structures, equality, small wage differences and consultation before decision-making. Further reflections of high PD in Korea which need to be considered are the submission of the weak, extensive hierarchies, concentration of power and the idea that social inequality is a norm (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). The implications of PD on Saint Fusion Korea's HRM strategy are significant and more rigid organizational structures, with increased hierarchical levels, and a broader range of salaries is to be considered.
Social inequality and collectivism mentioned above are also characteristic of Confucianism, a set of ethical principles predominant in Asia, which additionally includes perseverance, keeping "face", education, hard work, sacrifice and the prevalence of relationships over duty-guanxi (Usinier & Lee, 2005). The emphasis on immediate work for future rewards gives Korean society a long-term orientation-LTO (appendix 3). Though Confucianism justifies Korea's highly qualified labour market and equips organizations with skilled workforces (appendix 2), its LTO also demands significant changes to human resources management (HRM) from what is practised in the UK, as the latter is characterized by a focus on immediate outcomes, importance of jobs over relationships and tradition-short-term orientation-STO (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). Saint Fusion Korea's HRM managers should consider longer contracts and increased training/skills development opportunities (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005), which oppose the UK's focus on immediate results (Romani, 2004).
Technological progress (appendix 2) in both countries is precious for hospitality success, enabling companies to adapt to both converging and non-converging cultural elements. Technology's impact on HRM is the need for highly skilled professionals to use it, e.g. in the UK, professional managers are needed to interpret soft data so to identify trends. Given that Saint Fusion will apply these ICT developments in Korea, the same specialised skills should be looked for in managers.
A company's strategic people management orientation depends on the host-country's national and organizational cultures. International companies moving into new countries are more likely to find their culture eventually assimilate that of the host country, rather than their host country employees' beliefs altered by the organizational culture (Hodgetts & Luthans, 1997). Additional influences in determining centricity profiles include targets market characteristics and origin (Doherty, 1998), expansion strategy, home-country influence (Roper, Brookes, Price & Hampton, 1997) and employment regulations (Harzing, 2004). Three different perspectives determine centricity, namely the management mind-set, the companies' tendencies and the host-country manager's perspective, resulting in polycentrism, geocentrism and ethnocentrism (Roper et al. , 1997). Harris, Brewster & Sparrow (2003), further introduce the regiocentric approach. Important to note that no company depicts any centricity profile in entirety, but rather reflects its tendencies.
Ethnocentrism suggests parent country staff and management policies are superior to those of the host country (management mindset) (Roper  et al., 1997). This reflects in significant expatriates in host-country management, moving across the organisation maintaining home-country managerial practices (Edwards, 2004) and host-country people management decisions made at company headquarters-power centralization (Harris et al. 2003). Though ethnocentricity maximizes the use of limited resources, lowers costs and increases control, it best suits home-country targets, overlooks host-country cultural differences and consequently fails to consider host-country staff interests (Harris et al. 1997). The need for UK nationals in Saint Fusion Korea is unnecessary as labour market reforms and high levels of education have significantly increased the availability of highly skilled staff-appendix 2-(Edwards, 2004). Despite reform, many employment law differences remain (appendix 4) which added to sustained cultural differences pose significant challenges to an ethnocentric approach. As examples, a preference for home-country nationals clashes with Korea's nationalism and homogeneity; low hierarchical levels in the UK oppose significant PD in Korea (Hofstede, 2001), and would confuse host-country nationals as to their relationship with superiors; young UK managers in a context where father-figure superiors are sought after, representing status and power, would not be appreciated by staff; UK nationals would have difficulty understanding the collectivist nature of the workforce (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005).
As a mindset, polycentrism holds that host-country nationals are the best to show loyalty and understanding towards their country's institutions and culture (Roper  et al., 1997), hunce crucial to work in the host country (Doherty, 1998). Polycentrism is most common in adaptive organizations that give subsidiaries decision-making independence (Harris et al. 1997) and tailor people management policies (Doherty, 1998). Though convenient in countries where legal, political and significant cultural differences persist it does challenge a company's ability to offer a consistent product, especially if it is a multinational group (Usinier & Lee, 2005).
Regiocentrism, links with a regional business strategy and organizational structure, is broader than polycentrism and from an HRM perspective, allows host country nationals to move around the area, gain experience, be promoted and make strategic decisions affecting their region (Harris et al. 1997). It applies to companies with regional target markets and country cluster strategies, allowing for similar practices to be brought together (Edwards, 2004).
Geocentrism is an ideal (Doherty, 1998) HR orientation, with global companies identifying advantages in diverse cultural practices and adjusting them to different contexts. It prioritizes skills over nationalities and executives support both equal parent/host country systems and the application of cultural/institutional/organizational resemblances at a global level (Harris et al, 1997; Roper et al, 1997).
Knowing the human resource strategy should be integrated in the business orientation (Storey, 1992; Riley & Jones, 1992), and Saint Fusion Korea is adopting, from a marketing perspective, mainly regiocentric tendencies (appendix 1), its people management strategy should also have a regiocentric orientation (appendix 6). Korean nationals are recommended at operative level due to different environments, employment law, bureaucratic work permits which do not validate importing all employees (appendix 6), but also to significant cultural dissimilarities (Edwards, 2004)-appendices 2, 4-which justify local operative staff as best serve consumer, employee, and company interests. Unit managers, however should be from around Asia (initially Tokyo and Hong Kong-appendix 1) because of fewer cultural differences but also due to mobility. Given Saint Fusion's moderate operation, it is more cost-efficient to bring managers from close by, who understand the group's regional business goals and work towards them by adding creative, yet appropriate, management practices. Once Koreans are trained they should also move around the region, experiment and so enrich Saint Fusion's culture (appendix 6). Saint Fusion's reliance on its in-housel market at managerial levels is important to guarantee standards and consistency (Doherty, 1998), though its flexibility also extends to hiring managers from the external market with significant training before occupying their positions. The same ought to apply to national and regional managers so to foster innovation and entrepreneurial activities which are crucial to the Saint Fusion concept (appendix 1). The latter should come mainly from Saint Fusion's internal market and be third-country nationals (Asian) with regular temporary visits from parent-country executives to certify strategic alignment with the company's international goals.
There are two underlying ideologies behind people management: universalism and contextualism (Harris et al. , 1997; Brewster, 2006). The first, a broad paradigm, focuses on the organization and regards staff as assets who, with strategic management, help achieve the company's business goals (Harris et al, 1997; Brewster, 2006). It supports a "best practice" approach, applicable in various circumstances and characterised by human resource management and business strategy integration, staff loyalty, adaptability and excellence (Torrington, Hall & Taylor, 2005), whilst disregarding the organization's external environment (Brewster, 2006, Harris et al. 2004); at an extreme, it's opposing principles of adaptability and staff loyalty make its objectives unachievable (Torrington et al. 2005, Storey, 1992). Disregard for external forces when moving into significantly different environments, has a negative impact on the organization's success and reputation.
Contextualism considers labour markets, culture, political environments and trade unions. Instead of implementing 'best practice', it seeks to understand differences, through natural data collection, and adapt to them (Brewster, 2006). Not only are people management practices influenced by outside forces, but also by how those forces are interpreted by the organizations' members (Storey, 1992). Though enabling greater host-country adaptability (good for staff), contextualism can challenge management ideologies (Brewster, 2006).
The most common approaches to managing human resources are personnel management (PM) and human resource management (HRM). There seems to be confusion in related literature as to the real differences between HRM and PM, though what prevails is HRM as a development of PM resulting from reduced trade union power and increased competition. This created a need to shift focus from collective employee representation to direct employer/employee relationships, to better maximize performance and reach business objectives-universalist approach (Storey, 1992; Price, 1997), and is shown in performance appraisals, increased earnings, acknowledgement of individual achievement and direct communication of bad news (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005; Brewster, 2006, Harris et al. 2004)-individualist connotation. This "hard" HRM (e.g. cost-minimising, short term contracts) is contrasted with a "softer" version which entails a sense of training, development, career progression and commitment to staff (Korczynski, 2002). PM, however, has collectivist/pluralist implications, centred on managing the workforce, regarded as inflexible and who need strict rules and centralised orders. Its clearly delineated procedures make it very mechanical and it has an intermediating role between workforces, trade unions and managers (Torrington et al. 2005). Certainly this approach is inappropriate in societies characterised by individuality and a certain deregulation (appendix 2). Ultimately what has to be accomplished is a match between job characteristics, skills needed and employee motivators (Guerrier, 1999).
The above and mentioned differences (appendices 2, 4, Business Environment), and link between HRM and universalism, suggest a contextual approach to people management is more viable for Saint Fusion. The main cultural elements that suggest a different approach in Korea relate to relationship values which entail inequality, hierarchy, benevolence, importance to manual workers and a 'family environment' (Zhu & Warner, 2004; Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005); these significantly contradict the UK work environment and therefore have implications on the choice between HRM and PM. Collectivism is both a cultural dimension and a Confucian principle which always regards the individual as part of a system (appendix 2). It links with PD, regarding the workforce as a unit where mutual responsibilities of security are exchanged for fidelity (Zhu & Warner, 2004; Hofstede & Hofstede, 2001), therefore also suggesting a different approach from that in the UK, where emphasis is on individual interests, personal achievement, autonomy, lack of formal rules and regulations and narrow pay differentials (Harris et al. 2003). Korea's feminine mindset is also highly contradictory to the UK's masculine ideology and certainly impacts on approaches to managing human resources, especially in relation to the notion of Ying and Yang, reflected in the workplace as an endeavour to achieve and maintain harmony, stability and continuity (Zhu & Warner, 2004). Conversely, employees in the UK commonly display assertiveness, and self-interest (related to individuality), a need for acknowledgment, challenges, and progress (both in terms of responsibility and pay) (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). Koreans are also influenced by Bing Fa (ancient war strategies) which influences not only their mindset but also their approach to management. It is based on five principles which, support an ethical and honourable cause (femininity), a sense of time and situational circumstances (LTO), leadership defined as courage, strictness, but also wisdom and compassion (PD and collectivism), and regulation and obedience with clear designations of power and dependability (PD and UA) (Zhu & Warner, 2004). Bing Fa therefore, appears to underlie the essence of Korean culture and will have to be carefully considered when delineating strategies for the local workforce.
The type of product/service also has a significant influence on the approach taken. Saint Fusion provides a rather standardized product/service, however, not to the extent of fast-food chains. The skills and creativity needed to develop fusion products and the concept evoking success, want and achievement, make service staff vital for overall customer satisfaction. Saint Fusion thus operates between "service factory" and "mass service" concepts-appendix 7 (Lashley, 1998) and although its service is standardised and tangible dominant, it is not totally predictable and homogenous, and service staff need the skills to induce a sense of aspiration and excellence in customers who appreciate individuality and refuse to be attached to stereotypes (appendix 1). Saint Fusion Korea should therefore adopt a mixture of command and control and participative styles of people management (appendix 7). These will vary depending on operative (command and control) and managerial (participative) staff. Considering the standardised product/service offer and the Korean culture, at an operative level, PM should be more controlling, with greater rules and procedures, however not as much as suggested in appendix 5. The mentioned characteristics are typical of fast-food restaurants, with minimum or nil discretion for operatives (Guerrier, 1999), and that is not what Saint Fusion stands for. Saint Fusion's volume is moderate, employees are relatively empowered (however much they are comfortable with), and there is a degree of intangible pleasure-seeking attached to the product (appendix 1). At a managerial level, HRM practices should be more participative, include more autonomy, involvement and greater discretion so to anticipate and adapt, along with the overall business strategy, to customer service needs (Lashley, 1998).
According to Price (1997), resourcing depends on the company's external environment, the type of product/service, the company's HRM strategy and the level of expertise needed. To these Harris et al. (2003) add the type of labour market and recruitment sources used.
When considering the domestic labour market, especially availability and cost, Saint Fusion has an advantage, as appendix 2 shows the existence of employees with high qualifications, an increase in demand for tertiary jobs (especially in hospitality), high productivity and employment and very low wages compared to the UK. Considering the above factors, company training opportunities and career progression, type of product/service requiring more practical skills rather than expertise (Guerrier, 1999; appendix 7), Saint Fusion's staff will be supplied mainly by vocational training (About Korea, 2006) and secondary school graduates (appendix 2). The availability of skills in the domestic labour market, increasing employment, especially in hospitality (appendix 2), secure Saint Fusion's source of professional skills (appendix 2), growth opportunities and competitiveness (Price, 1997). Considering recent employment law reforms, mainly increased flexibility (Rowley & Bae, 2004; appendix 5), Saint Fusion should primarily operate on a core staff basis, though during periods of increased demand, temporary staff could also be employed to further assist operations (Harris et al. , 1997) and supplied though external sources (appendix 6) to maintain fairness and equal opportunities (EO). Saint Fusion recognizes collectivism reduces risk (Hofstede, 2001), emphasizes family and 'in-groups' which suggest greater staff loyalty and the upholding of the organization's interests (Pizam et al. 1997) and that informal recruitment methods are very common in Korea (Rowley & Bae, 2004); however, priority to 'in-groups' leads to nepotism (McCourt, 2003), and contradicts Saint Fusion's core values of EO and diversity management (DM). Throughout the day, depending on demand, tasks can be reallocated to keep costs down (functional flexibility within each organizational level, Guerrier, 1999) but also to tie in with notions of collectivism and LTO, where training & development (multi-skilling) and lasting career opportunities are important (Price, 1997; Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). This will maintain Saint Fusion's PM/standardized product approach but also include some 'soft' HRM elements (commitment, development) so to also tie in with cultural needs (appendix 2). All operative staff can be provided from the local labour market, whereas unit and national managers should be a mixture of internal/external, local/regional markets (staff reallocation), as evidence of career progression but also to stimulate innovation (Price, 1997). Regional executives should come mainly from Saint Fusion's internal market and be third-country nationals (Asian) with regular visits from parent-country executives (in accordance with Saint Fusion's centricity-see Strategic Orientation). These recommendations complement Saint Fusion's orientation, reflect cultural needs for hierarchy, and consider type of product/skills needed and PM/HRM approaches. Because of operation size, work permit bureaucracy (appendix 6), and high costs, it is not justifiable to have permanent expatriates on the regional board. With this in mind, recruiting strategies will vary from suitability to flexibility (appendix 6). Operative level staff could be recruited on a 'best fit' approach, linking to the company's PM (Storey, 1992) and standardized service (Doherty, 1998), however, it should not be as strict as Price (1997) suggests, as once employed and corresponding to Korea's culture, employees go through training and teamwork, whilst integrating into Saint Fusion's culture (malleability strategy). Managers will go through development processes to fit in the organizational culture, improve performance, increase loyalty and guarantee lasting employment (Rowley & Bae, 2004), resulting in 'softer' HRM at higher levels (Storey, 1992; Price, 1997).
Companies are increasingly concerned about motivation at work, given its close relationship to improved job performance (Hodgetts & Luthans, 1997). The two most common theories on motivation come from Maslow's hierarchy of needs and Herzberg's theory of motivation. Both support that once physical needs have been met, various psychological needs emerge (Hodgetts & Luthans, 1997). These views have faced criticism, by claims that they do not consider culture or the type of job performed. The understanding of cultural values is crucial for developing reward systems. Cultural differences impact perceptions of equity, i.e. balance between one's contributions (skills, knowledge, energy and functioning) and results (success, wages, respect, promotion and development) (Wheeler, 2002). Depending on distinct views, people can divided into benevolents, equity sensitives and entitleds (appendix 8), the first mainly found in cultures with high collectivism and feminism are high as PD and UA have a lesser impact on equity sensitivity (Wheeler, 2002). Therefore, and considering the challenge it is to determine what job motivators apply to which culture, career and development stage, an appreciation of both intrinsic and extrinsic values is advised as well as the emphasis on intrinsic or extrinsic depending on operatives or managers, and the different approaches of PM and HRM.
Since PM principles prevail at operative level (appendix 7), and considering the Korean culture and a company's obligation to meet employee work goals, motivators should include programmed training and multi-tasking-see Resourcing. Also teamwork, group management and 'family-like' employer/employee relationships, as well as unity, concord and collaboration should be integrated to correspond to feminist and collectivist principles-appendix 2 (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). Jackson (2004) suggests a company can further stimulate rising loyalty and motivation in collectivist countries, by establishing links with the wider community, a connection which Saint Fusion establishes by relying on produce from local farmers/suppliers as part of its fusion concept (Aghdassi, 2005).
Motivators for unit managers should be different, considering people management approaches, centricity, and the additional needs of professionals who already have achieved the above elements (Hofstede, 2001). It is thus recommended an increase in managers' autonomy to make unit-level decisions within pre-determined parameters, temporary training and development opportunities at regional units, and certain elements of individual performance appraisals and management by objectives (appendix 7), so to satisfy both managers' and company work goals (appendix 8). The same would apply for regional executives, though individualist and soft HRM elements should prevail.
Home country nationals' (HCN), specialist skills make them pursue constant career development and progression (appendix 8) rather than money, so Saint Fusion, has to focus on an inclusive reward package, focused on sophisticated challenges, unique opportunities and unequal career development.
Recent changes in Korean employment include a surge in flexible employee rewards -appendix 8 (Rowley & Bae, 2004), though no distinction between performance (PRP)/competency-related pay and individual/team-related pay is made. The introduction of an annual salary, based on individual performance/ability further suggests greater westernization. These changes have also brought problems that underline major cultural differences, such as preference for subjective appraisal and non-financial rewards-which contradict Korean ethics (Harris et al. , 2003), and the difficulty to communicate bad news-opposes feminism and protection (PD) (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). Whereas PRP opposes cooperation, leniency, admiration of employee efforts and harmony in performance assessments (Rowley & Bae, 2004; Korczynski, 2002), competence-related pay (CRP) is based on acquiring skills, developing abilities and showing flexibility. The allocation of extrinsic rewards for each hierarchical level can be found in appendix 8 with consideration to Saint Fusion's product size and service offering (appendix 7). Profit sharing/share options and employee benefits seem unnecessary (Harris et al., 2003) given the company's size of operation.
Effective training and development (T&D) offers numerous advantages for employees. By developing and acquiring skills, employees can better adapt to changing environments, increase flexibility and loyalty (Harris et al. , 2003; Price, 1997). However, a contradicting argument claims staff, with new and improved skills, can find better jobs and resign (Torrington et al., 2005). Whereas the latter argument may be apparent in avoidance resilient, masculine, and individualist societies-see Business Environment (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005), in places, like Korea, characterized by a sense of belonging, low occupational mobility, collectivism, harmony and fear of uncertainty, T&D can create the above results (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). Institutional elements also impact the importance given to T&D (Harris et al., 2003; Price, 1997), reflected in government policies, T&D recipients, where it is needed, which delivery methods to use, how to measure it's success and approaches towards developing and assessing management (Harris et al., 2003). It is therefore the combination of the above stakeholder (government, individuals, and companies) influences in T&D that are vital for competitive advantage. Adding to the above, Saint Fusion's T&D plan should consider its HRM orientation, type of product (appendix 7), approaches to people management and national culture.
Confucianism, the awareness of status, social class mobility and technological developments have all fostered an emphasis on education and highly-qualified professionals-appendix 2-(Rowley & Bae, 2004; Price, 1997). These reduce many T&D costs in some of the most expensive areas (appendix 6); on the other hand, the provision and significant attendance of vocational training in Korea (appendix 2) satisfies many training needs of Saint Fusion's operative staff (Price, 1997). At this level, bearing in mind Saint Fusion is taking a PM approach, the main focus should be on training (appendix 7).
Unit managers should build on their previous training, and their development should aim to build a Saint Fusion character and attitude. Given differences in culture, regional managers could be brought in for national-level personality development, and unit managers sent to other sites in Asia for programmes based on developing general managerial competencies through job rotations (Rowley & Bae, 2004; Price, 1997; Harris et al. 2003). Though pre-departure training programs are advisable to avoid expatriate failure (Dowling, Welch, Schuler, 1999), given the geographical similarities, Saint Fusion's programs should focus on language training, some cultural orientation (if moving to Japan, Hofstede, 2001) and sensitivity training.
As for regional executives, 'frequent flyers' (Harris et al, 2003) will be sent on brief international assignments to coordinate and integrate Saint Fusion Asia's practices into the company's overall strategy (Scullion & Paauwe, 2004). They will not need specific training as they are travelling on the basis of 'consultants' and thus would have received it throughout their career (Scullion & Paauwe, 2004).
Because the term expatriate normally involves a period of 2-5 years of work in a host country (Harzing, 2004), and Saint Fusion's 'expatriates' will only be in Korea for a maximum of 90 days, in the case of frequent flyers (appendix 8), and between 6 to 9 months, in the case of unit managers, the detailed processes mentioned in literature do not seem entirely applicable to Saint Fusion.
Equal opportunities (EO) and diversity management (DM) are crucial topics for international companies given increased immigration, greater mobility and demographic and employment law changes (Price, 1997; Groeschl & Doherty, 1999). However culture also influences the extent of EO and DM efficiency. The former concept focuses on implementing legislation and structural changes to reduce discrimination and encourage greater participation of minorities in employment (McCourt, 2003; Price, 1997), including discrimination acts, positive action (dealing with demand) and positive training (dealing with supply) (McCourt, 2003) and cover areas including gender, race, ethnicity, disability and religion (Torrington et al. , 2005). It assumes the misleading premise that having employed ethnic minorities, staff perceptions will change. The understanding that cultural changes are needed alongside EO and affirmative action (AA), resulted in DM, with a business aim to maximize the diverse workforce (all included) as part of the organization's strategy to increase profitability (Groeschl & Doherty, 1999 Harris et al. , 2003), ideal in high discretion tasks and less efficient in routine jobs (appendix 7). Multicultural workforces increase innovation, diverse solutions, staff loyalty, improve performance, productivity, cut recruiting costs and enhance decision-making (Price, 2000; Hodgetts & Luthans, 1997). The benefits of multiculturalism are questionable in relation to Korea, as obedience is a trait of the culture, especially towards those hierarchically higher. Diversity may also cause challenges for homogenous and collectivist societies, with high PD, feminism and low UA (appendix 3) due to lack of structure, diverse perceptions and communication barriers (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). EO and DM are therefore both needed, the first to influence behaviour and the latter to focus on changing organizational culture.
Contradicting evidence that minorities are found mostly at lower levels of organizations (Price, 2000; Goeschl & Doherty, 1999), Korea's homogenous population and cultural characteristics (see Business Environment), and Saint Fusion's source of operative staff hinder DM related to ethnic minorities. However, the government has made several changes to provide EO, including age and women discrimination acts, extending the retirement age, improving pay systems, some de-regulation of employment laws, subsidies for companies that introduce shift work and employment support programs for young workers ("YES") and the homeless ("RESTART") (About Korea, 2006a). Though considerable, these changes show a lack of consideration for ethnicity, religion, disability or race. This may be justified by Korea's ethnic homogeneity, related to cultural values such as the importance of social networks or shame towards disabled people (contradicted by Korea's feminism), particularism, ethnic prejudice and xenophobia and intolerance towards immigrants-see work permits in appendix 6 (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005).
Considering Saint Fusion is all about synthesis and its target markets appreciate diversity (appendix 1), personnel managers should focus on providing EO and fairness to as many employees possible from diverse backgrounds (though regarding ethnicity/nationality, this may only extend to a minute Chinese community-appendix 2). This should be achieved by implementing and monitoring legislation (equal chance), and equal access through Saint Fusion's entry points (Price, 2000). They should also take into account Saint Fusion's use of PM at operative level, link between PM and EO, practical implications of the above cultural values, and evidence showing these are not change with EO. Conversely, DM approaches will be inherently evident if Saint Fusion follows the resourcing and T&D recommendations, by recruiting managers from across the region and mobilizing them to gain new experiences. It is hoped that contact between culturally diverse managers and their operative staff, in addition to legislation towards EO and Saint Fusion's efforts to implement it, will eventually generate a multicultural workforce, which apart from increasing novelty and business performance will mirror the company's European and North American employees.
This report has looked at differences in people management approaches in Korea and UK. By reviewing business environments in both countries and analysing the differences in cultural factors that affect people management techniques it identified changes needed in key people management areas, namely, resourcing, motivation and rewards, training and development and diversity, suggesting and justifying recommendations which if implemented guarantee Saint Fusion's competitive advantage in Korea by using cultural differences to efficiently adapt to context and effectively align with the company's international strategy.