The past couple of decades have witnessed a significant change in the role of the hotel controller. From being considered an enemy of the managers, focused merely on producing numbers and gathering data, he has become an important member of the management team, shouldering a very holistic role. Not only is he heavily involved at departmental level but he has a crucial responsibility when it comes to strategic decision-making. Both the computerisation of hotel systems and technological developments have been major contributors to his enhanced role. Though his primary task still relates to accounting and control, part of his new functions include:
The above added responsibilities show the controller as an influential member of the management team, and prove he now has a very wide operating area.
This suggests that with coming years, the controller will have to be more knowledgeable of all areas of management and pose himself as a responsive element to future market trends. He will also be more informed of technological developments, environmental matters and key competitors. These increased responsibilities will require him to be better qualified, broadly experienced in all operative areas of the hotel and in continuous training and development.
This seminar paper aims to identify the role of the hospitality financial controller and his relation to and effect on the rest of the management team.
Controllers play a very important role both in the daily operations and strategic directions of a hospitality organization. They are part of the executive committee and also managers. Controllers work closely with all departments to provide them with the proper financial image and assist departmental managers in developing their budgets. Most importantly, they are the right-hand confidants of the general managers. The hotel controller is one of the key players of the management team (Burgess, 1995) as he assists managers with the provision of accurate information so that effective decisions may be taken. Further, research has shown that hotel controllers are able to exercise a significant amount of power due to their central role in the hotel's information network and in the decision-making process (Moore and Stefanelli, 1989). Burgess (1998) found in her survey, that 71.4% of financial managers had responsibility for systems management within the hotel operation. An earlier study by Burgess (1997) showed that over a third of respondents commented on how much impact technology had had on their working lives in the last five years. Although many of the changes are found in the front office area, the responsibility for control remains with the financial manager, who must ensure optimum levels of revenues and costs for the capital investment required.
Developments in technology, mainly the computerization of management systems, and the economic recession of the early 1990's had a major impact on the role of the controller over the past two decades (Burgess, 1993). This shift has transformed the controller's tasks from a mere accountant, focused on gathering data to a full participant in the management team.
In the last decade there have been many changes to the role and responsibilities of the controller for which new skills and training are required. He is now accountable not only for the hotel's finances but also for departmental duties (Burgess, 1993). There is a trend for controllers to become more active in areas such as hotel development; however, their responsibilities vary depending on the type of hotel ownership (Burgess, 1993).
Geller and Schmidgall (1984) provided one of the first profiles of hotel controllers. Amazingly, very few (13%) of the respondents were Chief Public Accountants (CPA) and a mere 8% reported to be a Certified Hospitality Accountant Executive (CHAE), nonetheless they found that a substantial number of accountants were part of the hotel executive committee (82%) and, unexpectedly, 72% were also well educated having at least a bachelor's degree. Their duties were primarily associated with budgets, accounting, analysis, and to slighter extent taxation and electronic data processing (EDP), as this depended, again, on the size and ownership of the hotel (Geller and Schmidgall, 1984).
Geller, Ilvento and Schmidgall (1990) followed up their previous study comparing the changes in the role of the controller over the previous 7 years (1983-1990). They found that an increasing number of financial controllers had graduated in hospitality management (17% as opposed to 8% in 1984). This was seen as a favourable shift with hotel companies recognising the value of hospitality management training and operations experience in the financial controller position (Geller et al. 1990). In addition to being skilled and qualified in hospitality and accounting matters, hotel controllers also had to possess essential knowledge in taxation (75% compared to 60%) and EDP (97% in comparison to the 1984 figure of 70%).
Geller et al. (1990) also noted a significant change in hotel controllers holding a designation of CHAE with an increase from 8% in1984 to 17% in 1990. These results further support the argument that the skills and education required by controllers has increased considerably over the past years (Palmer, Ziegenfuss & Pinsker, 2004).
In order to immediately react to previous recessionary pressure in the early 90's, the financial controllers of many hospitality establishments became of paramount importance, and their responsibilities increased dramatically (Burgess, 2000). Their ability of radical cost-cutting was required, and their knowledge that ranged from business to industry was utilized to great effect (Burgess, 2000). The changed relation between financial controllers and management team demanded them to communicate within organizations in a much more effective way and deliver the best financial views of the effect of management decisions. Consequently, they would be able to assist other managerial members in minimizing losses and maximizing profitability, and contribute themselves to the success of hospitality organizations. Burgess (1994) also identified that controllers were no longer perceived as adversaries of the management team, but more as advisers.
The following sections examine how the new controller relates to the rest of the management team and the duties his new role entails.
The future role of the hospitality financial controller will be greatly influenced by industry trends. The prime forces for change consist of capacity control, safety and security (including environmental issues), assets and capital, technology, and as a result, the requirement for a new type of management (The IHA White Paper, 1995) cited in (Burgess, 2000). Burgess (2000) has also stressed that globalization urges organizations to focus on the key areas of profitability, such as rooms, and to look for new methods of managing those that are less profitable. Thus original management skills will be needed in the development of predicting new trends, assessing the impact on all the areas of the business, and adapting to the speed of change (Burgess, 2000).
Computerization and technology are identified as being key influences on all aspects of life and will increase in importance even further (IHA, 1995) cited in (Burgess, 2000). Although comparatively more efficient, accurate and informative, new systems and the information they provide can be complicated and less user-friendly (Burgess, 2000). Decision making managers will benefit from controllers who provide unique information using new computerized methods and will increasingly appreciate both information and advice supplied by the financial team (Burgess, 2000). Hence, in order to devise new methods of financial control, to increase technical skills and to manage different types of systems, continuous training and development to maintain and update the competence needed in ever-changing technology is paramount (Burgess, 2000).
Environmental concerns have also been identified by IHA (1995) as one of the key determinants in the development of the international hospitality industry. Jauncey & Hawkinds (1997) cited in (Burgess, 2000) identified that the benefits of adopting environmentally friendly practices included not only cost savings from energy management but also attracting new markets and avoiding litigation and bad publicity. To anticipate future directions of new environmental policies aiming at maximizing organizations' benefits, controllers must remain aware of the sources of potential financial saving and of the necessity to think strategically (Burgess, 2000).
Recently, outsourcing has been a trendy change to business approach. In the hospitality industry, where core services, such as F&B, have been outsourced, there is a slight reduction of the financial manager's role. However, negative influences usually emerge between the parties, due to conflicts in maintaining standards. In this case, financial controllers have to be responsible for ensuring that the terms are adhered to and that standards are maintained, otherwise the venture will be in danger of failure (Burgess, 2000).
Burgess (1995) regarded a successful controller as an individual who can be knowledgeable about industry developments and internal management, informed of modern hotel management trends and also able to identify how well these might be used to maximize advantage within the organization. In the need of precise forecasting aiming at minimizing costs and maximizing revenue, the accounting skills of financial controllers are still of leading importance (Burgess, 1995). They offer valid and beforehand notice of future action to the management team of the organization. The financial controller, over the future, is more and more likely to play the role of a mediator between the various departmental heads and senior management. This will anticipate and assist developing the financial stability of the hospitality organization (Burgess, 1995).
Over the past three decades the role of the controller and his image has changed significantly. From being previously considered somewhat of a book keeper, focused merely on financial results and data collection and reporting (Burgess, 1993), he has become an active part of the management team, taking an important role in both daily and strategic decision making. The development of technology and the computerization of management systems has therefore, played an important role in broadening the duties of the controller. It has made him more involved in departmental management as well as superior administration (Geller and Schmidgall, 1984). Therefore, education and training are thus essential for the controller to carry-out his new tasks effectively. Apart from technical knowledge in accounting and finance, experience in operations is also vital in assisting the proficient assessment and analysis of the data gathered, facilitating valuable communication between the management team and contributing to the general efficacy of financial control (Burgess, 1994). In conclusion, Burgess (2000) puts forth that the role of the controller in the future will heavily be dependent on hospitality trends. Communication skills are no longer a plus but a definite requirement; the controller will have to be increasingly well prepared, trained and educated, informed of the market and able to forecast future trends.