Saint Fusion's purpose is to incorporate distinct characteristics of different world bakeries in one product, making it an original concept by introducing fusion cuisine in breads, cakes and vienoisserie (Aghdassi, 2005).
Saint Fusion was launched in 1998 in Oxford. In the following two years it focused on establishing itself as a strong organization in the UK, opening two sites in London, one in Manchester, Birmingham and Edinburgh. Saint Fusion's incremental success has allowed a careful international expansion strategy, with openings in Milan, Porto, Barcelona, Prague, New York, Boston, Montreal, Sydney, Tokyo and Hong Kong over the past six years (32 units in total). Saint Fusion's goal is not mass expansion, but to handpick sites where its main targets are established or where there is a trend for their development (appendix 1). In the coming years Saint Fusion will place itself as a reputable company in S. Korea, China, Jordan, UAE, Egypt, and South Africa.
Saint Fusion's UK target markets are young, sophisticated, wealthy consumers, aged 25-44 yrs, demand exclusivity, trendy yet calm ambience and originality (appendix 1). They have an eclectic taste, as they have been exposed to different cultures (Mintel, 2005). Czinkota & Ronkainen (1996) classify Saint Fusion's targets as trendsetters who, adding to the above, appreciate autonomy and "refuse consumer stereotypes" (Czinkota & Ronkainen, 1996, p. 254).
South Korea is one of the most affluent Asian countries, becoming increasingly westernized, with highly educated professionals (KOSIS, 2004) who embrace novelty and innovation (World Bank, 2004), therefore generating Saint Fusion's niche market. Further, the government's efforts to increase foreign direct investment (FDI) and international presence in the country as well as greater business transparency and easing employment regulations, giving more power to companies entering the market, all contribute to Korea's market attractiveness (Economic Challenges, 2006) and justify the need to research the country's potential. From an internal perspective, it would only seem logical for Saint Fusion's next move to be South Korea. With a recognized presence in Japan and Hong Kong, knowledge about the dimensions of Asian culture and business, and proven success that western bakery can be incorporated in Asian gastronomy, it is only natural to extend Saint Fusion's presence in the region.
Demand for westernized bakery products is growing in Korea (Datamonitor, 2005), with the market being dominated by three main players, Paris Baguette, Tous les Jours, and Crown Bakery, which through vertical marketing systems (VMS) have polarised the sector. The first two compete head-to-head by charging premiums and targeting affluent female teenagers and young adults. They are located mainly in department stores and close to railway/bus stations (Datamonitor, 2005; appendix 11). Crown Bakery however is less expensive, aims at families and is therefore mainly located in residential areas (appendix 11). All chains fail to respond to the sophisticated needs of domestic business markets, creating a gap in the supply of convenient yet exclusive breakfast alternatives (World Bank, 2004; Datamonitor, 2005), Saint Fusion's niche market.
A comparative analysis of business environments in the UK and Korea and their impact on Saint Fusion follows. The PESTE framework was chosen for the assessment, as it provides an overview of the countries' macro-environment, pinpointing challenges and opportunities and suggesting the level of adaptability needed (Czinkota & Ronkainen, 1996).
Korea provides many business opportunities for FDI as it is currently going through a favourable economic stage as a result of a continued rising rate of growth and GNI per capita (Bowie & Buttle, 2004)-appendix 2. Recent government efforts showing the country's openness to internationalisation (appendix 2) are proven by policies restructuring the economy and reforming employment laws (World Bank, 2004), free trade agreements (FTA), mainly with the US (Foreign Relations News, 2006) and sanctions on businesses (for restaurants the max. fine is 500.000 won) if they do not adopt the international metric measurements (Nation News, 2006). Increased business transparency and unlocking most industries to FDI (Foreign Relations News, 2006), have resulted in Korea becoming the twelfth largest world economy (BBC, 2006) and adding to the mentioned positive political and economic changes assist hospitality organizations entering the country.
The UK, in contrast, is already a very western country with most of these policies strongly recognized. Consequently, its level of wealth is much greater than Korea's (appendix 2), it has a highly diversified economy and worldwide political influence; nonetheless, the UK's rate of growth has fallen and it is very competition-driven, posing therefore possible survival challenges for some companies. It has enjoyed greater growth than its Eurozone counterparts, since the introduction of the Euro (UK Trade & Investment, 2006c), and though this has decreased over the past few years (appendix 2); it is the G8 country that has grown most consistently over the past 10 years, a trend likely to remain (UK Trade & Investment, 2006c). Korea is not as strong and faces external threats from China and India's booming economies and Japan's large-scale international companies, which together emphasize Korea's high cost production, thus somewhat constraining export potential (Tong-soo, 2006). To overcome these threats, Korea is tackling internal problems by improving labour market policies (About Korea, 2006a), including moderate and flexible working hours (About Korea, 2006g)-appendix 2-which encourage consumer spending (IMF, 2006) and rising the retirement age, therefore increasing similarities in both countries' employment markets.
The UK's inflation rate target is fixed at 2% for 2006 and though food and non-alcoholic prices rose in Oct. 2006, the consumer price index (CPI) remained unchanged (2.4%) balanced by a fall in November 2005-2.2% (National Statistics, 2006). UK's CPI was chosen over the retail price index (RPI) as it includes restaurant and caf prices. Evidence shows prices in the latter have remained equal over the past year (National Statistics, 2006) whereas eating out (food and non-alcoholic drink) expenditure has been on a steady rise since 2001 with a significant increase seen in 2003-2005 from 7.33 to 7.72 per week (DEFRA, 2005). Due to limited information on CPI and different items considered in the basket of goods and services (excludes restaurant expenditure); comparison between the two countries is highly constrained. Nonetheless, Korea's GDP deflator decreased in 2004, possibly influenced by increased levels of trade and exportation prices (OECD, 2006).
Socio-cultural challenges for hospitality businesses in Korea include a homogeneous population, predominance of the national language, social class and Confucianism (appendix 2), all referring to different aspects of culture (Usinier & Lee, 2005). Whereas UK's high immigration levels have brought diverse languages, ethnicities, nationalities, levels of education, types of profession, and religions (UK National Statistics, 2005), adding to greater innovation and diversity, Korea has a highly homogeneous culture. Certainly from a marketing perspective, these factors imply a greater need to "koreanize" products, so to maximize profit potential. Further implications lie in social relationships. In the UK, status and power are not regarded as important, however in Korea, these are differentiators of social class, are linked to greater respect, formality (Usinier & Lee, 2005) and believed to bring stability through unequal social relationships (power distance), though also balanced with a greater sense of responsibility (Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005). Organizations have to consider this when developing marketing communications (marcom) strategies and business relationships.
Increasing levels of wealth in both countries are creating similar demanding consumers, who are well-informed, travelled and sophisticated (Bowie & Buttle, 2004). The increasing use of interactive TV, technological development and internet have played significant roles in generating international markets (80% of Koreans are internet users and internet spending in the UK rose 67% from 2003 to 2004-appendix 2). Breakthroughs in information communications technology (ICT) in the UK identify changes in wants and needs, the creation of new products/services dependent on demand, as well as maintain a secure customer base, forecast consumer trends and develop new markets (appendix 2), information which international companies can adapt to other countries. In Korea healthy eating is increasingly important (CJ Corporation, 2006), and high-speed lifestyles are becoming commonplace (Datamonitor, 2005a), thus major food developments are emerging which meet new needs (appendix 2). Technological progress in both countries is precious for hospitality marketing success, enabling companies to better understand consumers and anticipate transforming wants.
Companies forced by globalization to react fast to changing environments need to understand demand drivers if their market potential is to be maximized (Middleton & Clarke, 2001). Middleton's framework (appendix 3) covers catalysts found in every country and the tourist area life cycle (TALC) provides a limited context of tourism development based on consumer behaviour analysis (Bowie & Buttle, 2004).
Increasing GNI, GNI per capita and GDP (appendix 2), reflect both rising country wealth and consumer disposable income, further emphasized by the GDP deflator. Though value added in hospitality, trade and transport fell from 17.8% (% of GDP) in 2003 to 17.1% in 2004, and hotels' and restaurants' contribution to total value added fell from 18.653%, 2001, to 17.13%, 2004, (OECD, 2006)-also supported by the seeming consolidation phase of the TALC (appendix 3), rising CPI (included in GDP deflator) during 2001-04, and Korea's trade balance surge (11,787 million USD, 2000 to 29,382 million USD, 2004) show better living standards (OECD, 2006). The above figures emphasize domestic demand in detriment of international, and prove rising affluence. Falls in leisure travel (appendix 3) are attributed to SARS outbreaks and the Iraq war (Invest Korea, 2006). Korea's main inbound markets are from its biggest trading partners, thus suggesting these as Korea's biggest international business segment, also supported by age distribution (appendix 3). These points are further backed by outbound figures, which prove high interaction between these countries and segments. Inbound tourism increased in 2004 and outbound reached a significant high last year, with receipts and expenditures matching demand, as a result of increased growth and a greater appreciation of the won-appendix 3.
Seoul and Incheon (appendix 3) best show Korea's balance between culture and business. Seoul being the capital and the largest city is key for business and tourism (About Korea, 2006e). Incheon, the 3 rd largest city (Incheon Metropolitan City, 2006), is crucial in North-eastern Asia, extensively connecting international and domestic destinations (just 28km from Seoul). Both cities, with high population and development suggest relative affluence and high education levels (Middleton & Clarke, 2006), and are in geographical advantage (for international and domestic travellers), regarding city breaks and day-visits. These are becoming increasingly popular as a result of increased domestic leisure time, personal mobility, widespread transportation and the influence of media on westernization (appendices 2, 3). The increased value of the won and low levels of inflation have further stimulated demand and consumerism (International Monetary Fund, 2006).
As for government regulations, efforts to encourage FDI are also seen in the creation of Free Economic Zones (FEZ) in different regions of Korea (Invest Korea, 2006c), and benefits given to international occupants (appendix 3). FEZ's present a smart channel to escape additional tax for city business developments (appendix 2). They also attract more expatriates and business travellers-especially to Incheon, due to its location-who in turn want a greater variety of western influenced products.
Thus, the economy's strong position, the interaction between Koreans and worldwide population, as well as the attraction to western lifestyles and trends has driven demand for and greater acceptance of foreign products and services, all crucial drivers of demand for Saint Fusion. Evidence of this is the increasing consumption of bread (Datamonitor, 2005; appendix 11), especially freshly baked, by Koreans and the shift from traditional foods to bread and vienoisserie for breakfast (Datamonitor, 2005).
Porter's Five Forces was chosen to analyse the influences of competition on Saint Fusion because it considers all the external pressures facing companies seeking competitive advantage (Keegan & Green, 2003). Appendix 4 depicts Porter's framework for competition analysis.
Though the government is taking action to encourage increasing foreign businesses, especially through FEZ's and equal rights for local and international companies, the actual progress of the bakery needs careful analysis. Unable to survive fierce competition, independent bakeries have been bought out by major chains, which use the opportunity to significantly expand and establish themselves closer to their consumers (Datamonitor, 2005a), leading to economies of scale and experience (appendix 4), and increased revenue and profits through vertical marketing systems (VMSs) (Kotler, Bowen, Makens, 2003; CJ Corporation, 2006). Further, changing lifestyles, western influences and emerging trends, reflect the increased number of entrants which in turn intensifies competition (thus, barriers to entry are average-appendix 5). On the other hand, capital requirements are low, especially for Saint Fusion rolling out in FEZ's, its network of regional suppliers brings switching costs down (appendix 1), and most importantly, the company has the strength of product differentiation, where it achieves exclusivity through product features, innovation and effective marcom (see Marketing Mix and appendix 7) (Keegan & Green, 2003).
VMS may be a source of substitute products, especially when competitors have a share in supermarkets and food production companies (appendix 4). This may additionally be fuelled by the fact that the majority of the competition also has a R&D division solely focused on actively responding to consumer needs and trends (CJ Corporation, 2006). However, mass production and services, are a disadvantage as upmarket consumers are looking for differentiation and special product characteristics (Datamonitor, 2005a), reflected in the emerging trends (appendix 4).
Customers' bargaining power is low for Saint Fusion because of the product, service and high switching costs. Compared to hotels, it is a small scale business, selling to individual consumers (appendix 4). Saint Fusion's creative products and the development of matchless psychological relationships with consumers, in addition to the above, minimize customer bargaining power (Bowie & Buttle, 2004).
Suppliers also don't have much bargaining power in the bakery sector as most raw materials (flour, eggs, etc.) used in bakery, are imported (appendix 4). Although comparing to the OECD average, Korea's firing costs are higher due to unionization (World Bank, 2006a), this does not apply to Saint Fusion as trade unions in restaurant, catering, and food retail are at most, a minimum, and tourism and women workers' federations have very few members (Korean Federation of Trade Unions, 1999). Also, Saint Fusion's presence in Asia will allow it to continue working with its regional suppliers, minimizing any costs of looking for new ones.
While inaccessibility to soft data restricted the analysis of rivalry among existing competitors, there seems to be cooperation between the different companies, with Korean bakery chains forming alliances with foreign brands (appendix 11). Supporting the argument is the increasing number of chained brands entering the sector and the presence of international brands (appendix 4). Nonetheless there is significant rivalry between Paris Baguette and Tous les Jours, as both companies aim at young affluent females, locate themselves close to transport stations and in departments, charge premiums and offer the exact same products. Though Crown Bakery also has a large share, it is less expensive, aims at families. There also seems to be some co-existence between competitors, supported both by the alliances formed and the acceptance of major competitors expanding into the same different segments (e.g. pre-packed food in supermarkets).
In conclusion, the above evidence suggests the forces driving competition in Korea's bakery sector are similar to those found in any developed country and do not pose major threats for Saint Fusion. Further, the forces low scoring (below average) in appendix 5 demonstrates good opportunities for Saint Fusion to enter the Korean bakery market.
A country's risk depends on its demand and competitive environments. In addition to this, political stability is also crucial to determine the level of country risk and planning (Bowie & Buttle, 2004).
Korea's most significant constraints on general international companies wanting to enter the country are posed, economically, from China and India's booming economies (appendix 2). However, government efforts to counterbalance the above and foster FDI include equal rights for Korean and international businesses (appendix 2) and the establishment of Foreign Investment Zones (FIZs), Free Trade Zones, (FTZs) and FEZs, all with significant benefits for foreign companies (Invest Korea, 2006c; appendix 3). Korea's increased globalization and media influence have added to its westernization, with changing lifestyles, significant trips abroad in 2006 and increased acceptance of foreign brands (see Analysis of Demand). Additionally, high growth rate, GDP and GNI per capita (appendix 2), general consumption capacity and low country risk all contribute to its market attractiveness (appendix 6), backed by decreasing inflation (appendix 2). High tertiary education levels and real wage growth have contributed to increased affluence and new, demanding, sophisticated and price insensitive Korean consumers (appendix 3 and 11). Further, employment law reforms include an increase in leisure time, thus encouraging higher consumer spending-reflected in increasing levels of outbound tourism expenditure (appendix 3). Inbound tourism, on the other hand, seems to have reached a consolidation stage (see Demand), reflected in the TALC, with stagnating tourist arrivals, decreased tourism receipts and highly developed commercial infrastructures (appendix 6). Nonetheless, Korea's TALC implications for Saint Fusion are limited, as the company focuses on domestic and international business markets, which have been rising, with inbound/outbound travellers being mainly from/to Korea's primary trade partners (appendix 3). A further advantage for Saint Fusion is high Chinese and Japanese inbound figures which increase its range of regional target markets (Bowie & Buttle, 2004). Certainly, increased demand also has a heavy impact on supply, reflected in the increase of chained bakeries- both national and foreign- (appendix 4) and emerging trends resulting from increased affluence, fast-paced lifestyles and rising demands for western products. To capitalize on the above, the industry's main competitors have strongly established themselves in the market by polarising the sector and integrating VMSs (appendix 4), thus increased the threat of substitute products. However, cooperation and coexistence between competitors, Saint Fusion's product differentiation and its unique marcom reduce the risk posed by the above.
There are various entry strategies which are beneficial in different country situations. In unstable locations, it is safest to expand through a franchise or management contract, where a partnership with a local company both reduces risk and allows for added knowledge of the environment (Bowie & Buttle, 2004). Where the regime is stable, then long-term lease-hold contracts or property purchases is more valuable. Property purchasing can be through acquisition, where the home country purchases a group/property and re-brands it, saving costs and allowing for rapid expansion in detriment of maintaining standards; conversion, where the purchased property is converted into the required business, revealing more costly; and new-built development, where purchased land is used to build the property according to the brands' specifications and standards (Bowie & Buttle, 2004). Considering Korea's demand and supply enviornments (appendices 3 and 5) as well as Saint Fusion's previous experience in Asia, the company will enter Korea by developing new-build properties. Additional significant factors in this decision are Korea's political stability (appendices 2 and 6), favourable investment conditions offered by the government and the importance of Saint Fusion's image and standards (Bowie & Buttle, 2004; Invest Korea, 2006c). Saint Fusion will locate itself closest to its niche targets (domestic/international business), in financial centres and FEZ's. To reduce costs (mainly additional tax in major city areas-appendix 2) and capitalize on the government's incentives encouraging FDI, which include, the reduction or exemption of local/national tax, exemptions on custom duties, cash grants for site developments and rent reductions (appendix 3), Saint Fusion will initially focus it's sites in FEZ's.
A natural form of defining target markets derives from the analysis of demand.
The TALC shows Korea as a tourism destination may have reached a consolidation phase with stagnant international tourist arrivals for the past few years (appendix 3), and unstable tourism receipts, though this may be attributed to the impact of SARS (see Analysis of Demand). On the other hand, international business has been on a steady rise, mainly due to increased exports and trading, proven by the main nationalities entering the country also being Korea's main trade partners, which additionally shows the existence of regional business markets, mainly from China and Japan (appendix 3). As for regional leisure markets, Korea's prime location attracts these segments. Positioned around a quarter of the world's population with great accessibility though its international airports and ports, Korea's main cities of Seoul and Incheon are in the hub of these markets, attracting city-breaks, day-visits and week-end travels (appendix 3). Further, its TALC consolidation stage can be reinvigorated by its many tourism regions yet to be developed (About Korea, 2006e) which can bring in more travellers. As for domestic markets, both leisure and business segments are thriving. A considerable rise in real wage and GNI per capita (affecting household income), as well as the surge in tertiary jobs (appendices 2, 3), more people completing higher education and a rise in reduced households has led to the emergence of a "new middle class" (US Library of Congress, n.d.). These shape demand owing to their requirements of high quality, innovative and convenient products further influenced by significant westernization-due to growing internet usage and the frequency of outbound travel (appendices 2 3).
Because Saint Fusion is a moderate scale operation, focused on food and beverage, its main focus is the domestic business markets (Bowie & Buttle, 2004), who have the needs mentioned above, and include due to location (FEZ's)-appendix 3), expatriates. Regional and international business markets represent Saint Fusion's secondary target markets, because Korea's increasing level of trade, and inbound tourism are mainly from its primary traders; these are followed by the domestic leisure market. The focus on domestic business markets is further supported by the combination and balance between increased tourism expenditure, frequency, destination and purpose of travel as well as economic growth (appendices 2, 3) which show Korea's reaction in increased spend as proportionate to higher income (Middleton & Clarke, 2004). Finally, age distribution of these travellers matches those from Saint Fusion's targets in the UK proving Czinkota & Ronkainen's (1996) theory of global niche markets, though not that of global consumption patterns (De Mooij & Hofstede, 2002).
There are four different perspectives in market orientation relating to how a company views its home-country markets versus its host-country. An ethnocentric profile prioritizes the home country and thus home-country language, culture and practices will be imposed on the host-country (Usinier & Lee, 2005). Polycentrism is the exact opposite, therefore regarding the host-country as one in which culture, and markets are so different that a distinct marketing approach with bespoke policies and decisions is needed (Usinier & Lee, 2005). Geocentrism sees all markets as a world market and so takes the best practices from around the world and applies them to the host-country. Finally, regiocentrism falls between ethnocentrism and polycentrism, adopting a more global approach than the former whilst recognizing that culture and consumer needs may require a regionally-focused perspective.
Considering all four perspectives and that no company totally embodies one centricity profile (Bowie & Buttle, 2004), Saint Fusion's approach, will manifest regiocentric tendencies. The company recognizes the Korean market is becoming increasingly westernized (see Business Environment, Analysis of Demand and Analysis of Supply), a tendency with no signs of slowing down; however, Korea is still has a very homogenized population, with strong emphasis on the national language and Confucian culture (predominating in the region)-appendix 2, therefore suggesting an adaptation of marketing strategies and procedures to better meet customer needs. Nonetheless, once the company has successfully established itself in the region, it will consider the incorporation of increasingly geocentric attitudes (Usunier & Lee, 2005). Regiocentricity will also be reflected in the product, where fusion bakery will be produced with Asian ingredients.
Contrasting its competitors' positioning and targeting (appendix 4) Saint Fusion places itself in the niche business market, thus, customized marketing (Kotler et al, 2003) will be meshed with subjective positioning (Bowie & Buttle, 2004) where innovation, excellence, style, fusion and aspiration will be reflected in the brand's image (e.g. colours, lay-out and presentation of bakery-displayed at knee-high level with "alternative" furniture). Therefore, the products' features and attributes (objective positioning), price/quality relation (premium price for premium quality)-appendix 1, usage and class of user (see below) will be part of the positioning strategy-appendix 7 (Bowie & Buttle, 2004).
Saint Fusion's dedication to local economy will be a major differentiator as VMS's require large scale supply; this contrast will make the most of Confucian culture where the whole is worth more than the individual and collectivist attitudes are still predominant (Usunier & Lee, 2005). Whereas Paris Baguette, Tous les Jours and Crown Bakery focus on providing similar markets with the same European products (Datamonitor, 2005; appendices 4 and 7), Saint Fusion will appeal to the business market's economic understanding by connecting local consumers directly to local farmers, establishing a cycle where both production and consumption feedback into the local economy (appendix 1), contributing to the development of the whole. Target markets will increasingly be attracted to Saint Fusion knowing they are purchasing superior quality and helping local producers. It will be portrayed to consumers by stating next to the products how much local ingredients they contain.
The growing popularity of bakery has brought with it a Korean interest in baking (Datamonitor; appendix 11). Nonetheless, because it is still a very recent trend, bakery ingredients are inaccessible to consumers or extremely expensive. Saint Fusion will then offer its products/ingredients to consumers to be used at home, e.g. different types of dough, freshly-made and rolled, fusion pastry fillings and freshly ground coffee, fair-trade chocolate and organic flour (appendix 11).
Saint Fusion's mission to celebrate and fuse national foods and cultures suggest adapted elements (appendix 8), though it also has some standardized aspects such as pricing (business markets are generally price-insensitive regardless of where they are), emphasis on product planning & development, range of target markets, and service range (appendix 8). Saint Fusion manifests both elements, maintaining its image and consistency, whilst adapting to local cultures as a means of differentiation (Usinier & Lee, 2005).
There are different views as to how much consumer behaviour convergence globalization has caused. Some (Usinier & Lee, 2005; De Mooij & Hofstede, 2002) argue there is more to globalized consumer behaviour than cheap prices and economies of scale. De Mooij & Hofstede (2002) state though "income, media, technology" (De Mooij & Hofstede, 2002, p. 61) have converged it does not mean consumer needs have too. Usinier & Lee (2005) confirm, defending cultural context has a major impact on consumer behaviour, convergence is limited to product/service attributes, surrounding circumstances and the motives for purchase, and that restaurants and food are more culture-bound than other products. Levitt (1983) however, opposes this theory claiming consumers increasingly look for cheap prices and relative quality, thus a convergence of consumer needs poses significant opportunities for global companies to develop economies of scale, by fostering standardized tastes and products. He advocates companies to gain economies of scale which are crucial for competition (Levitt, 1983)-clearly a view supporting a "hidden" product orientation; leaving consumers with no option but to give in to mass production. Levitt (1983) fails to recognize companies have different values and missions. For Saint Fusion, it is not about mass market domination, but celebrating cultures and contributing to the local economy, whilst operating in increasingly international markets. Usunier & Lee (2005) do not reject convergence, but state it is at a general level (e.g. language, importance of family, alphabets and religious beliefs, deep-rooted value systems and customs remain unaffected). Culture-specific adaptations are needed to meet and anticipate consumer needs, differentiate and gain competitive advantage. Even where higher convergence may be argued, globalized consumption is only seen in consumers with low patriotism, the rest preferring to pay premiums for locally produced products (particularly seen in South Korea).
In a world where mass production and services are taking over, attempting to standardize tastes, lifestyles and consumption, globalization generates diversity and innovation. Saint Fusion promotes cultural differences in recognition that eating habits and taste will never be absolutely uniform. The best approach is then a "Koreanization" of products, services and marketing procedures, realistically standardizing whilst adapting to local cultures, the spirit of the company.
Saint Fusion's outlets will be larger in Korea than in UK, because the company is mainly targeting markets in business locations where larger units are more feasible, both to accommodate greater volume and to aesthetically harmonize large financial buildings (appendix 1). There will be some adaptation in service attributes acknowledging the Confucian and collectivist culture, which also influence loyalty (Usinier & Lee, 2005). Koreans well give positive word-of-mouth with satisfaction, though not the opposite with dissatisfaction; further they will not complain or switch companies. Although this may seem a bonus it also demonstrates that gaining consumer loyalty is more challenging in Asian countries, and therefore aspects that appeal to Korean interrelations, such as increased formalisation of interaction (resulting from power distance) will be enforced. The dcor, ambience and size of bakery products will remain the same (appendix 9) though different colours will be used in the interior (appendix 9). Further, Saint Fusion's logo is international and will not be written in logographic characters. Business consumers are well travelled (appendix 3) and westernization, acceptance of foreign brands and international business targets (i.e. expatriates) also prove it unnecessary.
Pricing is always delicate when expanding to international markets as culture heavily impacts price perceptions (Usunier & Lee, 2005). Saint Fusion will initially adopt an "intermediate geocentric inventive position" (Usinier & Lee, 2005, p. 325) as it's first goal is to gain customer loyalty (recognized as challenging for companies entering Korea), be accepted and establish itself, explore the market and develop brand awareness. This may therefore, at first, require international management of pricing strategies, also because of remaining differences in currency value (appendix 2). As it becomes established prices will be balanced with those found in the chain's international units. The guarantee that consumers in Korea can afford high prices comes from local competitors' pricing. These are 3 to 4 times as much as those of independent bakeries (appendix 11); nonetheless, consumers still buy their products because they want them and can afford them.
Location is a major decision, involving significant costs and determining business the success (Bowie & Buttle, 2004); further, it is directly linked to target markets, their location, and consumer behaviour (Usinier & Lee, 2005). Saint Fusion's focus on business markets and provision of premium products-which consumers want with convenience-shows proximity to office buildings in financial centres of urban/gateway cities are its initial key locations. The reason why Saint Fusion Korea is located close to offices and in the UK in affluent residential areas, is because the consumption of bread in Korean households is still limited and patisserie/vienoisserie are bought to eat on the go (Datamonitor, 2005), an argument backed by competitors' locations (close to stations, in subways). To reduce costs and take advantage of government incentive for FDI (appendix 3), Saint Fusion has found its perfect locations within the Songdo and Dudong districts of Incheon and Busan-Jinhae's FEZ's (appendix 10). Secondary and tertiary sites (for future expansion and market exploration) include residential areas in FEZ's and Seoul (appendix 9). The reason why Seoul was chosen as a tertiary site though providing demand and potential relates to its barriers to FDI (appendices 2 and 10); also, once Saint Fusion has assessed further markets (e.g. families of businessmen and expatriates) in operating FEZ's, it can grow in residential areas, owing both to greater market knowledge and adaptability; this move will bring it closer to its UK locations in terms of standardization (appendix 1).
Direct marketing is the distribution channel used throughout the brand with intermediaries proving unnecessary due to a moderate scale operation and type of product-sold directly to the consumer (Bowie & Buttle, 2004).
As for marcom, verbal communication will be adapted to high-context cultures where milieu is very important, with consumers experiencing customized language, mainly focused on emphasizing their status (linked to symbolic attributes) and environment (Usinier & Lee, 2005) but also taking advantage of the language's implicitness. Although Paris Baguette and Tous les Jours advertise in every way possible by using celebrities and advertising in television, female-targeting magazines, and posters, due to Saint Fusion's operative scale and importance in local culture large part of the marketing will rely on positive word-of-mouth (Usinier & Lee, 2005), however, initially to promote brand awareness and when needed, advertising will be more evocative, soft and conventional than in the UK, with visual appeal and attention to detail. In these situations, national business newspapers and magazines will be the prime means of advertising. Certainly, Saint Fusion's international website will provide significant information and presents a portal for aggressive marketing. PR relations will be part of the brand awareness/image strategy and directed mainly at employees, consumers, competitors, local government, media and suppliers. Important to note that culture has a significant influence on effective PR, mainly when entering a new country and communication is its vital element (Usinier & Lee, 2005). Therefore, communication/interaction business norms will be adapted to the Korean culture, using Kwankye, comparative to UK networking, where socialising out of office hours is fundamental for developing and maintaining good relations (Usinier & Lee, 2005).
Korea's recovery from the 1997 economic crisis has been remarkable. Adding the recent strategies to counterbalance its neighbouring booming economies, it has opened its markets to FDI, focused on business transparency, improved employment laws, reformed the economy and created favourable conditions for foreign investors. In turn it has become the world's twelfth largest economy, with significant levels of trade and a steady rate of growth, which have, increased consumer disposable income and levels of wealth. Further, its significant technological developments and media use have accelerated its westernization which has brought with it changing lifestyles and greater acceptance of foreign brands. Consequently, a highly educated consumer segment has emerged characterised by affluence, need for superiority, convenience and status, therefore, creating significant opportunities and demand for Saint Fusion products. The Korean bakery sector is not yet aware of the underlying potential of the domestic business segment, as competition's focus is mass production. Thus, the growth of Saint Fusion's target consumers allows for a unique positioning in the sector and generates opportunities for market development, conditions that the brand is well-experienced with. Though Saint Fusion's challenge may seem the Confucian and collectivist culture predominant in Korea, the brand's mission and flexibility to adjust to different markets, with regionally specified marketing strategies and previous experience in Asia, will enable it adapt to social differences and use marcom as a means of further differentiation.
Korea's high stability, correct infrastructures in place and above all else demand for differentiated products increase its attractiveness for FDI. In conclusion, the country's current economic state and search for increased western influence whilst maintaining the national culture make it ideal for Saint Fusion's next move.
The reliability of sources and effective comparative analysis were the report's main limitations. Though different sources provide the same information, these vary depending on the method used for analysis and factors taken into account for the investigation, e.g. the method used to calculate CPI in the UK is very different than that in Korea, therefore, limiting accurate analysis. The date of published information limits validity (e.g. data from 2002 may no longer be up-to-date) as well as how biased the sources are. There are different interests at hand, and government sites may portray only specific elements of data they want the public or their targets to know. Ultimately, statistics are mere figures and their analysis depends on individual interpretation, which constrains balance and partiality. These added to time constraints form the basis of the project's limitations.