Both Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown used the basic premise of 'functionalism', but each utilised it in a very different way (Leach, 1966, p6). Both of these scholars begin their theories on the basis that a culture or a society "is an empirical whole made up of a limited number of readily available identifiable parts" (Leach, 1966, p6), however Malinowski observed 'institutions' to be functionally connected into a balanced mechanism, subsequently being coined functionalism, whereas Radcliffe-Brown was more inclined to the 'organic analogy', whereby cultures could be seen as working in the same respect as organisms (Leach, 1966), alternatively being named structural-functionalism. An excellent comparison of the two is made by Leach (1966), relating the two to time pieces "Radcliffe-Brown was concerned, as it were, to distinguish wrist watches from grandfather clocks, whereas Malinowski was interested in the general attributes of clockwork" (Leach, 1966, p6) As this essay has begun by defining the charismatic differences between the two of these scholars it makes sense to go into these differences in more detail.
The focus of Malinowski's theory of Functionalism was focused on the individual, which opposes that of Radcliffe-Brown's, "Malinowski is looking at the individual, Radcliffe-Brown at society" (Homans, 1941, p168). This was a factor for which Radcliffe-Brown criticised Malinowski. On comment of his work the Mailu peoples in New Guinea, concerning kinship Radcliffe-Brown quotes "The Australian notions relating to kinship cannot be studies without reference to what the author calls 'group relationships'; in other words, the relationship systems, classes and clans" (Kuper, 2002, p28).
This precise focus on the individual is essentially brought to light during the latter stage of Malinowski's life. He set out to summarise his perspective, and subsequently present a theory that encapsulated all his work. Firth (1968) presents the primary starting points of Malinowski's theorising. First he wanted to make any mode of human behaviour understandable, in relation to the motivation of individuals. Secondly he wanted to be able to include both rational and irrational behaviour on part of the same person. Thirdly, the appreciation of the interconnectedness of the different factors which constituted a culture, and finally a reference to a particular item, to some kind of function in the current situation of a culture, in order to form a basis of understanding.
Malinowski presented in Scientific Theory of Culture commonly known as his theory of biological needs or bio-functionalism. "Malinowski's initial idea was that societies are like macro-organisms having macro-organic biological needs in much the same way that organisms have biological needs. The function of social institutions was principally to satisfy the macro-biological needs" (Jarvie, cited in Manners and Kaplan, 1968, p201).
He proposed a theory of 'vital cultures' to which he proposes are "the biological foundations incorporated into all cultures" (Barnard, 2003, p68). Eleven of these sequences exist, containing an impulse, an act, and a satisfaction. An example quoted by Barnard (2003), is that of sleep, with the impulse of somnolence being associated with the act of sleep, resulting in the satisfaction of waking feeling restored. Malinowski's second claim was that the basis of his approach "was a set of seven biological needs and their respective cultural responses" (Barnard, 2003, p 68). One example comes from his monograph Argonauts of the Western Pacific (1978), where he talks about gardening. The Trobriand islanders have a garden magician, who consecrates any gardening site, and among other rites he magically assists the plants in sprouting, budding, and producing food. From this Malinowski believes that magic is based on a psychological need of an individual, which is culturally evolved. Consequently Malinowski believed that cultural institutions are responses to a variety of specific biological needs. It could be argued that Malinowski is making considerable assumptions by propounding this theory.
As said previously, one of the main differences that can be seen in Radcliffe-Brown's work is his overriding focus upon society and structure, as opposed to Malinowski who at no point in his career attempted structural analysis.
Radcliffe-Brown lacked "Malinowski's interest in individual motivation and strategy" (Kuper, 2002, p39), this was undoubtedly a strength allowing an objective analysis of social systems, which Malinowski was never able to do (Kuper, 2002). The main aim of Radcliffe-Brown was to create a social Anthropology, which was generalising and thus a Science, he was a strong advocate of the organic analogy, viewing society as a biological organism, whereby each organ has a function in making that organism survive. The same he argued was present in society, whereby each institution function was their in order to maintain the structure of that society, with its function being the contribution it made to the "continued life of the 'social organism" (Layton, 2003, p34), not to meet individual needs. His theory was labelled 'Structural Functionalism' the logistics of which shall be examined shortly.
An example of this exists in Radcliffe-Brown's monograph the Andaman Islanders, where he is commenting on the weeping rite, which exists in this society. It exists in many contexts however one is in the situation where friends are reunited after a separation. The weeping rite is obligatory, and during this time of emotional tension it must be relieved in some way. The two embrace and weep, this ceremony reinstates the condition of intimacy and affection that existed before the separation, Radcliffe-Brown believes that it is "the affirmation of a bond of social solidarity between those taking part in it" (Radcliffe-Brown, 1922, p245).
The overall aims of these two scholars were different, which subsequently led them into producing two different theories around social anthropology. Malinowski was primarily concerned with customs, his aim "was to show how different customs were functionally dependent on one another, and reveal the social and psychological bases on which social institutions were constructed" (Layton, 2003, p33). The term 'function' to Malinowski under his headline Functionalism conforms to his focus upon the individual by "satisfying (the individual's) primary biological need through the instrumentalities of culture" (Layton, 2003, p33). Radcliffe-Brown's aim was somewhat different; he wanted to "discover laws of social behaviour by demonstrating that societies of a certain type, certain characteristic social relations would be found" (Layton, 2003, p34). Through this it becomes clear that another very important difference arises; the use of the comparative technique in order to support your given theory.
Malinowski's theory was unable to explain the diversity of human societies, primarily because "biological needs are universal to the species" (Layton, 2003, p33), however this comparison is necessary in order to gain support for Radcliffe-Brown. Radcliffe-Brown regarded function, under his theory of 'Structural Functionalism' as the contribution any institution gave in the maintenance of the society's structure. He often referred to his theory as comparative sociology, with its aim being "to explore the varieties of forms of social life as a basis for the theoretical study of human social phenomenon" (Radcliffe-Brown, 1976, p 108). Through his comparison he wanted to show that different cultural areas with no historical contact, show similar phenomenon in culture, presenting a universal development of the human mind. An extremely scientific aim, in comparison to Malinowski
One of his greatest contributions to anthropology was his classification of non-Western societies into types and sub-types (Layton, 2003). In studying 130 Australian aboriginal tribes, he noticed many correlations between them, one being a totemic religion. A religion whereby different moieties are identified commonly by a specific animal species, two common species include the eaglehawk and Crow. Radcliffe-Brown was curious as to why these moieties were assigned to these particular animals; the answer lay in opposition. In reference to the above two species their opposition comes from many Australian tales, where they come into conflict. Radcliffe-Brown sees opposition as a universal feature in human thinking, for example up and down, black and white. Radcliffe-Brown later wrote that classification was "an essential pre-requisite for scientific study" (Layton, 2003, p59).
As it can be seen Radcliffe-Brown was very specific in his approach to functionalism looking for specific attributes, which could relate different groups of human society together, Malinowski's theory did not work from this spectrum.
Nadel (1957) commented that Malinowski's thought moved on two levels only, from the Trobriands to general primitive man and society at large. The only time that he did refer to other primitive societies was to gain supporting evidence. "His generalizations jump straight from the Trobrianders to Humanity, as undoubtedly he saw the Trobrianders as a particularly instructive species of humanity" (Nadel, 1957, cited in Barnard, 2003, p69). This quote shows that Malinowski's theory worked on the premise of generalisation, a far less scientific initiative, some may argue than Radcliffe-Brown.
In Radcliffe-Brown's later life he was angered when he was labelled under the paradigm of Functionalism, he did not believe that his theory lay true to any of those proposed by Malinowski or other functionalists of his time. However, as much as he did refute it there are similarities present between the two theories.
One of the main similarities, which these two scholars hold with one another, is their rejection of the evolutionist theory. Between them they managed to convince the entire British Commonwealth that the old interests of anthropology, which were directly found in the theories of diffusionism and evolutionism, were no longer relevant as a primary field of investigation (Barnard, 2003).
Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown are often considered to be the establishing party of the Functionalist school in anthropology. Their main reaction against the evolutionist school was that they strongly disagreed that societies could not be ranked in accordance to a specific level they had reached in social evolution. (Layton, 2003) this they believed to be unjust and ethnocentric in accordance to the anthropologists of the Western world who had composed the stages, whilst believing themselves to be the superior 'race'. Instead societies were considered as an individual and from this point compared with others, much more so in the case of Radcliffe-Brown, as was mentioned earlier.
Both Malinowski and Radcliffe Brown were synchronic in their approaches. They examined the customs of small-scale societies primarily in the functions which they hold in the present day, with no reference to history or the events that happened therein. This reference to historical events and peoples was one of the great hallmarks of the evolutionist era. Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown however, argued "the customs of small-scale societies could not be explained as survivals from an earlier era but had, rather to be explained in terms of their present function" (Layton, 2003). One of the main factors behind this reasoning was the absence of any accurate written histories or detailed archaeological evidence, concluding that any information would be speculative at best. Consequently the information gathered would be of no real use when attempting scientific research of small-scale societies (Layton, 2003). With this focus upon synchronic research it could be argued that the influence of Durkheim can be seen through both scholars.
With Durkheim being the founding father of sociology and one of the first proponents of functionalism, it is not surprising to discover his influence on Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown. Durkheim clearly influenced these scholars in different ways, however the point that I am trying to express in terms of similarity is that both scholars found inspiration from the same master, although this influence may be demonstrated in different ways.
Radcliffe-Brown was a keen advocate of Durkheim both Durkheim's and his theory have been labelled as structural-functionalism predemonately because of the huge similarities between the two, both "reifying society" (Layton, 203, p37). Durkheim's influence can be strongly identified in Radcliffe-Brown's work on the Andaman Islanders e.g. the weeping rite as considered earlier. In addition Radcliffe- Brown was a strong advocate of Durkheim's organic analogy whereby society is used as a comparison to an organism. Organs are seen as the institutions in society and therefore relate to the survival of that organism or society, and this clearly reflects in Radcliffe-Browns theory.
In reference to Malinowski, it could be argued that he borrowed the concept of social function from Durkheim, purely replacing Durkheims idea of social facts reaching an social end a biological one, and subsequently loading the entire theory with value judgements (find ref). This factor could be said to be one of the many that lead to Malinowski being considered a failing and unproductive theorist.
One factor however, that both Malinowski and Radcliffe- Brown took to their differing functionalisms from Durkheim was from his theory of ritual. In reference to religion, Durkheim said it would "both 'reflect' the structure of their social system and function to maintain that system in its present state" (Layton, 2003, p68). Nadel quotes that in terms of religious rites, Malinowski believed religious rites promoted "lasting attitudes, stable relationships, the awareness of rights and obligations, in brief, a piece of social order" (Firth, 1968, p200). Likewise Radcliffe-Brown quotes "any religion is an important or even essential part of the social machinery, as are morality and law, part of a complex system by which human beings are enabled to live together in an orderly arrangement of social relations" (Radcliffe-Brown, (1963), p154) and in reference to rites including religious "they have for their effect to regulate, maintain and transmit from one generation to another sentiments on which the constitution of the society depends" (Radcliffe-Brown, (1963), p157).
From the factors that have been considered it becomes clear that both masters throughout their theory and its application are attempting to be scientific or positivist, in order to gain and salvage only empirical data. At the time when both were writing, the concept of empiricism was becoming more and more popular, as a means of gaining measurable and comparable data, as backs began to turn on the previous works of evolutionism and diffusionism. Malinowski, through his work in the Trobriand Islands would keep a field diary, in order to prevent any personal opinions or non-empirical data from clouding his scientific perspective. Clearly through the theories it can be seen that with Radcliffe-Browns consideration of Durkheim's organic analogy, and Malinowski's bio-functionalism both were strongly linked to the natural sciences.
In conclusion, as said previously although Radcliffe-Brown detested being labelled along side Malinowski under the title functionalism, "whose theory of biological needs and cultural responses he explicitly opposed" (Barnard, 2003, p78), there is no doubt that differences arise between the two theories however, there is overlap between the two theories and what they were ultimately trying to achieve. Homans (1941) presents an excellent conclusion "a study of the theories of Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown illustrates a common feature of scientific controversites: two distinguished persons talking past one another rather than trying to find a common ground for discussion, presenting their theories as alternatives when in fact they are complements" (Homans, 1941, cited from American Anthropologist p172).