Social Anthropology as a discipline could ultimately be described as the comparative study of humans and their societies. Both males and females exist within societies and perceptions of the appropriate gender roles differ by society. Therefore, it could be argued that yes, gender should be a central analytical component in Anthropology, purely because of its prominence throughout the social world. Moore (1988) quotes "It would not be possible to pursue any sort of social science without the concept of gender" (Moore, 1988, p6). In the past, study has been primarily dominated by the biological differences between 'man' and 'woman', however as Brown and Jordanova (1982) point out "biological differences do not provide a universal basis for social definitions. What cultures make of sex differences is almost infinitely variable, so that biology cannot be playing a determining role. Women and men are products of social relations, if we change the social relations we change the categories 'woman' and 'man'" (cited in Moore, 1988, p7). Therefore to use gender as an analytical element can be seen as having great benefits however, whether it is practical to maintain gender as a core category of analysis within Social Anthropology is debateable. This shall now be explored, beginning first with the reasons why gender should be a core analytical component.
It can be regularly observed through the past works of Social Anthropology, that there is a distinctive bias concerning the position from which much work is conducted. "The argument is often put forward that anthropology has long suffered from a male bias" (Milton, 1979, p40). It can clearly be seen through the great scholars of Anthropology, who all tended to be male, the vast quantity of their work had a particularly male stance in terms of their interpretations of a specific culture. For the large part therefore, concentration lay on the specifically male attributes of societies, thus making females subordinated. A quotation that highlights this very effectively is one by Malinowski, although no year is given, "Anthropology is the study of man embracing woman" (Moore, 1988, p1). Due to the overwhelming amount of work in the past being conducted by males the vast proportion of present works, whether written by male or female anthropologists, work in alliance with these past men's models. This presents the fact that the gross proportion of works "are one sided; they present society from a male point of view" (Milton, 1979, p44). It has been stated, that the study of gender is not the concern of the male anthropologist, "the study of gender has been, and still is, the concern of women" (del Valle, 1993, p13). It must be considered however, that with male anthropologists concentrating directly on the male dominance within a society, they are already addressing the importance of gender. So, why has there been an absence of knowledge in relation to a woman's gender? Ardener (1975) indicates that women often "remain 'muted' because their model of reality, their view of the world, cannot be realised or expressed using the terms of the dominant male model" (cited in Moore, 1988, p3). It could certainly be argued that for a more in-depth understanding of a society, the female opposition could offer insights into the mechanics of gender within that society.
Gender is not a static entity, and is not identical in each society, and as such this immediately supports why gender as an analytical category should be conceptualised. Moore (1988) considers gender symbolism, primarily the concept of pollution (i.e. women in many societies, for example the Kaulong of New Britain (Moore, 1988), are often considered polluted during childbirth and menstruation), as a means of analysing the inferior role of women throughout societies. Using these symbolisms, gender can "provide clues as to how people categorize one another and thus structure their social world" (Moore, 1988, p16). It could be argued that to believe the category of gender as irrelevant for analysis is wrong. Society is ultimately structured around the roles of those within it. The absence of gender analysis therefore, may fail to gain solid support for the information gained during research. The opposition of this argument shall be considered later in the essay.
Recently, scholars of gender are discovering the great level of bias and the construction of ideology around the regularly used differentiating categories of societies e.g. demography and genetic i.e. biological differentiations (del Valle, 1993). Many see gender as an analytical category that may solve many confusing factors during research (del Valle, 1993). For example Melhuus (1990) examines the problems Dumont faced when attempting to accept the hierarchy which underlies modern society (cited in del, Valle, 1993). Melhuus quotes "Had Dumont been interested in gender relations he might have seen that his idea of hierarchy is not as radical and difficult to grasp as he himself claims" (del Valle, 1993, p3). This clearly elaborates once again that gender can open and reveal new areas of answers and further investigation. Del Valle proposes "Gender views and gender interpretations produce knowledge which affects the understanding of power and the elaboration of hierarchical differences. It contributes to the understanding of how processes of inequality are formulated and developed" (del Valle, 1993, p3). Primarily, in terms of inequality, understanding the processes is the first stage of trying to eliminate the problem. Without this valuable tool of gender interpretations, it could be debated that at no point are we able to solve inequality as a whole, therefore the concept that gender is a vital and insightful category, can certainly be supported in this instance and certainly in the field of ethnography.
To write an ethnography with no consideration of gender could in many scholars' eyes deem it as incomplete (del Valle, 1993). A highlighting example is given by Nash (1989) who quotes that research that has considered women as well as men "has brought a multidimensional analysis to the study of Latin American society" (cited in del Valle, 1993, p3). In support of this analogy Warren and Bourque (1989) quote "that when we apply gender to the analysis of technology, and the impact of technological change, it no longer appears the neutral category that it has often been presented as. The consideration of women's lives reveals dimensions that have been overlooked" (cited in del Valle, 1993, p3). As these points illustrate, gender pervades every element of human existence, and the revelation of new facts due to the consideration of gender only proves to support the inclusion of gender as a core analytical category.
Biological distinctions alone are no longer constructive for analysis in the social world with which we now live, and arguably they never were. In investigating Biology and human behaviour, Fausto-Sterling (1985) (cited in Moore, 1994) elaborated on the fact that it is becoming increasingly difficult to recognise that Biology has the dominant role, primarily "because of the large number of connected or very tenuously associated phenomenon which are thrown together under that rubric" (Moore, 1994, p813). Social sciences, even to this day are "haunted by the shadow of biological determinism, especially in its most recent guise as socio-biology" (Moore, 1994, p814). Feminist anthropologists during the 1970s aimed to combat this and establish a clear distinction between sex and gender. During this time it became clear that, as said previously, the biological differences between the sexes could not be used as a universal determinant of gender constructs (Moore, 1994). It could be argued that if biological factors did play the vital role in gender identities, would not all males and likewise all females be socially the same? Biological factors in many cultures can be seen as irrelevant, "differences between women and men are said to exist in certain domains of social life, for example with regard to spiritual potency, ritual efficacy or moral worth, but are not thought to be derived from biological differences" (Moore, 1994, p815). Indeed, these cultures may be a rarity, but it clearly shows that biology cannot be used as a universal construct as its importance is not universally considered or respected and therefore gender is an extremely important category for analysis.
A particularly thought provoking and some may say confusing theory surrounding this area was proposed by Yanagisako and Collier (1987) (cited in Moore, 1994). They argue that both gender studies and kinship studies within Anthropology work primarily from a western folk model of human reproduction, which argues that all differences between men and women are biologically determined (Moore, 1994). The alternative theory that they propose is that both sex and gender are socially constructed (Moore, 1994). "Bodies, physiological processes and body parts have no meaning outside of socially constructed understandings of them. Sexual intercourse and human reproduction are not just physiological processes, they are also social activities" (Moore, 1994, p816). Yanagisako and Collier propose that there is a further distinction between sex and gender: 'Sex', represents a particular construct of human bodies, particularly Euro-America. Sex, refers to the physical nature of human bodies and gender, relates to what different cultures see as sex (Moore, 1994). One fact that must be indicated is that every culture cannot understand sex without 'sex' (their own definition); this can therefore be clearly linked to the importance of gender. If even the biological definitions are variable, sex cannot exist as a universal concept. Gender or the socially applied meaning of sex has the prevailing role and consequently gender may be seen in turn as a key entity and therefore should be used as a core analytical framework in Social Anthropology, if for nothing else, because it is the basis of all distinguishing elements of the human body.
This final positive factor strongly defends the use of gender as a core analytical feature in Social Anthropology; however, there are also equally valid reasons as to why it could have limited analytical use in this field.
Although the concept that gender varies by society was used as a reason as to why gender should be considered as a core analytical category, this argument also raises negative debate.
"Women are not a homogenous category, and the circumstances and conditions of their lives in the varying regions of the world are very different" (Moore, 1988, p74). Evidently this quotation does not only apply to women, the same could also be proposed for men. Because of the differing circumstances and conditions in varying cultures, this will ultimately have an effect upon the social workings and maintenance of their lives, which will project upon the societies ideals of gender roles. Subsequently this makes it very difficult to find a definition for gender which can be applied to all societies. This is illustrated clearly in the words of del Valle, "It will take some imagination to construct a term that will not only account for the meaning attributed to gender in English, but will also be a more encompassing universal concept with the capacity to express the variety which is constantly being discovered about women and men cross-culturally" (del Valle, 1993, p2). In addition Moore quotes "The main problem facing researchers in this area is how to explain...the enormous observable variation in cultural understanding of what the categories 'man' and 'woman' mean" (Moore, 1988, p13). If there can be no agreement concerning the definition of gender universally, any information on the subject will ultimately be of little value, as comparisons will be difficult and in many cases impossible to comprise.
A dominant problem which appears in terms of examining gender is that to analyse it as a category on its own is too flaccid. It needs to be examined in collaboration with another factor for example kinship, religion, or ritual. Moore (1988) illustrates this point well in discussing how Anthropology consistently looks at central features such as kinship and economics, and explains the differences primarily on the basis of cultural differences. In doing so she argues that cultural differences are only one form of difference in a huge range, therefore this is insufficient. "Feminist anthropology has recognised this insufficiency in so far as it formulates its theoretical questions in terms of how economics, kinship and ritual are experienced and structured through gender, rather than asking how gender is experienced and structured through culture" (Moore, 1988, p9). This quotation clearly illustrates the previous point, that to examine and use gender effectively it can only be done in collaboration with other entities. It is a social category, and therefore, to evaluate it thoroughly as a core analytical category, gender would have to be considered in all areas of social life. In many aspects of social life however, gender does not present itself as a vital element, as shall now be demonstrated.
The central idea that everything can and must be studied through gender fails in practicality. When considering different societies, indeed using gender as a key analytical component could be very helpful. For example, in hunter-gatherer societies such as the Pygmy society of the Bamgombi in the Central African Republic and Cameroon (Ingold, Riches and Woodburn. 1988), lives are very much central around social roles such as gender. In this society, division of labour is devised by gender, man is the hunter and the woman is the gatherer (Ingold, Riches and Woodburn, 1988), and this line of division can be seen in many other hunter-gatherer societies around the world. However, not all societies work on this basis, in many, gender is not a key defining element e.g. within the Hindu caste system.
This caste system contains four major varnas, in descending order: Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras, all ranked in accordance with their ritual purity (Ferraro, Trevathan and Levy, 1994). Below these four and technically out of the caste system is the Untouchables who are generally perceived as outcastes, considered so impure, the other castes should avoid any contact with them (Ferraro, Trevathan and Levy, 1994). Each caste has their own rituals in order for them to maintain caste exclusivity; clearly this expresses the intensity of this segregation. These castes act as the determining factor in social stratification and pervade practically every area of the Hindu's lives. In reference to the division of labour, gender is not important, what is deemed important is the persons 'jati' (sub-castes of the principal four, considered as local family groups (Ferraro, Trevathan and Levy, 1994)). Each jati is associated with "its own traditional occupation which provides goods or services for the rest of society" (Ferraro, Trevathan and Levy 1994, p432). Gender is not a prevailing factor; social roles etc are all primarily determined by caste membership. Subsequently the importance of gender is debatable; similar could be said of class-based societies.
Scott (1985), in his book 'Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance', comments on the manner in which peasants in America went about resisting the commands of the ruling classes through such acts as "foot dragging, dissimulation, false compliance, pilfering, feigned ignorance, slander, arson, sabotage, and so forth" (Scott, 1985, p29). To use gender in this area of analysis seems pointless and abstract. In short, when considering a society's power stratification i.e. its economics etc, gender as an analytical category is extremely limited in its capacity to offer information. Therefore as a core analytical category it could be argued that its application is not functional.
A final problem in considering gender as a core analytical category in Social Anthropology is the fact that there is no real documented history of gender before the 1970s, the time when feminism took hold. "The feminist critique in social anthropology, as in the other social sciences, grew out of a specific concern with the neglect of women in the discipline" (Moore, 1988, p1). With this in consideration, there is little historical documentation in reference to the development of gender in a number of societies; the only real documentation was given through ethnographies when considering kinship and marriage (Moore, 1988). Without history, containing important events that may have affected gender roles in any one place, it could be argued that a comparison of two similarly structured societies concerning gender may very well be weak and subsequently invalid. To consider a populations gender roles' purely on the basis of present observations could certainly be argued to be minimalist and of little actual use.
In conclusion, gender is certainly an area that pervades all elements of every person's life and therefore is certainly worthy of consideration within social anthropological studies. However, this pervasion is variable and therefore, whether gender should be classed as a core analytical category, certainly raises debate. Through personal belief, social anthropologists should certainly consider gender in relevant fields of investigation, because as said previously in many cases it can open many new avenues of investigation, introducing new elements of supplementary information. However, to consider it as a core analytical component, it could be argued is impractical. Gender has differing importance in different subject areas, and therefore to consider it essential in all areas of social anthropology is nave and any information that is revealed from certain areas (i.e. those concerning societal power structures) may be of limited use.