This essay will analyse the extent to which the views of the Enlightenment affected colonial life in New South Wales from the date of the first settlement in the region until the middle of the nineteenth century. It will take into account the effect of the Enlightenment in terms of the reasoning behind transporting convicts to New South Wales in the first place, the methods of punishment and rehabilitation that the authorities imposed on the convicts once in Australia, the colonists' attitudes towards and treatment of the Aborigines, as well as the agricultural outlook and methodology of the colonists. It will argue that in the majority of these aspects the Enlightenment world-view was extremely influential, except in deciding to establish a penal colony which ran counter to Jeremy Bentham's ideal of the Panopticon. Although, by the end of the period in question, even the system of transportation had been abandoned in favour of ideas more influenced by the Enlightenment.
The English authorities firmly believed that the relocation of its criminals to New South Wales would be able to reform them - 'Improvement of the land through convict labour seemed to bring with it moral improvement as crime was washed away by honest sweat." This belief emanated from the Enlightenment concept that progress and improvement was possible in humans and John Gascoigne argues that this was indeed proved - 'As the Australian colonies developed, the possibility of the improvement of human nature was demonstrated by the way in which many convicts were turned into good and useful citizens once transported into a new situation." New South Wales became the land of the 'second chance', allowing emancipists back into society - a stance consistent with Enlightenment views about the ability to reform mankind. As this policy was so successful in reforming the convicts, it was believed that the principle could be applied to the Aborigines in order to 'civilize' them (another Enlightenment concept). Consequently, there was a belief that 'Aborigines could be refashioned by removing them from their families at birth and bringing them up in European society'. This had disastrous consequences, as it contrasted directly with the Aboriginal respect for the land and its rhythm. It also disturbed Aboriginal patterns of growth and migration, and led to a sense of disorientation among those Aborigines taken from their parents at a young age. Thus, the Enlightenment belief in the reform of the human character was adopted by the authorities in New South Wales in relation to both the convicts, but also to the Aborigines which had a far more negative outcome.
When initially deciding how best to imprison and monitor the convicts when they had reached New South Wales, the House of Commons proposed the idea of establishing a prison with a type of viewing gallery so that all the prisoners could be permanently observed. It would have enabled 'the whole Establishment to be inspected at a View, from a commodious and insulated Room in the Center'. This design was taken from the English philosopher Jeremy Bentham's ideal of the prison, the so-called Panopticon. This was undoubtedly the most famous example of Enlightenment thought in relation to the imprisonment of convicts, as it emphasized viewing and inspecting the prisoners at all times - there would be an invisible omnipresence, and even members of the public would be encouraged to visit, since the prison would be a type of exhibition. It would improve both the convicts and society - it had great utilitarian aims, a clear Enlightenment concept. However, this ideal was not adopted by the authorities of New South Wales. Bentham was hostile to transportation and in particular to the penal colony of New South Wales which he regarded as loosely monitored and lacking inspection. Bruce Kercher argued that New South Wales was more akin to an open prison than a closed and isolated prison. This was in contrast to Bentham's penitentiary system which offered 'order, clarity and social utility'. Thus, it would be fair to argue that although there was a belief in the improvement of human nature by the authorities, the actual supervision of the convicts cannot be regarded as being influenced by the Enlightenment because it was not secure or scientific enough (according to Bentham). However, there was a growing insistence on the greater supervision and surveillance of the convict population form the 1820s, as well as attempts to classify the convict population. After 1840, there was no further transformation of convicts to New South Wales indicating a greater acceptance of Bentham's ideas of closer control and surveillance of the prisoners (and thus recognition of the Enlightenment ideas). Therefore, as Gascoigne has described 'In some ways... the Australian experiment ran counter to the theories of the Enlightenment'. He is of course referring to the method of transportation as being enough to reform the convicts. The fact that by 1840 this had been terminated as a form of punishment indicated that there was no longer a belief in its validity as a form of punishment and rehabilitation and instead a more Enlightenment-influenced penitentiary system was introduced. However, Gascoigne also argues that the Australian experiment was largely successful in reforming the convicts even though it ran counter to Enlightenment ideas - 'Convicts demonstrated that human nature was too complex and too contrary to be neatly shaped into an Enlightenment mould.'
One of the most important books of the Enlightenment era was undoubtedly Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations. This was also highly significant in shaping life in New South Wales. Smith is often regarded as the father of economics, and his writings have been enormously influential. The Wealth of Nations was so successful that it led to the rejection of earlier economic schools, and later economists such as Thomas Malthus, focused merely on refining Smith's theory into what is now known as classical economics. Perhaps the idea of greatest significance in the book was the notion of the division of labour. He argues that the division of labour 'is the necessary... consequence of a certain propensity in human nature... the propensity to truck, barter and exchange one thing for another... [This propensity] is common to all men, and to be found in no other race of animals'. The fact that the Aborigines refused to 'truck, barter and exchange' with the English colonists (mainly because there were very few objects that the Aborigines valued) meant that they were treated as uncivilized people, almost akin to animals, because Smith suggested that in declining to trade, the Aborigines were inhuman. Accordingly, they were seen as such by the colonists. N.G.Butlin argues that there was a major removal of Aboriginal resources as well as the actual killing of Aborigines on an increasing scale from 1815. Indeed, it has been estimated that the Aborigines lost half of their 1788 population (about one to one and a half million people) by 1850, although it must be stated that a large majority died due to contracting European diseases, which was an unintentional form of killing. However, the colonists were glad that nature was aiding them in their quest to settle the continent. For Smith, rights were of secondary importance to economic prosperity. He thought labour was equal, and that a division of labour would cause a great increase in production. However, although he considered labour to be equal, the theory automatically created a system where inequality was unavoidable - 'the Australian Aborigine tended to be relegated to an increasingly lowly position. As conflict between European and Aborigine increased, such theorising could be invoked to justify dispossession and white supremacy." Another of Smith's important ideas was the stadial theory which depicted the transition from a natural society to a commercial one in four stages. If a commercial nation encountered a natural one (as was the case with England and the Aboriginal society in Australia), the former would be able to exploit the latter in order to make a greater profit, which is exactly what happened in New South Wales. In general, therefore, the concepts in The Wealth of Nations which epitomized Enlightenment thinking and were largely adopted by the authorities and colonists of New South Wales only helped to create a system of inferiority and superiority in which the Aborigines suffered immeasurably.
The notion of the Self and the Other was borne out of Enlightenment thinking, which also established the great chain of being, 'a hierarchy of creation reaching from God and the angels down through man to the lowliest worm'. Apes were seen as the missing link between humans and animals due to the large number of characteristics that they shared with humans. There was a great deal of investigation into where the break between man and ape, and between person and non-person existed. This was a rational scientific attempt to order the universe. White Europeans were seen as being at the very top of the chain. However, there was a great deal of confusion as to where the Aborigines fitted on this scale. Where they above or below the ape? 'The eighteenth century was the great age of classification' and the colonists were determined to categorize the Aborigines. Racial divisions were seen as sharp and static. Enlightenment thinking put forward the idea that beards were highly significant in determining the differences between races and peoples. Across Europe beards symbolized both lordship and virility and were 'considered a mark of both physical and moral strength and energy, respect and honour'. They distinguished men from women. The fact that Aborigines generally lacked beads, or if they did sport one, it was usually very thin and scanty, meant that they were seen as effeminate and lesser people than the colonists. This was also coupled with the nakedness of the Aborigines which caused a great deal of shock and disdain among the European settlers - 'Of the use or benefit of clothing, these people appear to have no comprehension." This was further accentuated by their tendency to wear jewellery and piercings and display tattoos. Also disturbing to the settlers was that some of the Aboriginal groups practiced cannibalism - 'They found... that they were cannibals... and it appeared that a short time before, six of their enemies having fallen into their hands, they killed four, and eat them." Self-mutilation was another aspect of Aboriginal life which the colonists could not comprehend - 'They sat down upon the ground together, and cut many parts of their bodies in a most shocking manner." The Europeans were also annoyed that the Aborigines seemed to lack a hierarchical structure, another important Enlightenment concept. This made it difficult to know who to address when trying to communicate with the Aborigines. Also frustrating was the idea of collective ownership which the Aborigines employed - a completely alien and unscientific concept to the colonists. The migratory nature of the Aboriginal lifestyle was not conducive to economic prosperity according to Enlightenment thought. The colonists took it for granted that the Aborigines were '"timeless" without a history and civilization, leaving the land legally a terra nullius [no man's land] waiting to be inscribed by the Europeans'. This gave them the idea that the Aboriginal presence in New South Wales was limited and unimportant, and therefore justified their conquest of the land. This clash in ideas, the Enlightenment opinions of the colonists and the dreamtime beliefs of the Aborigines, had disastrous consequences for the latter and was a major factor in shaping colonial life in New South Wales until 1850. That is, the attempt at the systematic destruction of the Aboriginal community.
As already stated above perhaps the most important concept of the Enlightenment was the idea of progress. It was most obviously linked with economic development. In the early nineteenth century the key to this in New South Wales was the improvement of the land. An agrarian revolution was needed to mirror the one in England. Despite the poor quality of soil and the infertility of much of the continent, there was still a great deal of belief that a stable food supply could be grown and successful colony established - 'From the sand we have yet been able to draw very little but there seems no reason to doubt, that many large tracts around us will bring to perfection whatever shall be sown in them." Watkin Tench was indeed correct in this assessment as the 'early colony of New South Wales did succeed in feeding itself much more successfully than the early American colonies'. The promotion of agriculture became more overt in the 1820s. The belief that waste land could be cultivated and improved grew stronger as did the notion that the Australian landscape would be able to support a larger European population. Science was seen as a natural ally to agricultural in the quest for improvement and was highly influential in causing the agricultural revolution in New South Wales.
Perhaps the most pertinent quotation in terms of understanding the relevance of the ideas of the Enlightenment in New South Wales can be summarized by John Gascoigne,
This essay has demonstrated the far-reaching influence of the Enlightenment into almost all areas of colonial life in New South Wales between 1788 and 1850. These include the reason for establishing a colony in New South Wales in the first place (to allow the reformation of the convicts by giving them a second chance), the attitude towards the Aborigines (the completely contrasting way of life between the two groups) and in the belief in agricultural progress to support a growing colony. The only area where Enlightenment thoughts were not prominent was in the supervision and detention of the convicts once in New South Wales. However, there were moves to change this by 1850 as Enlightenment thoughts won out in this area too.