In spite of the great degree of controversy concerning the importance of meat-eating in the evolution of genus Homo, most researchers are at least able to agree on one fundamental point. The emergence towards the end of Pliocene of Homo ergaster, at 1.9 MYA, represents a clear grade shift in hominin evolution both morphologically and behaviourally (Wood/1999). Modern 'human-like' limb and body proportions, habitual bipedalism, larger body size as compared to its most probable ancestors (Homo habilis, rudolfensis and Australopithecus gahri, (Foley/2001; Asfaw et al/1999)), reduced molar size and increased brain size of Homo ergaster all represent a shift away from ape-like morphology. Additionally its appearance in the fossil record is concurrent with a host of behavioural 'firsts' including; the first appearance of hominins outside Africa, 'home base' or 'central place' sites, and the first utilisation and possible control of fire (Stanford/2001). It is clear that 'such a shift needs accounting for,' however considerable debate exits over what factor or combination of factors, both social and ecological, may have brought about such a reorganisation and almost immediate geographical expansion out of Africa (Foley;2001; Swisher et al/2000)
Increased reliance upon 'meat-eating' is regarded as a prime candidate, as Robert Foley states, "H.ergaster/erectus, appears to show a number of evolutionary shifts that would be expected to occur as a result of a more carnivorous foraging strategy" (Foley/2001p324). Historically 'meat-eating' by hominins was closely associated with either Raymond Darts graphic descriptions of the 'blood-thirsty' ape or 'man the hunter' paradigms (Boyd & Silk/2003). Some researchers still erroneously synonymise the term 'meat-eating' with historical theories of 'man the hunter' (of big game) in their arguments denying the role of meat in the evolution of the genus Homo (O'Connell et al/1999). Thus for reasons of historical disassociation 'meat-eating' might be better termed as the exploitation of 'animal protein' or 'animal resources' (Aiollo/1995; Stanford/1999).
In a phylogenetic framework meat-eating is a plesiomorphy of the Pan/Australopithecus-Homo clade and 'some level of meat eating is likely to have characterised all hominoids' (Foley/2001 p308). Clear evidence in the form of herbivore limb bones which bear stone tool cut marks and have been shattered (Presumably to obtain high fat bone marrow) now suggests some Australopithecines, A. gahri for instance and early Homo obtained a source of animal protein by exploiting animal carcases as early as 2.5 MYA (Heinzelin et al/1999). However, although the increase in brain size for H. habilis may be correlated with increased inclusion of animal protein in the diet, its overall morphology remained more like that of the Australopithecines than ergaster (Haeusler/2004). Consequently a range of hypotheses have emerged, each attempting to illustrate the relationship, or otherwise, between 'meat-eating', body shape, brain size, geographical expansion and total life history of H. ergaster.
This relationship exists as Foley (2001) states, as the "...evolution of relatively larger brains is dependent upon energetics as much as the actual selective pressures leading to an advantage of having a large brain". Thus while two distinct hypothetical standpoints are evident in the current literature, neither denies that with the appearance of H. erectus, "...there are indications that early humans were able in some manner to greatly improve their intake and uptake of energy, apparently without any decrease in dietary quality" (Milton/1999). Furthermore, as Foley (2001) illustrates the 'evolution of relatively larger brains among hominins would be expected to correlate with changes in life-history which in turn would result in a series of adaptive/biological changes'(my emphasis p313). However, there are those who contend that increased reliance upon meat-eating had very little significance in producing these changes, and maintain that 'H. erectus evolved as a result of climate-driven changes in female foraging and food sharing practices, possibly involving the exploitation of tubers' or Underground Storage Organs (USO's), combined with the cooking of these USO's (O'Connell et al/1999; Wrangham et al/1999).
O'Connell and Lupo (2002) use ethnographical studies of modern hunter-gatherers like the Hazda in an attempt to illustrate that even if meat acquisition via scavenging was practiced in the Plio-Pleistocene, 'it does not necessarily follow that Carnivory played a key role in the evolution of early humans' (p104). They maintain that it is the frequency and reliability with which meat was acquired that is critical. Indeed, as Kristen Hawkes (2001) illustrates, "The Hazda large-carcass scavenging rate is about two large carcasses per hunter per year" (p232). Proponents of the USO hypothesis argue that as the climate in Sub-Saharan Africa became cooler and increasingly arid between 2.8-2.5 and 1.9-1.7 MYA meat, because of its low energy value during periods of climatic stress appears unlikely to have been a fall-back food; rather, 'USO's would have been a much more dependable target' (Wrangham et al/1999; O'Connell et al/1999).
O'Connell and associates also use ethnographic comparisons of the Hazda and early humans to support their 'Grandmothering' hypothesis. They propose that increasing aridity prevented juveniles from being able to help in provisioning themselves due to a lack of fruits. Thus older female members of the social group, grandmothers, were able to increase their potential genetic fitness and value to the group by helping to provision younger members and especially female kin. This was achieved by the extraction and roasting, using digging sticks, of USO's. The two-fold effects were increased longevity of female members and increased fertility amongst the younger females. This increased longevity would delay maturation and thus mothers would have needed, and been able, to devote more time to infant rearing; the net results would have been larger group sizes. Thus larger brains developed through a combination of greater social interaction and were 'funded' by the increased nutritional benefits provided by cooking USO's. Furthermore, better nutrition, increased longevity and slower rates of maturation are posited to explain the reduction in molar size and the increase in body size (O'Connell et al/1999).
The life span of H. ergaster is estimated to be approximately 56 years but for most individuals was probably lower (Vasey & Walker/2001). In addition, excavations at the site of Flk Zing at Koobi Fora, have demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt that members of the ergaster lineage used 'home-bases or central place sites' to which they transported carcasses. Bunn (2001) argues that, "given the quantities of meat obtained, it seems probable that, like the Hazda, early Homo shared meat" (p212). Thus some of the theories of the 'Grandmothering' hypothesis such as the correlation between increased brain size and group size and food-sharing are not incompatible with current palaeoanthropological theory (Bunn/2001; Stanford & Bunn/2001). However, their arguments are fundamentally weakened by the self-imposed dichotomy they themselves create. The majority of the evidence suggests that the driving force behind the grade shift in ergaster was not meat only vs. plant foods only, but rather a mix of the two elements (Milton/1999; Foley/2001; Vasey & Walker/2001).
Furthermore, in opposition to their theory most researchers contend that, 'small incremental increases (in carnivory) rather than a major change in foraging behaviour can have a significant evolutionary consequence' (Foley/2001 p313). As chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) obtain only 5-10% of their calories from meat an increase of just 10% in early humans would have brought them up to a level of animal exploitation similar to living humans (Foley/2001; Stanford/1999). Indeed as both Stanford (1999) and Milton (2001) illustrate, not only would a small increase in animal products in the diet be sufficient, when dietary intake exceeds 50% 'the liver is unable to metabolise the excess amino acids and the body unable to flush itself of the waste products of meat consumption' (Stanford/1999 p118).
Paradoxically the potential toxicity of excessive meat consumption helps to illustrate the importance of meat for the increased encephalization and body size of H. ergaster. For instance, the long bones of the female ergaster specimen (KNM-ER 1808) are covered with a layer of abnormal, amorphous bone. The cause of this abnormality is suspected to have been Hypervitaminosis A (vitamin A poising). Modern Artic explorers have developed similar abnormalities by consuming the livers of large carnivores such as polar bears (Boyd & Silk/2003). In addition to strengthening the case for the increasing importance of animal protein within the diet, this example is also significant for two further reasons. Firstly, it illustrates that early hominids would have had access to relatively intact carcasses, probably as a result of 'power-scavenging' by at least 1.75 MYA. Secondly it suggests that either female's were involved in this potentially very risky strategy, or perhaps benefited from the sharing of animal resources within a social group at some form of 'home-base' (Bunn/2001).
It may be argued then, that reasonably small amounts of animal protein were fundamentally intertwined in the relationship between body shape and brain size. Indeed, although USO's provide an excellent source of calories which is absent in meat, most are 'devoid of nutrients' and some contain cyanogenic compounds (capable of causing cyanide poisoning) (Milton/1999). Milton (1999) argues that, "An adequate supply of sulphur-containing amino acids is essential in the detoxification of cyanogenic plant foods" (p18). Thus meat becomes a tool, which enabled H. ergaster to simultaneously exploit foods from two trophic levels, while at the same time lowering dietary bulk by only selecting the most energy rich plant foods, for instance tubers (Milton/1999).
As previously stated, 'brains constitute tissues that are expensive to grow and maintain' and thus require a diet rich in nutrients (Foley/2001). The extensive fossilized remains of Turkana Boy (KNM-ET 15000) indicate that in contrast to both apes, australopithecines and early forms of the genus Homo, H. ergaster lacked not only the wide pelvis of previous hominins but also had a modern-like barrel shaped ribcage (Aiello & Wheeler/2001; Haeusler & McHenry/2004). The expensive tissue hypothesis of Aiello and Wheeler argues that the relative increase in brain size from ca 654cc for H. habilis to ca 850cc in ergaster occurred (perhaps simultaneously) with a corresponding decrease in gut size (Vasey & Walker/2001; Foley/2001; Milton/2001). Indeed, they state that the wide pelvis in other hominins is consistent with the presence of a well developed and protuberant abdomen which ergaster lacks. This combined with the barrel as opposed to funnel shaped chest of Australopithecus specimens would mean H. ergaster has a greatly reduced gut, which she argues was the result of an increased reliance upon a mix of nutrient rich animal protein, combined perhaps with underground tubers. Concurrently, Katherine Milton (1999) suggests that, 'using meat to supply essential amino-acids and many required micronutrients frees-space in the gut for (high energy i.e. USO) plant foods (p11).
In reply, proponents of the USO's hypothesis and especially Richard Wrangham, argue that if cooked, tubers could fulfil all the dietary requirements. Additionally, he argues that modern humans were unable to digest the uncooked beef slivers they were experimentally fed (Wrangham et al/1999; Wrangham/2004 personal notes from conference). However, Holy Smith illustrates that when the teeth of the H. ergaster youth from Nariokotome (KNM-ET 15000) are compared to those from a H. habilis specimen (OH7) they display significantly less wear. She suggests that uncooked meat consumption in H. erectus is a good candidate for the difference, and that, 'simple cooking in hearth ashes, such as that of Australian Aborigines, introduces much grit into the food and produces high attrition of teeth' (Wrangham et al/2001 p586). Furthermore, Milton (1999) argues that the present archaeological; record does not show evidence of cooked or roasted bones. Thus even though populations of ergaster may have been controlling fire at >1.8 million years ago they was either able to digest raw meat, or had some means to process it with tools before consumption that did not involve cooking (perhaps simple tenderisation with stone tools) (Wrangham et al/1999).
Theories that exclude the possibility that meat played an important role in the evolution of the genus Homo also have a difficult time explaining the sudden and rapid expansion of H. ergaster to Dmanisi in Eurasia and the Indonesian Island of Java (Swisher et al/2000; Gabunia et al/2000); in contrast, those that do not have less trouble. Mary Stiner (2002), for instance, suggests that early humans may have co-evolved with carnivores by scavenging there kills. As the climate, and thus fauna, at Dmanisi, Georgia >1.9 MYA was similar to that found in the savannah environment of Africa, there would be little barrier to geographical expansion of both carnivore guilds and herbivores from Africa. Furthermore, the inclusion of more animal protein in the diet would naturally require larger day and home ranges due to the behaviour of prey items, which would have selected for both more efficient bipedalism and locomotors abilities (Foley/2001; Gabunia/2000, Stiner/2002).
Thus, there appears to be a strong correlation between increased levels of animal protein within the diet combined with continued reliance upon plant food. Indeed, Vasey & Walker (2001) argue that the secondarily altricial nature of modern human infants probably coincided with the emergence of H. ergaster. They state that ergaster appears to have evolved 'prenatal and postnatal growth patterns found in modern humans (suggesting) ...mothers must have begun acquiring foods of high nutritional value' (p341). Furthermore, this secondarily altricial nature would further boost the validity that ergaster populations had some form of 'base camp' as secondary altricial young cannot cling to their mothers.
As both Foley (2001) and Milton (1999) concur, infants require10% more nutrients to grow their large brain size, and developing children have been shown to need iron, calcium, iodine, vitamins A, B, C, not to mention high levels of protein and fat. USO's and tubers alone cannot fulfil these needs and thus, "the routine inclusion of animal foods in the diets of weanling children seems mandatory" (Milton/1999, p19). This 'mandatory' reliance upon high nutrient rich food in the form of animal protein would certainly have been required for highly mobile social groups and thus an influential part of the diet that could very well explain the related set of novel and interrelated features covering encephalization, body size and life history that are only seen in the archaeological record with the evolution of H. ergaster (Foley/2001).