As of recent years anthropology as a subject has developed a healthy reputation for self-criticism and reflection. Stemming largely from the desire to avoid the harsh glare of the ethnocentric critical light, traditional categories including colonialism, politics, society and even styles of ethnographic writing have undergone deconstructions that were much needed if not openly welcomed. The categorical manifestation of the dualist paradigm is represented in the form of the nature-culture and nature-society dichotomies which, as it is now universally agreed, represent little more than stumbling blocks in our attempts to understand the particular intricacies of human societies. Until, recently this dualistic interpretation has proved surprisingly resilient to criticism. The sustained survival of which may owe its existence in part to a paradox within which nature has been much more than the basic term of a series of antithetical notions, an oppositional prop for culture, the supernatural or society. As Philippe Descola states, "What is distinguished from nature receives its determination from it... Suppress the idea of nature and the whole philosophical edifice of western achievement will crumble" (Descola/1996/p98).
Whether or not this will be the outcome of such inward criticism, it is clear that the nature-culture division represents a serious problem for anthropological investigation. Subsequently a spurge of recent literature and thought has emerged attempting to critically deconstruct the dichotomy via a multitude of theoretical approaches. However, is it really possible to dissolve a dichotomy that as Descola contends represents a key foundation stone of modernist epistemology, not just another analytical category belonging to the intellectual toolkit of the social sciences? (Descola/1996/p12)
Human evolutionary ecology has its roots in cultural ecology and evolutionary anthropology. It represents an attempt to deconstruct the dichotomy between nature and culture based upon an ecological perspective, analysing human behaviour in terms of natural selection and microeconomics. Tim Ingold argues that, "An approach that is genuinely ecological in my view is one that would ground human intention and action within the context of an ongoing and mutually constitutive engagement between people and their environments" (Ingold/1996/p26). He contends that through their use of the 'optimal forager theory' evolutionary ecologists merely consolidate the existing nature-culture dichotomy. The theory endows what Ingold calls 'economic man' with reason in the sphere of social interaction allowing him to advance culturally against the backdrop of nature. Conversely the rationality of the optimal forager is installed at the every heart of nature, while the specifically human domain of society and culture is seen as a source of negative influence, causing the behaviour of the forager to deviate from the theoretical optimum. His point is how they can claim that reason is a universal attribute of humanity, yet simultaneous maintain that the natural rationality of human hunter gatherers is compromised by social and cultural constraints (Ingold/1996).
Evolutionary ecologists attribute behavioural patterns to the influence of natural selection over time, asserting that choices are made within a pre-developed framework. Which in turn owes its existence to its 'proven' ability as the most successful strategy in terms of reproductive fitness. This neo-Darwinian approach is heavily criticised, it is claimed for instance that it does not stand under even the most casual survey of our knowledge of development and natural history (Descola/1996/p5). Indeed, as Ingold states, behaviour must not only have consequences for reproduction it must also be a consequence of reproduction (Ingold/1996). Thus since the fallacy of genetically distinct racial groups is thankfully eradicated from anthropological theory, it is proposed by Winterhalder that, "the instructions underwriting human foraging behaviour are culturally rather than genetic, encoded in words and other symbolic media rather than in the language of DNA" (Winterhalder: in Ingold/1996/p30).
According to Ingold the argument still relies upon enculturation via a process analogous to that of genetic transmission. Through and examination of Winterhalders ethnography on the Cree of Muskrat Dam, Northern Ontario Ingold conversely concludes that the novice hunter learns by accompanying more experienced hands in the woods, and that via direct instruction he is led to develop a sophisticated perceptual awareness of the properties of his surroundings and of the possibilities for action they afford. He contends that, "Observation is no more a matter of having information copied into ones head, than is imitation a matter of mechanically executing received instructions." (Ingold/1996/p40) For Ingold the actions of the novice are intrinsically intertwined with those of his environment, thus he sees the evolutionary ecologists as culturally generating a false dualism between nature-optimal forager and culture-economic man. In conclusion he maintains that hunter gatherers and the scientist in the guise of 'economic man' both develop their capacities and aspirations, within a continuing history of involvement with the human and non-human components of their environment (Ibid).
Philippe Descola agrees with Ingold insofar as he also emphasises, that in order to deconstruct the dualism the importance of environmental interaction cannot be understated. He argues that modes of identification and interaction with the environment combined with modes of classification of the environment allow him to create very general patterns in the way people construct representations of their social and physical environment. However, as he states, "This is not to say that the organic and inorganic environment of humans is a symbolic artefact which would only exist, because it is perceived thought the prism of cultural codes" (Descola/1996/p86). Rejecting this old Durkheimian dualism he believes that the mental models which organise the social objectification of non humans can be treated as a finite set of cultural invariants, which he is careful to illustrate are not reducible to cognitive universals.
Such social objectification takes shape in the form of totemism, animalism and our own mode of identification and interaction, naturalism. Naturalism, he maintains is so ingrained within our culture that it has resulted in us treating other modes of identification as 'intellectually interesting but false representations' and mere symbolic manipulations of 'nature.' However, as he demonstrates, viewed from an unprejudiced perspective. "...the very existence of nature as an autonomous domain is no more a raw given of experience than are talking animals or kinship ties between men and kangaroos" (Descola/1996/p98). Furthermore, each of these particular modes of identification is further strengthened and characterised by their modes of interaction or relation to the environment. For totemism, animalism and naturalism these translate as respectively as predation, reciprocity and protection. The linkage of predation with naturalism is significant as it reflects an interconnected strand of criticism which flows amongst those attempting to deconstruct the present dualism. This theme is the role of conservationists in fallaciously strengthening the dichotomy between nature and culture, a theme which will be discussed later.
In his writing Descola, attempts to transcend both dualism and relativism in order that societies, cultures as well as human faculties combined with physical nature are not treated as autonomous substances in opposition to one another. Rather he advocates a process of 'structural phenomenology' whereby the interaction between a finite set of cultural invariants and physical elements (both human and non-human) encompass the variant modes of categorisation and systems of mediation which, when geared to specific environments generate the particular conceptualization of the world that emerges (Descola/1996).
This solution to the dualistic problem does indeed appear a least, to be a neat all encompassing structural tool. It is an approach with which Roy Ellen agrees at least to an extent. He argues for instance that identifiable within particular paradigms are, "...a minimum number of underlying assumptions upon which pragmatic schemata and symbolic representations are built and which ultimately constrain human conceptual permutations" (Ellen/1996/p104). Characteristic of his approach is the idea of three separate cognitive axes or dimensions which when combined in different ways generate particular representations, "all recognisably transformations of some ur- or proto-nature" (Ibid) These three axis he labels as: the inductive construction of nature, in terms of 'things', the spatial recognition of a realm outside the human domain and the metaphoric compulsion to understand phenomena by their essence (Descola/1996). He argues that it is the extent of the respective role that each of these axes plays in the contextualisation process combined with specific environments which is indicative of the particular definition of 'nature' that emerges.
In terms of 'things' he means that the human environment consists of neutral objects waiting to be ordered, indeed he contends that, "...the fact that all human populations engage in such activity is hardly in doubt" (Ellen/1996/p106). However, he shares the concern of Descola that both ethno-botanic and traditional Linnaean classificatory systems are inappropriate for such a task. Indeed, to him and other researchers such systems are purely ethnographic examples of the way in which humans classify their surroundings, and which subsequently should not be viewed as more 'accurate' or 'truthful' in comparison to other systems (Howell/1996).
However, on the point of cultural relativism Ellen appears to be fundamentally opposed to Descola. He claims for instance that "nature itself - or at least, 'the biological world' - is the product of human cognitive evolution" (Ellen/1996/p106). Surely this is not an insinuation that the biological world does not exist? Rather such a world, a 'nature,' has always existed physically and chemically, yet it is only with the relatively recent appearance of highly conscious philosophical beings that it has existed socially and culturally (if taken literally such a cultural relativism would ultimately lead to nihilism and the rejection all reality except that of a culturally created one).
Nevertheless, he maintains that within societies the natural world exists as a result of the following equation; whereby (n1 + n2 + n3...) = N + (n1 + n2...) = N + (...) = N. The bracketed n's represent culturally agreed natural such as animal, plant or rock. Thus it is the combinations of such classification that results in Nature (Ellen/1996/p107). Through such a process he seems to be reinforcing the dichotomy between nature and culture. Indeed, he maintains rather paradoxically as he admits, whilst we must not "impose our own nature-culture dualism upon the data," (Ellen/1996/p120) by situating people's perception within their actions on the world a culturally created dualism between the two categories is apparent, but it is a dichotomy of their own creation in their categorical terminology. He presents as evidence an example correlating to his third axis, that of nature as inner essence in relation to the gender practices of the Nuaulu of Seran from the Indonesian controlled half of Papua New Guinea. For instance he states, "As it happens, the Nuaula data fit well with the 'male is to female as culture is to nature' motif" (Ellen/1996/p112). Problematically he states that although no Nuaulu word exists for either nature or culture such examples of gender division and ideas of 'Wesie,' or primary forest, come closest to representing such terms, "from which the existence of an abstract covert notion of 'nature' can be reasonably inferred" (Ellen/1996/p116). Further 'interpretive' leaps are taken with the description of hunting practices. He states for example, that all killing takes place outside the village in the natural 'other' and thus represents 'the domination of culture over nature in nature' as opposed to animal sacrifice within the village which he 'interprets' as the 'domination of nature in culture' (Ellen/1996/p118).
Similarly, although not in complete concurrence with Ellen, Peter Dwyer too advocates a position of some relativism. He proposes for instance that, "in the domain of human affairs culture should be taken as prior, nature as emergent" (Dwyer/1996/p157). The difference lies inherently with the proposition that although the dichotomy between nature and culture is in fact a culturally created one, for a great proportion of societies there has only ever existed the 'cultural' world, though he does not pertain that 'nature' as a category is a purely cognitive entity, rather he emphasises, like others, a process of environmental interaction (Ingold/1996) (Descola/1996). His approach is one of 'human geography,' asserting that anthropological perspectives has focused too specifically upon the social and he expounds that, "The geographies (he employs) are those of the visible and invisible worlds, experienced by the people concerned, in order to gain alternative perspective on nature and culture" (Dwyer/1996/p158).
Through examination of three separate Papua New Guinean groups, the Kubo, Etolo, Siane, he contends that the difference in gradients and intensification in land use between the three ultimately results in a difference in people's perceptions of the visible and invisible worlds and that this accounts for the emergence of varying contextual perceptions. He proposes for instance that, "At the outset a landscape in which use values are generalised, extensive and un-graded and in which invisible beings are all pervading must be understood in totality as a landscape of human action and interaction. Hence, it is 'cultural,' there is no nature and no contrast" (Dwyer/1996/p0178). Therefore, conversely a graded and particularly intensive landscape such as our own excludes invisible beings, and through a process of cultural formation the potential to invent nature occurs. Indeed as he so eloquently elucidates "Culture is internalised; it implodes. The created periphery of the visible world, increasingly divorced from human contact and understanding, emerges as 'nature'" (Dwyer/1996/p178).
In his attempts to understand the Chewong, a small aboriginal group of the Malay rainforest, Signe Howell appears to arrive at rather a similar theoretical position. Indeed, he states that the Chewong constitute an empirical counter example to such Dualistic models of nature and culture. Such categories he proposes hold no meaning for these people. Although they categorise their environment he argues that for them, "The Whole forest, including the numerous invisible worlds within and above it, is cultural space" (Howell/1996/p141). He contends that whereas Ellen has suggested a phenomenon indicative of the existence of 'nature' as a category found in its spatial definition as a realm outside the cultural world no such special delineation is used by the Chewong (Desccola/1996).
Through his work with the Mbuti people of the Zaire River basin, Mitsuo Ichikawa appears to be in concurrence with the view that not all societies have a concept of 'nature.' It appears that through a process of 'dwelling within' the forest environment and of low intensification and gradients in land usage the forest for the Mbuti is indeed a cultural space (Ingold/1996). Moreover, it is an environment that has been constantly linked to a process of interaction and evolutionary adaptation with in its inhabitants, including both the Mbuti and the agriculturists with whom they share an economic relationship, for an absolute minimum of two thousand years (Ichikawa/1996). Quite simply the environment, the 'natural world' of the forest is the product to a certain extent of cultural processes. This leads him to infer as Howells and more specifically in this instance Dwyer confer, that the nature-culture dichotomy is a false dualism created through a process of isolation with peripheries as a result of intensification. He illustrates for example, that "...those people (agriculturalists living outside the forest) are rapidly loosing contact with the forest wilderness, the meat (which they trade for with the Mbuti) is also valued as a source of 'wild power' which cannot be obtained from fish or domestic animals" (Ichikawa/1996/p479).
At present the Mbuti face pressure from modern conservationists who although allowing for the continued patterns of Mbuti self subsistence fails to appreciate the real situation of environmental interactions in process. The implication of such reliance upon fallacious ethnocentric notions of nature and culture held by conservationists is thus a contemporary example of the need to dissolve such perceptions. It is argued that the dichotomy results for example in, "A small enclave, where guilt is alleviated and domination euphemistically transmuted into patronising preservation and aesthetic entertainment" (Descola/1996/p91). It is the duty of anthropologists to at the very least attempt an examination of attitudes towards nature which until recently have treated it as an external object to be controlled either through exploitation or protection (Ichikawa/1996). It is apparent from the work presented here that such attempts are being made. However, a continuation of such an effort would help to prevent further erroneous blunders being made upon other people's cultures, of which the example of the conservationists is merely one. We need as Ichikawa states, "...a model which does not reinforce the simple dichotomy of man and nature, and in this regard hunter-gatherer societies may provide us with some important choices" (Ichikawa/1996/p487). It is worth considering as stated at the beginning of this essay whether such a position is really attainable considering the implications in perceptual reorganization and perhaps social calamity it entails.