In the study of Paleoanthropology there are two major theories that attempt to account for the Phylogeny of H. sapiens and thus in turn their relationship to the Neanderthals. These two conflicting ideologies are commonly known as the 'Multiregionalist model' and the 'Out of Africa 2 Model.' Supporters of the former model believe a hominid, namely Homo erectus, left Africa some time in the past one to two million years and colonized Europe and Asia. This hominid subsequently gave rise to all modern human populations, simultaneously in multiple regions, through a process of in situ evolution. With constant gene flow between the populations ensuring that only one species, ours, was the result of this Multiregional evolution. If there theory is correct then Neanderthals are the direct descendents of these first 'true humans' and subsequently we are the direct descendents of Neanderthals, and thus very closely related to them. Therefore, it is not surprising that he should be able to, 'see a Neanderthal in his shaving mirror'. If however, they are wrong and Neanderthals are not related to ourselves then a major piece of the Multiregionalist model is missing. Thus, the question as to whether Neanderthals are related to us is of fundamental importance to our understanding of Human origins.
In stark contrast to the Multiregionalist hypothesis, there is the belief held by researchers such as Chris Stringer and Ian Tattersall that Neanderthals represent a separate species of humans, Homo Neanderthalensis. They argue as Ian Tattersall illustrates that, "There is no convincing evidence in the region (Europe) for intermixing of Neanderthals and modern human morphologies - and if H. neanderthalensis and H. sapiens were indeed separate species as the anatomical distinction between them so strongly suggest, they could not have interbred successfully, certainly not over the long term." (Tattersall/1995) Thus they argue that we are not at all closely related to Neanderthals, but that on the contrary by about 30,000 years BP an influx of anatomically modern H. sapiens into Europe had replaced the existing populations of Neanderthals. This is what is known as the 'out of Africa two' theory, further discussion of which will be returned to later (Stringer/1996) (Tattersall/1995).
One of the chief proponents of the view that Neanderthals are our direct ancestors is the well known Multiregionalist supporter, Milford Wolpoff. Based upon the evolutionary theories of Charles Darwin, it would be logical to assume that evidence of transitional forms between Neanderthals and modern humans should be found on the continent that transition took place (Darwin/1998). Milford Wolpoff argues that this is indeed the case. At Moravia in the Czech Republic for example, he states that, "The Moravian specimens outlined the similarities of Neanderthals and the populations following them." (Wolpoff/1997) In addition, he states that when Neanderthal remains found at Vindija in Croatia are compared to earlier central European Neanderthals there are a number of anatomical features present that appear to show transition in progress. Indeed, as Richard Klein illustrates, these late Neanderthals do generally have a smaller thinner and less projecting supraorbital torus (brow ridge), less receding foreheads, smaller and less prognathous faces, mandibles that showed some evidence of chin development and perhaps somewhat smaller anterior teeth. All of which seems to provide evidence that as he states, "They may have been evolving toward early modern central Europeans." (Klein/1999) Wolpoff argues that that this was indeed the case and that the later Upper Palaeolithic Europeans showed a continuation of this pattern. However, Richard Klein emphasizes that although early modern people did have more rugged features resembling the late Neanderthal finds, "In overall morphological pattern however, both cranially and post-cranially they are unmistakably modern, with no true Neanderthal features." (Klein/1999)
In addition, Chris stringer believes that the remains found from Vindija are too fragmentary, incomplete, and seemingly rather late to make a convincing case for any transitional relationship between Neanderthals and early modern humans (Stringer/1993). Indeed, the discovery of a highly typical Neanderthal skeleton from Saint-Cesaire in western France is also cited by many researchers as evidence that Neanderthals can not be closely related in an ancestral sense. From a variety of evidence including archaeological associations, stratigraphy, pollen analysis, and direct thermoluminescence dating of associated burnt flint the skeletal remains are reliably dated to no more than 35-38,000 years BP (Mellars/1996). These dates would mean, as Barry Cunliffe illustrates, the Saint-Cesaire skeleton is hardly more than 3-4,000 years earlier than discoveries of several specimens of typical Cro-Magnon (i.e. Homo sapiens sapiens) skeletons found in Europe at such sites as Vogelherd in Germany (Mellars/1996). Therefore he states that, "Advocates of the population replacement theory hypothesis would argue that in this situation there was simply not enough time for typically Neanderthal populations to have evolved into fully 'modern' populations, within the time span available." (Cunliffe/1997)
In the last ten years a number of genetic studies have been undertaken using mitochondrial DNA to try and determine the origin of modern H. sapiens and more recently whether or not we are related in any way to Neanderthals. The most famous of these studies is commonly known as the 'mitochondrial eve' theory. A comparison of the number mutations in mtDNA from African populations with those from European, Asian, New Guinean and Australians ones was then undertaken. It revealed, as Chris Stinger states, that African populations had more diverse types of mtDNA than any of the other modern populations, suggesting that they have had more time to develop such mutations. The other populations seemed to show far fewer mutations and thus must have had a much younger date of differentiation from each other. The dates for the emergence of H. sapiens in Africa have been given at 1-200,000 years. As Chris Stringer illustrates the oldest fossil evidence for modern humans in Africa is 130,000, with the oldest outside being 100,000 years from specimens at Skhul and Qafzeh in Levant. Thus as he states, "...we have evidence of a genetic migration from the African centre" (Stringer/1993) Wolpoff argues that the results from this study are invalid and inaccurate as "...the computer program used in the analysis was not applied correctly." and that "...no statistical analysis shows that variations in Africans is greater than other population." (Wolpoff/1997) However, if accurate, the results of the mtDNA studies seem to prove that Neanderthals could not possibly be ancestral to modern humans and thus not closely related.
Recent mtDNA studies provide more compelling evidence of our lack of close relation. Researchers succeeded in sequencing mtDNA from the original Neander Valley specimen of 1857, which they then compared with 994 human mtDNA lineages. Their results showed that amongst themselves, human mtDNA lineages differed by about 8.0 + or - 3.1 substitutions, whereas the difference between humans and the Neanderthal sequence was 27 + or - 2.2. This they claim indicates that Neanderthal divergence from their ancestor occurred about 555,000 to 690,000 years ago, compared with only 120,000 to 150,000 years for the common mtDNA ancestor of modern humans. Thus, they highlight, "...there was roughly a period of half a million years of independent evolution between Neanderthals and the line leading to modern humans." (Ward & Stringer/1997) However, many researchers believe that although there is no close genetic relationship between ourselves and Neanderthals there is a high probability that we are related to the extent that we share a common ancestor in the form of H. Heidelbergensis, with Neanderthals diverging from this ancestor at a much earlier date than modern humans. This seems to imply that H. neanderthalensis and H. sapiens are in fact different species of humans (Ward & Stringer/1997) (Tattersall/1995) (Klein/1999)
In response to these findings proponents of the Multiregionalist theory argue that if Neanderthals were a mere sub-species of human they could still have interbred and hybridized and thus still play some part in our evolution (Tattarsall/1995). Indeed, as Ryk Ward and Chris stringer emphasize, "With respect to the contentious issue of whether Neanderthals and anatomically early humans exchanged genes, these new (mtDNA) results diminish, but do not rule out the possibility." They take this stand, as they explain, because although there is no evidence for an exchange of mtDNA, this does not rule out the possibility of the exchange of nuclear DNA (Ward & Stringer/1997). Therefore are we related to Neanderthals via a period of hybridization? There is certainly evidence, as Ian Tattersall indicates, in the form of skeletal and ancient tool assemblages that a significant period of overlapped occurred between the two population in Europe. From this he estimates that for a period of about 10,000 years co-existed in Europe, which of course would provide an opportunity for interaction and hybridization.
For example, Milford Wolpoff cites the example of the gene that causes cystic fibrosis. He contends as this gene is most common in Europeans being uncommon in Africans and virtually unknown in Asians. Thus he states that as the gene is estimated to have emerged at least 52,000 years ago in Europe (before the earliest evidence of modern humans in the region) and conversely it must have originated in European Neanderthals, which he argues would, "... Show them to be the ancestors of modern humans." However, other researchers argue that the gene must have passed originated in modern human populations living in Levant at this time (Wolpoff/1997).
Another case for possible hybridization arose in 1998 with the discovery of a child's skeleton at Lagar Velho, in Portugal. The skeleton dated to 25,000 years BP, has been claimed to show mixed Neanderthal-modern features. As Chris Stringer illustrates it is described as, "...combining a modern-looking lower jaw and teeth with the robust, cold-adapted body shape characteristic of." (Stringer/2002) He argues that as the climate of Portugal was significantly colder at this time, the find represents nothing more than unexpected evidence of modern humans adapting physically to cold conditions before the Last Glacial Maximum of 18,000 BP. Furthermore, he argues that if the child is verified as a hybrid (and of course the logical course of action would be to compare its mtDNA with that of a modern European sample) it would only tell us that interbreeding did occur in one area, not how common such events were and to what extent Neanderthal genes penetrated the Cro-Magnon populations. Nor would it disprove the theory that Neanderthal and humans represent different species, as Neanderthals, "...would have been very close genetically to H. sapiens, and many mammals do hybridize, e.g., lions and tigers, or dogs and wolves." The real question he contends would be whether high levels of gene flow occurred between the two populations, and perhaps even merged, would result in Neanderthals being classified as a cousin or sibling or other close relation. However, he disputes (as do many other researchers mentioned) the possibility of this by stating, "The fossil record and recent DNA studies still support the view that Neanderthals were not our ancestors in any biologically meaningful sense of the word."(Sringer/2002)
In addition to this, a very recent publication by Yoel Rak, Avishag Ginzburg and Eli Geffen seem to provide further evidence that Neanderthals are not closely related to us. The study concerns as they say the study of the mandibular ramus (the coronoid process, the condylar process, and the 'depth of the' notch between them). They concluded, through careful comparisons of the mandibular ramus of each jaw bone investigated that; "Neanderthals (both European and Middle Eastern), differ more from H. sapiens (early specimens such as Tabun II, Skhul, and Qafzeh, as well as contemporary human populations from as far apart as Australia and Alaska) that the latter differs from Homo erectus." (Rak, Ginzburg, Geffen/2002) They explain that as the morphology of the Neanderthals mandibular process is the result of a highly specialised evolutionary process, the reversal of which (like any reversal of an evolutionary adaption) is highly unlikely. Therefore they conclude that, "... Neanderthals do not play a role in our evolutionary ancestry, through either 'regional continuity' or any other form of agagenetic progression." (Rak, Ginzburg, Geffen/2002) Prior to the development of DNA testing, a thorough investigation of Neanderthal morphology was the only possible way to examine there relationship to modern humans. It is know generally acknowledged from fossil remains that the term Neanderthal refers to a morphologically distinct population of humans, occupying a geographical range that stretched from Spain and Wales in the far west to as far east as Uzbekistan, and from Levant in the far south to as far north as Moscow (Conroy/1997). They were successful in this homeland for at least 200,000 years, with the last remaining evidence of there existence presently dated from tool assemblages found at Zafarraya in Southern Spain to 27,000 years BP (Tattersall/1995)
Various studies of their unique morphology were undertaken including examination of differences in limb length between the Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans. The most notable being one completed by Erik Trinkhaus in 1985. He stated through the use of 'Allen's' and 'Bergman's' rules, which dictate that body extremities of mammals and humans will tend to be relatively shorter in cold conditions, whilst conversely body weight tends to be relatively larger in cold conditions (Stringer/1993). When these rules are applied to the Neanderthals it is clear that they conform perfectly, whilst neither ancient nor modern European populations of humans do. Thus he concluded that Neanderthals had evolved to suit their environment, and evidently it was unlikely that they could be evolved into modern humans as they would have undoubtedly passed on these highly advantages body attributes necessary to withstand the intense cold of Europe, to their successors. (Stringer/1993)
In addition, as Ian Tattersall indicates, studies undertaken by researchers such Alberta Santa Luca on specific characteristics unique to Neanderthals (in this case Skull morphology), have shown them to anatomically distinct from the anatomically modern humans that arrived in Europe later on. He contends that, "Santa Luca pointed out that since modern humans share none of the distinctive and specialized Neanderthals traits, its highly unlikely that's the Neanderthals were our ancestors (Tattersall/1995). However, although it appears Neanderthals are not biologically closely related to us, Chris Stringer believes that they may have been related in other ways. For instance he argues that the old view of Neanderthals as being slow dim-witted and lacking in culture and social organization may need to be revised. He states, for example that, "...the prevailing view that Neanderthals did not exploit marine resources" is inaccurate because "... our excavations in Gibraltar show that over 50,000 years ago at Vanguard Cave their varied diet included baked mussels, seal and dolphin that must have been collected at least a kilometre away." (Stringer/2002) It is also apparent, as many researchers now believe that the discovery of Hyoid bone, (the bone responsible for connecting throat muscles used in sound production) appears to indicate that they possessed a form of rather sophisticated vocal communication (Tattersall/1995). Thus, as Chris stringer states, "...some of their behaviour seems very familiar, and show us that, even if the Neanderthals were not our ancestors, ours was not the only path that led to humanity."(Stringer/2002)
Nevertheless, it appears highly unlikely, as Chris stringer states, that we are related in biologically significant way to Neanderthals, with the noted exception that we appear to share with them an ancient common ancestor. Even then this does not constitute a close relationship as previously mentioned, they appear to have diverged from this ancestor at a far earlier point in prehistory than modern humans, and thus it is logical to conclude that Neanderthals may be seen as an extinct side branch on the path of human evolution; A separate species namely that of H. Neanderthalensis, consisting nonetheless of significantly modern human populations (Tattersall/1995). Consequently, unless the mtDNA evidence proves to be inaccurate, the testing methods used in the mandibular ramus comparisons flawed, or some other fossil evidence emerges it seems highly probable that we are not significantly closely related to Neanderthals.