On the 26 th August, Bank holiday Monday, Mr. Lars Hanson has arranged to host a party to celebrate his 25 th wedding anniversary. The location is at his riverside house with the marquee erected on the lawn next to the river. He requires a three course luncheon with wine starting at 1pm. The guests will arrive from 11.30am and will leave around 3.30pm. He has contacted Peacock Catering and asked for a quote for the day including the following:
The structure of the report is based around the guidelines set out in requirement of Mr. Lars Hanson. First, it was necessary to consider the style of service of the day and the type of menu for luncheon. Once these were decided upon, the report also needed to include the costing of the food and beverage package, a staff roster and equipment and glassware required. Moreover, a plan is needed to maintain effective quality control of products and services. This will ensure the whole event runs smoothly.
Peacock Catering has achieved a required gross profit of 70% of food. Please see appendix B for the costing of the menu.
Please see appendix C for drinks costing and appendix D for recipes of cocktails
Quality control is post-operational and is applied primary a product component of the catering package. (Merricks, P.1986).
Peacock catering has selected Cash & Carry for their purchasing requirement. As it is one off event. Food and drink will be collected and transported to the storage area three days before the events. The management team will do a final check the day before the event.
All food needs to be stored in the fridge until preparation except dry store food which should be stored on shelves in a dry store area off the ground. The drinks will need to be stored; champagne and white wines will need to be stored in a refrigerator, red wines in a wine rack off the ground; the rest of the soft drinks should be stored at in their original packaging, unopened and off the ground. The storage area must be clean, and free from dust and at the correct room temperatures for storage of red wines and foods. Storage at the event should be the same.
Both the Food and Drink should be transported the day before so that it can be insurance that everything is there.
According to the request of Mr. Lars Hanson, a list of all china cutlery and glassware is required. (Please see appendix H)
To conclude this report for Mr Lars Hanson, it is necessary to summarise what has been outlined in the main body of the report. Firstly, the service style is 'A la Carte', canaps and cocktails will be served to the guests on arrival and then followed by a three-course lunch. The cost of the menu will be 40 per head, and that is including the canaps. The drinks including cocktails, wine, champagne, spirits and soft drinks are estimated at approximately 80 per head, depending on consumption. Therefore the total cost per person will be approximately 120. As a result the overall food and beverage package will cost 6000.
In the order to run the event, Peacock Catering requires 14 personnel to run both the Kitchen and the service area. Methods that will be used to control quality of service are stated in the main body of this report. Although it was not a necessary requirement, the staff wages were taken into account. Please see Appendix I
Hope this suits your requirements and if you have further comments or questions please do not hesitate to contact Peacock Catering.