8 alternative proposals are suggested, all are with reference to the Contribution statement, Appendix (2-5)
They are:
Besides cost control and financial management, there are several areas that the manager should take into account to improve the wealth of an operation:
This includes the management of relationship with customers and employees.
There are several alternatives on the Food & Beverage to gain competitive advantages:
Promote new food items with special offer to attract customers
Create a separate menu for kids. Provide children's favourite menu with child-size portion at lower prices. This attracts families with children.
As customers become more knowledgeable about nutrition and concern healthy eating, managers might provide the nutritional content of ingredients and menu items.
Furthermore, the restaurant can promote low calories menu items so to attract customers who are on diet and prefer light meals
Since a meal experience involves both tangible (the food and beverage) and intangible products (the whole
service delivered to customers from the time they enter the restaurant to their departure), customer will expect
to pay for products and services and receive value from both tangibles and intangibles, therefore the
operations should maintain delivering a high quality service.
The management of capacity has a great impact on long term success.
If resources are overstretched:
If there is a sudden surge of customers, this increases the waiting time and staff pay less attention on customers' needs
strategy: poor service delivery
As the employees are continually overloaded, they will probably make more mistakes
poor performance and lower customer satisfaction
High staff turnover as they are demotivated
Therefore, the manager needs to put focus on capacity management to ensure the service process has sufficient
resources to deal with the anticipated levels of customer demand in the most cost-effective manner.
For a restaurant operation, a combination of the three capacity strategies can be employed:
Furthermore, emphasis should put on the management on the "coping" zone as well.
Benefits of marketing:  Understand customer needs and satisfying local tastes
Offer guidelines when designing the mix of products and services that will satisfy them
Understand the trends in the target market
Keep improvements on the current business so to prevent lagging behind.
By keeping customer records, helps realizing customers attitudes and purchasing habits,
and gaining repeat visits information.
Operators can use these information to improve customer relations and create loyalty
Understand competitors in the market
By learning from them such as their strengths and weaknesses, pricing policy and quality; manager can make improvements on the current business and create unique selling point to gain competitive advantage.
Therefore, manager should develop a marketing plan and do market research, alongside teaching employees
sell suggestively to improve sales.
With the use of the Service-Profit Chain (Heskett et al, 1994), we can conclude the way for the restaurant gains profit growth:
Internal service quality should firstly fulfilled, which includes employee relations, capacity management, control of finance and food & beverage, marketing; this leads to