Despite the research and debate concerning human resource management for many years, it is still not possible to provide a precise definition (Worsfold, 1999). However, it is believed that the traditional ways which just simply focus on productivity and cost factors alone should be ignored. Instead, many authors agree the aim to achieve employee commitment by managing organisational culture is the main characteristic of HRM (McGunnigle, 2000). Storey (1995) gives the definition of HRM as
Since there is great evidence showing that a good management of organisational culture is inevitable to achieve employee commitment, much of recent literature play keen interest in the 'best practice' HRM. Purcell (2001) stresses the need to recognise the central importance of strategy in the HRM models. Nickson (2002) argues that to create a high performance and commitment workplace, firms should adopt a universalistic approach which includes a prescribed range of HR policies and practices. However, it is believed that the "best practice" approach is considered as an ideal model remained on paper and is rarely existed in the contemporary. "They are often constrained by industry and organisational economics from implementing a deluxe version of 'best practice'." (Boxall & Purcell, 2002 pg 199). Nevertheless, these 'best practice' models do give valuable contribution. Nickson (2002) suggests that although much of the literature put emphasis on giving "overly optimistic prescriptions of the universality of best practice models", it helps encouraging employers to adopt a high commitment management through bundles of HR practices with a high skills workforce to obtain high value. For these reasons, 'good practice' seems to be a more suitable term when discussing the HR practices currently used.
What are the good practice to encourage commitment and culture changes? Price (1994) defines 'good practice' as that 'which is required or encouraged by legal provisions in terms of policies, procedures and other arrangement' (pg 48). He claims the bare minimum responsibility for all employers is to comply with standards set by legislation. In people management, the key areas are recruitment and selection, training and development, reward systems and employee empowerment (Mcgunnigle, 2000). Since recruitment and selection is frequently identified as the dominant activity within these areas (Jameson, 1999; Mcgunnigle, 2000), this article is focused on this part.
The adoption of the new HRM approach has led to a series of changes in recruitment and selection method. First, to ensure the recruitment and selection process is fair, the Government has established several laws such as the Equal Pay Act 1970, the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and the Disability Discrimination Act 1975 which put pressures on employers to select employees in a non-discriminating way in terms of sex, race and disability.
Regarding the selection tool, though the cost of interview is low, it has been extensively criticised as being unreliable, invalid and subjective on employment selection (Torrington, 2002). In view of this, there is great evidence showing that there is an increasing use of psychological tests as which are considered as better predictive ability and can get the right people who conform with the commitment culture (Goldsmith & Nickson, 1997; McGunnigle, 2000; Torrington, 2002). These tests include areas on intelligence, attainment, aptitude, interest and personality (Boella, 1996).
To encourage organisations to achieve high standards in employment practices, various initiatives and awards have been established to act as a hallmark of a quality employer. The most common ones are the Investor in People (IiP) and the National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs). Though they meet a number of criticisms of their applicability and utility, they do paid a role in leading organisations to a higher commitment to improve their practices as a result of reduced absenteeism and increased profitability (Torrington, 2002).
Awards are also given to reward the good practice of employment. For instance, one of the Britain's best known food & clothing retailers, ASDA, has gained the 3 rd year running for one of the 'Top 10 "Best Companies" to work for' in the UK by the Sunday Times (). Moreover, it gained the 'Work and Pensions Age Positive at Work Award' in 2003 by Personnel Today (), which proves that ASDA has an excellent HR practice. Being selected as the 'best company', so what is its 'best practice' in their recruitment and selection process to ensure obtaining the best, committed employees? With reference to OPP consultancy information (), ASDA aims to take a fair and objective method, on the same time ensure a minimum acceptable standard of performance is achieved. Application is opened to all sex, races and age to prevent discrimination. Rather than using the psychometric testing which is seemed unsuitable for selection, a three-part questionnaire is adopted to assess candidate's commitment to the company, ability to perform basic calculations and accurate use of written information. Since the questions are based on minimum acceptable standards, the results are more realistic and reliable. It is believed that this 'best practice' of ASDA has set a model for other retailers to follow.
There is great evidence showing the good practice approaches are widely used among different industries. Turning to the hospitality industry, which has the characteristics of intangibility, perishability, heterogeneity and inseparability, question arises as is there a role of HRM in the hospitality industry?
Nevertheless, the extent to which the HR practices are used in the industry remains very open to question. Several studies (Worsfold, 1999; Jameson, 1999; McGunnigle, 2000) considered the sector has been premised on a low skills model or poor HRM practice. Price (1994) has a similar view, stating ' the hotels and catering industry remains fragmented with relatively little concentration of ownership and a death of the sophisticated human resource management practice' (pg 57). On the contrary, there are also optimistic views such as Hoque (1999) and Lashley (1998). More recently, whether HRM strategies should be 'best fit' or best practice' is extensively debated (Nickson, 2002).
The aim of this part is to evaluate the extent of good practice approaches used in the contemporary hospitality industry. As previously stated, recruitment and selection is identified as the dominant area in achieving culture change and employee commitment, the following discussion is focused on this area.
With the proponent of good practice approaches is being used in the industry, Hoque (2000) suggests they are widely used within the hotel sector, supported by his research towards the UK large hotels about the degree of the adoption of HRM practice, and make comparison with similar sized manufacturing establishments. In recruitment and selection, a very high proportion of the surveyed hotels consider trainability as a major selection criteria and the use of a formal system for communicating the values and systems in the company to new staff is necessary. Only half the sample use realistic job previews and more than 90 percent regard psychological tests is inappropriate for employment.
Hoque (2000) has further conducted a series of interviews in 1996 as a follow-up to test the validity of this survey. The selected hotels are allocated into six categories. For the 'HRM quality enhancer' hotel, which is part of a national chain of hotels, holds the IiP accreditation. Though past experience and qualifications are major criteria for recruitment and selection, more emphasis is placed on the need for employees to have an aptitude for customer service. Interview is used to spot the right attitude instead of using psychometric or behavioural tests.
In his conclusion, he states that the hotels are operating consistently with their questionnaire responses and therefore support the argument he has presented in his previous survey that the HRM approaches in large hotels maybe at least as good, and probably better than found in manufacturing units of similar size (Hoque, 2000).
McGunnigle (2000) has carried out a similar research in 1998. He investigates the top 50 hotel groups in the UK. From his findings, most agree the behavioural quality is the key criterion for potential employees. Selection is commonly based on double interview, the first is undertaken by the HR specialist and then the suitable candidates will have a second interview with the line manager. Again, psychometric testing is not included in selection, instead, some hotels use episodic questioning as it is being viewed as more realistic. After all, McGunnigle (2000) holds a pessimistic view stating that 'While there was strong evidence of a desire for selecting committed staff, the means by which such commitment was determined in recruitment and selection were largely incoherent or absent entirely' (pg 414).
Whilst Hoque (1999) and McGunnigle (2000)'s findings are focused on the hotel sector, Lashley (1998) focuses his investigation on restaurants. Instead of using the entire bundles of HR practices, he argues that the management of human resources is influenced by the nature of service delivered by the operations and therefore the practice should be 'best fit', which means the approach should be fully integrated with the specific organisational and environmental context. Using matrices by Schmenner (1995) and Heskett et al (1990), Lashley (1998) has developed a model to identify different processes in service operations management and suggested the style of HRM which best fits it. He presents his views through the case studies of McDonald's and TGI Fridays which seems to fit the ideal types identified.
McDonald's is characterised as the 'service factory', wherein the service process is of low labour intensity and low customisation which means the management of employees is focused on the delivery of a consistent standardised service. Unlike using a personnel specialist, recruitment and selection is undertaken by unit management. Employee's own discretion and judgement as well as skills are not the major selection criteria since the McDonald's requires staff strictly follow the 'one best way' method through work study, work measurement and ergonomic techniques. Even more individual's personality is not seen as much important as by other employers as the language used in the service interaction are fixed. Selection is typically involves just simple interviews.
The TGI Fridays is a 'service shop'. Although offering standardised tangible products, it has a higher degree of customisation. In order to achieve generating an appropriate level of commitment, it adopts a different recruitment and selection approach from McDonalds. Since there are a lot of direct customer interactions, the ability to advise and interpret customer needs is an important criterion. Various selection techniques such as psychometric test, role-plays and up to four interviews are used to access the creativity and the right personality of potential candidates. Above average qualification is required with a 'good clutch' of GCSEs is minimum. On the contrary, prior similar industry experience is not a must since training will be provided.
When relate their approaches to theoretical and conceptual explanations of good practice, it shows they are relatively unsophisticated. However, Lashley (1998) do appreciates and argues that:
Having discussed at some length the recruitment and selection practices from empirical research now turns to consider the contribution of the stakeholders to the development of people management in the hospitality industry. A relevant research is carried out towards the leading worldwide hospitality company, Marriott International, which is ranked as one of the best places to work 2004 for by Fortune Magazine (). Its recruitment is opened for all people regardless of gender, age, disability, ethnic background, or sexual orientation. Job description and person specification are used. Instead of focusing on one's skills, Marriott looks for candidates with the right attitude especially on their thinking, leadership, drive for results, team working and implementation. Interview is used by which the questions are based on candidate's past working experience and episodic questioning. To ensure all the recruitment policies are adhered to, the interview is undertaken by two recruitment leaders and they are trained in advanced with the interview skills.
Though interview is cost saving, its predictive validity, reliability and fairness are only to some extent. Interviewer maybe subjective and some questions cannot really reflect whether the candidate has the 'right attitude'. Question 2.5, for instance, surely for all candidates will give positive answer since they know the importance of teamwork in the hospitality industry. However, will they contribute to the team or will they have social loafing in real situation? This is what cannot be proved through the interview. (See Appendix I- IV)
Price (1994) gives poor comments on the contribution of the Government and organisations. He argues that despite there is obvious evidence showing that disciplinary procedures, equal opportunities and recruitment policies are rarely carried out in the predominance of SMEs, the Government has committed to deregulate the labour market. On the other hand, the industry - level bodies, the HCTC and the BHA also have only little influence to improve the employment practices.
In conclusion, the good practice approaches used to recruitment and selection in the hospitality industry is only to some extent. The discussion here shows nearly all the organisations have an explicit desire to recruit committed people. Nevertheless, it also shows that there is a strong correlation between the size of firm and the level of sophisticated recruitment and selection approach (Price, 1994). Though some of the large hotels appear to have sophisticated and highly developed policies and procedures, it only represents a small proportion of the hospitality industry. On the contrary, the predominance of SMEs largely carry out on an informal basis such as using word of mouth contact for recruitment which may include being breach of current employment law. Interview is still the dominant selection tool, despite its poor performance which may lead to employers recruiting the inappropriate people and high labour turnover (Jameson, 1999).
Unlike the retailing industry as stated at the beginning, the nature of the hospitality sector proves that there is no one best way for recruitment and selection. On the contrary, in order to achieve competitive advantage, many authors (Lashley, 1998; Nickson, 2002; Worsfold, 1999) agree that the HRM approach should be more 'best fit' than 'best practice', which is contingent and context specific. The stakeholders should also put efforts to improve the current poor situation (Price, 1994).