InterContinental Hotels Group Plc (IHG) is the world's largest hotel operator by bedroom numbers and it operates mainly in the upscale and midscale market. The Group also holds controlling stake of Britvic, the UK's second largest soft drinks manufacturer. The Group owns, leases, manages and franchises around 3,500 hotels with 535,000 bedrooms in nearly 100 countries. It is the UK's second largest hotel group after Whitbread Plc. Since its demerger from Six Continents (formerly Bass Plc) in 2003, IHG has been focusing on transforming itself from a hotel owner into a hotel management and franchise company. At present, the Group aims to expand its hotel business in the mainland China.
At the end of 2004, the Group operating profit has increased by 17% than the prior year. The Group has a higher gearing level yet it is more or less than its key competitors within the UK hospitality industry. IHG is one of the FTSE 100 index companies. As at 31 October 2004, the P/E ratio of the Group is 18.6, much higher than the industry average and its key competitors. Although there is no great difference of the share value of IHG at the same date one year after, the Group has a desirable stock market valuation. IHG even has a better performance than the competitors and has outperformed the FTSE 100 index during the past 6 months.
Various brokers express optimistic estimations for the future business of IHG and recommend investors to buy its shares. In the first half of 2005, the RevPAR of IHG has increased 8.1%. The Group has also successfully finished almost of the asset disposal programme and gain management and franchise agreements. Its good corporate image and the match of the hotel operations to meet the mainland Chinese needs suggest that the IHG could gain lucrative returns from the Chinese market.
Together with the positive prospects of the future of global hospitality industry, all these suggest that there is room for market capitalisation growth of IHG. In light of this, it is recommended that buying IHG shares at current market price is a good decision before its future rise as a result of higher demand.
InterContinental Hotels Group Plc (IHG) was formerly known as Bass. In 2000, the Group finally exited the brewing business to the international hospitality retail sector with the name of Six Continents (ihgplc.com). In April 2003, Six Continents Plc separated into two groups, IHG comprising the hotel operations worldwide with the controlling stake of Britvic (the UK's second largest soft drinks manufacturer), and Mitchells and Butlers PLC (MAB) comprising the retail business (ihgplc.com).
The company's corporate headquarter is in Windsor, UK. At present, IHG is the world's largest hotel group by number of rooms (Mintel, 2004). It has a total of 3540 owned, leased, managed and franchised hotels and 534,202 guestrooms across nearly 100 countries under a wide range of brands mainly encompassing the upscale and midscale markets. IHG also owns the world's largest hotel loyalty programme, Priority Club Rewards, with over 26 million members (ihgplc.com). IHGis the UK's second largest hotel group after Whitbread Plc (Mintel, 2004). The Group strategy and the portfolio of its hotel business are illustrated in Table 1 and Table 2.
The performance of IHG is analysed through the reports and accounts published by IHG for the last available accounting year. This is supported by Holmes et al (2005), with the notion that an annual financial report of a company is the principal way for different stakeholders to understand the activities, progress and future plans of that company. The IHG financial statements, including the profit and loss account (P&L account), the balance sheet and the cash flow statement are therefore investigated. Financial ratios are used to facilitate the examination of the business financial health position and performance. They also assist the comparison against competitors and averages within the industry (Atrill and McLaney, 2002). According to Mintel (2004), IHG's major competitors in the UK hospitality sector are the Hilton Group Plc (HG) and the Whitbread Plc (WTB); therefore they are used to evaluate IHG's market position in the industry. Other main competitors, including Millennium & Copthorne Hotels Plc, De Vere Group Plc, and CHE Hotel Group Plc are also used to obtain the industry averages of different aspects of business performance. All exceptional items of the businesses are excluded to get a like-for-like comparison.
Despite the general limitations when utilising financial statements to evaluate the wealth a business (Atrill and McLaney, 2002), it is important to note that there are additional limitations of IHG financial statements. Firstly, IHG has changed its financial year end from 30 September to 31 December since 2003 as a consequence of the period covered by its financial statements (i.e. P&L account, cash flow statement) is 12 months ended 31 December 2004, while 15 months ended 31 December 2003. Secondly, the performance of MAB before the separation is also included in the financial statements of 2003 which represents 20% of the total revenue (IHG Annual Report, 2004, pp 38). Averages of 2003 figures are taken to a basis of 12 months in this report, yet it is believed that there are deviations with the true view of the Group performance. To gain a better comparison, the unaudited 2003 P & L account, which is on a 12 months basis with the exclusion of MAB business is therefore used.
The performance of IHG is evaluated from different aspects: profitability, workforce,
returns to shareholders, efficiency and liquidity, and long term financial position.
The above ratios are utilized as they assist the evaluation of a company's ability in generating profitability (Watson and Head, 2004). As illustrated in Table 3 and Table 4, IHG's overall profitability in 2004 has increased following the hotel industry recovery from the impact of global insecurity and SARS (WTO, 2005d). Regardless the decrease of turnover in Americas and only a slight growth in total hotel revenue, together with declined operating profit of the soft drink business, the increased managed and franchise hotel business of the Group gain benefits of reduction in cost of sales as a result of higher gross profit margin and a significant increase in total operating income with 17%. The hotel businesses across the three geographical sectors, particularly in EMEA and Asia Pacific region show improvements as a result of 25.5% growth in operating profit. The overall RevPAR has also increased by 2.4% to 4126m.
The rise in net profit margin indicates that IHG has efficiently controlled the costs (i.e. operating, administrative, distribution) in the generation of revenue from sales. Moreover, a higher turnover is generated despite the 10.7% decline in total capital invested in 2004 showing that there are improvements in the Group's productive efficiency. All these cost control and productive efficiencies result to an increase in net profit available to ordinary shareholders.
Externally, IHG shows a better profitability performance than both key competitors and industry average. The net asset turnover ratio is suggested to be under the average however it is attributed from the huge turnover with high cost of sales of Hilton Group (Appendix A). Therefore, the significance of comparing with the average of this ratio is relatively low, while IHG still shows a better productive efficiency than the others.
Regarding the labour force, the growth in both revenue and profit per employee as shown in Table 5 reveal that there are improvements in the productivity of the IHG workforce. However, the average spending on employee has declined by 1.7% (IHG Annual Report, 2004, note 4). Particularly there is 20% less paying for wages and salaries to staff. One possible reason is that a larger sum of money is needed to meet the increased pension contributions required by the UK government (hospitalitynet, 2004).
With reference to Watson and Head (2004), the ratios in Table 6 are the primary ratios for shareholders to assess the returns on their investment. In 2004, the total shareholders' funds is reduced to 1977m, a 23% less than previous year. This is attributed to the share capital restructuring of IHG by two consecutive share repurchase programmes during the year (IHG Annual Report, 2004, note 30). The considerable increase in earnings (51%) and the effect of repurchase programmes lead to a better outcome on the return of profit available to ordinary shareholders. The share capital consolidation with new share nominal value of 112p further reduces the number of ordinary shares from 739m to 622m at the end of the fiscal year, and consequently, a higher earning per share occurs. Following the share buy-back programme, 501m was returned to shareholders by way of a special dividend of 72 pence per share. Table 7 presents the composition of dividends. Excluding the effect of special dividend, shareholders received a 6% higher fully year dividend than in 2003. All these factors help explaining the significant changes to the above IHG investment ratios.
The price earnings ratio (P/E) of IHG as at 31 October 2003 was very high. Though it shows a significant decrease to 18.59 at the same date one year after, the Group still holds a relatively higher P/E ratio among the comparatives. According to Koch (2000), a business having a P/E ratio more than 17 means that the stock market is at or near a temporary peak. In light of this, it can be suggested that shareholders gain a large sum of returns from IHG which is higher than those from other companies at the current period. On the other hand, it could also deduce that the potential growth of IHG is experiencing saturation (Koch, 2000).
The efficiency of working capital management and the short term financial position of the Group could be evaluated from the ratios of Table 8 (Atrill and McLaney, 2002). There is a slight increase in debtor days. The declined and relatively low current and acid test ratios suggest a worsening liquidity position for IHG. The more reliable ratio of operating cash flows to maturing obligations reveals that the working capital is not effectively managed by the Group and there might be problems for IHG to cover its short term financial obligations (Atrill and McLaney, 2002).
The cash flow statement further provides a better insight for the liquidity and viability of the business (Watson and Head, 2004). As shown in Table 9, cash inflow from trading activities of IHG was 515m, including a 71m for special pension contributions. These cash generated from operating activities are the primary source of finance used to fund the ongoing operating expenses, tax and interest payments, capital expenditure and dividend payments (Watson and Head, 2004). The Group shows a better control on capital expenditure with 257m, 27% less than 2003. 106m was generated from hotel disposal proceeds. However, there is a net cash outflow of 338m after the total dividend payment of 626m.
The impact of this current liquidity position is twofold. Firstly, as dividends and tax liabilities are cash transactions, there are risks that IHG would be incapable to pay the proposed dividends to shareholders. On the other hand, it also implies that there would be financial problems for IHG to repay the amounts owning in the short term to their suppliers.
The long-term financial capital utilized by IHG to fund its investment is mainly come from three sources: share equity, retained profits and debt finance (Atrill and McLaney, 2002). The total shareholders' funds is reduced by 23% following the share capital consolidation, share repurchase programme, and the deficit of profit and account. Besides, there is significant increase in both short term and long term debt. The Group's borrowings and its net debt are presented in Table 10 and Table 11. It reveals that IHG has to repay nearly double of the debt than the previous year.
These changes have significant influence on the long term financial position of the Group. It could be examined through the gearing ratios (Jagels and Coltman, 2004). As illustrated in Table 12, a higher level of gearing has occurred to finance the business of IHG. A possible explanation for this is that IHG needs to generate enough cash flow to support its asset disposals in return for management contracts and increasing potential for greater returns to shareholders. Although the Group's gearing level is relatively higher than the industry average, it is more or less than its key competitors.
The decreased total assets and increased total liabilities also impose a negative impact on the solvency level for IHG. It is even much lower than the industry average. As the Group is moving focus from asset ownership to management and franchise businesses, 121 hotels were sold since 2003 and the tangible fixed assets have been decreased by 175m at the end of 2004. Table 13 demonstrates the hotel ownership patterns of IHG and HG indicating that the proportion of hotels owned and leased by IHG is very small. Additionally, nearly 30% of the lands and buildings of e Group are under operating lease rentals (IHG Annual Report, 2004, note 19). It could be suggested that there would be a gradual decline in the total tangible fixed assets of IHG by its continual hotel disposals despite a small number of acquisitions.
As indicated by the fixed to current assets ratio in Table 8, hotel business is a high fixed-cost operation implying that shareholders bear more financial risks under this highly-geared situation. The notion is that a small decline in IHG profits would result to a greater decline in shareholders' returns. There are also greater risks that IHG might be incapable to repay the debt to the lending institutions. Nevertheless, IHG shows a higher and safer level of profit coverage to the interest payable than the prior year. This could give more confidence to both shareholders and lenders that the Group has the ability to generate enough profits to meet its interest commitments and give higher returns.
To summarize, IHG has a better operating performance than the other competitors for the year 2004, with a higher P/E ratio and has returned more dividends to shareholders with the effect of special dividends. With regard to the Chairman's review, it has presented all the positive results of the Group performance and are consistent with the above analysis. Nevertheless, in order to maintain confidence of stakeholders to the company, the weaknesses of the business are not mentioned. For instance, the total hotels turnover has only increased by 0.7% than the prior year. The growth of hotels operating profit has also been generalised to the contributions of the three regions mentioned in the Chairman's review. The fact is that the trading in Americas has just improved slightly with 1.2% growth in operating profit. Besides, its weakening liquidity situation is not declared that a net cash outflow of 338m is occurred after the payment for special dividends. Yet the refinanced debt facilities and its advantages have been presented to the public, the high debt level of the Group and its increased gearing are not stated. Since all these factors would merely threaten the corporate image, the chairman has omitted them and rather makes promises for the future such as the further return of huge amount of funds to shareholders in order to provide an optimistic future for the business.
Table 14 summarizes the major factors of the current economic situation from both global and national perspectives that might influence the business of IHG, using a LE PEST framework.
Firstly, the hospitality industry is exposed to the threats of terrorism with the latest incident occurred last month in Amman, the capital of Jordan where 3 hotels were bombed (CatererSearch.com, 2005). Although the increasing trend of global tourism suggests that terrorism has little impact on people confidence to travel around, it is only limited to those unaffected destinations (World Tourism Organisation (WTO), 2005a). According to PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC, 2005), the slowdown of UK economy together with the bomb attacks in London have adversely affected UK hotel businesses. While PWC (2005) claims that the impact of attacks will be short-lived with little effect on hotel performance outside the capital, more recently, the UK police commissioner warns that the country is still being a top target for terrorists (BBCnews, 2005a). Certainly it would further generate a significant influence on tourist confidence travelling to the UK. Furthermore, companies are facing with increased insurance premiums as a result of terrorism (BBCnews, 2005b,c). IHG might be unable to cover the cost of insuring its business and employees in case of terrorist attacks.
The labour-intensive nature of hotel business is also affected by the UK legislations in relation to increased minimum wage and pensions contributions (hospitalitynet, 2004). Total payroll cost per available room has raised (hospitalitynet, 2005a) and the government has announced its initiatives to further raise the minimum wage (BBCnews, 2005d). Besides, IHG has a pension deficit of 172m in 2004 (IHG Annual Report, 2004), it could be suggested that its profitability might be threatened by the increased pension funds.
Climate change and epidemic pose serious impact on hospitality businesses (WTO, 2005b,c). This is revealed by the previous incidents of SARS, Indian Ocean seaquake, tsunami and Hurricanes Katrina and Rita (WTO, 2005a). With increasing concerns of the widespread avian flu epidemic in Europe nowadays, it is blamed that the over-reaction by the media would create unnecessary panic to people and hence discourage international tourism (WTO, 2005c).
Despite the adverse effects of hurricanes and raising oil price, US has reported economic recovery with 4.3% annual growth rate (BBCnews, 2005e). Regarding the hospitality sector, besides the positive results of US tourism for the year 2004 as reported by the WTO (WTO, 2005d), the Smith Travel Research (hospitalitynet, 2005b) estimates that there will be growing demand of hotel rooms with 8.1% increase for RevPAR in the US lodging industry in 2005. Certainly, IHG would be benefited from it since its number of hotels in the Americas amounted to 79% of the total hotel system (Table 13).
Yet the high oil prices do not discourage tourism demand at present (WTO, 2005e), the revenue of IHG would be hindered from high cost of sales. Fluctuation in currency exchange rates between the UK sterling and other currencies, particularly the US dollar and Euro would affect also the Group's profit, net asset and interest cover.
The recovery of the world economy, Iraq war, SARS, together with increasing upper socio-economic groups, WTO expresses optimistic view on global tourism with forecast for tourism growth shows 1.56 billion international arrivals by 2020 (WTO, 2005d). However, there will be changes in travel destinations as shown in Figure 1, with growing popularity of East Asia and the Pacific while reverse for Europe and Americas. People are more affluent nowadays which has encouraged more leisure travel (WTO, 2005d; Mintel, 2004). There is also strong growth for mainland Chinese tourism and the Chinese are regarded as one of the top tourism spenders (WTO, 2005d). Since most Chinese travellers are more likely to choose mid-priced accommodation (Mok and Defranco, 1999), the Holiday Inn brands of IHG which focus on serving the mid-scale market would gain competitive advantages.
With the wide exposure of information technology around the world, people pursuing nowadays are high speed internet access and a variety of entertainment technologies such as videophones (BBCnews, 2005f). This has generated on-line booking trends and growing demand of entertainment technologies in hotels (CatererSearch.com, 2005). On the other hand, driven by the increasing usage of cellular mobile with prediction of two billion users by the end of 2005, it is reported that there is continual decline in hotel telecom revenues (hospitalitynet, 2005a). If IHG fails to keep pace in technology investment to meet customer demand, it would probably lose competitive advantages.
Figure 2 shows the market share value trend from 31Oct 2004 to the same date
of the current year. There is only slight growth for IHG than the prior year while both Hilton Group Plc and Whitbread Plc have outperformed the FTSE 100 index.
Table 15 presents the shares valuation of the three groups. HG reflects a greater market capitalization than IHG for the current year though it has the lowest asset value per share. Watson and Head (2004) stress the unreliability of it since the figure does not reflect the current asset value of a company. It is important to note that though IHG has a relatively low strength of share value, the share volume during the period from November to April 2005 is still high. This suggests that investors are still confident of the future prospects of the company though it has a high P/E ratio and weak liquidity situation at the end of 2004.
As shown in Figure 3, IHG even shows a better performance than the competitors and its growth rate has outperformed the FTSE 100 index during the past 6 months. Nevertheless, the strength of its market value is affected by the industry sector. The announcement from HG with its initiative to reunify with the US Hilton Hotels Corporation (HHC) on 14 Oct 2005 (Birmingham Post, 2005) lead to expansion in both share price and volume of IHG (Cranage, 2005), while there is decline on 25 Oct as a result of the negative news from the WTB (EveningStandard, 2005).
Various brokers express optimistic estimations for the future business of IHG and recommend investors to buy its shares (DigitalLook, 2005; Thomson, 2005; YahooFinance, 2005). Although past performance shows that there is a decreasing trend of the Group revenue (ThomsonOneBanker, 2005), the fact is that the business of MAB was also included before the separation. Therefore, it could not provide a full picture of the performance of IHG. Rather, the Group reports 8.1% growth of RevPAR in the first half of 2005 (Turner, 2005) and positive cash flow (IHG interim report, 2005). Besides, it has successfully finished almost of its disposal programme (Garrahan, 2005) and gain management and franchise agreements (ihgplc.com). Its good corporate image and the match to meet the mainland Chinese needs suggest that the Group could achieve its aim of gaining lucrative returns from the Chinese market. Furthermore, the floatation of the Group's 47.5% stake of Britvic (SundayBusiness, 2005), the adverse impact of the completion deal of HG with HHC, the rumours of possible bid from Starwood (Saigol, 2005), together with the positive prospects of the future of the global hospitality industry, all these imply that there is room for market capitalisation growth of IHG. In light of this, it is suggested that buying IHG shares at current market price is a good decision before its future rise as a result of higher demand.