Humean scepticism is not preferable to Cartesian scepticism. The fundamentally different approaches taken by Descartes and Hume make the conclusions that each reach only applicable to the individual projects undertaken. The conclusions reached by Hume are limited to the belief in the existence of the external world. Descartes scepticism however is greater in scope. Hume's scepticism is also at fault at concerning the methods he uses to doubt such as his ideas of reducing probabilities and his subscribtion to the notion of sense datum. Descartes methods of casting doubt onto both the senses and reason are more plausible.
Hume's scepticism is based on an idea that it is not possible to have certain knowledge and that as such, all our cases of knowledge are probabilities. I would deny that these probabilities always reduce to zero due to human fallibility and that this fault fundamentally undermines Hume's scepticism.
Cartesian scepticism accepts only cases of knowledge that are indubitable and the three arguments given that illustrate our inability to have certainty are acceptable and though attempts have been made to answer the questions poses by Descartes, I believe the questions to remain unanswered.
I shall begin by defining some key terms and distinctions that will be used in this essay. I shall analyse the two forms of scepticism and the ideas that they are based on, such as the requirement of knowledge to be indubitable or that knowledge is probability based and that will ultimately reduce to zero.
There are those who in philosophy use the term "perceive" to describe many actions. Thoughts, for instance may be described as "perceptions". In this essay, the term perceive will only apply to information received through the senses.
Scepticism can act to different degrees. Some scepticism can show beliefs to be false, whereas other forms may simply show that there is not certainty in cases of knowledge or that a method of acquiring knowledge is fallible. There must therefore be a distinction made between scepticism that shows 'doubt' and scepticism that shows beliefs to be false. Further distinctions have been made between 'doubt' and 'suspension of judgement' and these shall also be discussed.
Hume and Descartes are approaching scepticism from two different directions. A fundamental distinction between the two is that Descartes is considered a rationalist, while Hume is considered an empiricist. I would not consider his distinction to be overly relevant in this debate as in Hume's argument he, quickly dismisses perception and reason (though his distinction between reason and the imagination may be questionable) as the source of some of Human beliefs. Descartes' scepticism is also able to 'doubt' knowledge based on reason and perception, though he later relies on reason for his foundational belief.
Descartes is sceptical because he is unhappy with the current state that his beliefs are in. His method of scepticism is to abandon all knowledge learned through methods that are uncertain. In this way he first abandons anything learned empirically because the senses have been proven to be imperfect and because he cannot be sure that he is not either dreaming or in a delusionary state. He then abaondons even mathematical reason and anything learned a priori because, he may be being deceived by a malicious demon. With this method of grouping together beliefs, he has limited his knowledge to the one foundational belief that he believes to be certain.
Hume's approach is different because his project is very different. Hume is attempting to understand human nature. In exploring this matter he sceptically considers whether the human body exists. This question leads him to contemplate the causes of beliefs in "the continued existence of objects" and the belief that objects have "existence distinct from the mind and perception"(Hume, D. p. 238 XXXX). His interest is in the causes of these beliefs rather than if they are true, or even justified.
Descartes rejection of perception as a cause of knowledge begins with the simple fact that he has been deceived by his senses in the past and that it is prudent to "never entirely trust those who have once cheated you" (Descartes, R. p.62 XXXX). For a person to know that they have been deceived however, they must have been corrected (Kenny, A. 1997). A person would only know that a tower that appeared to be round from a distance was in fact square, if they were able to correct that belief. The problem here could be in the choice of when to accept perceptions as knowledge:
Perceptions that may not be corrected could give knowledge. For this to be the case however, there would need to be certainty over what could or could not be corrected. It is not clear that this is so. Descartes only needs to show that there can be times when perceptions are able to deceive, and is therefore able to cast doubt on the ability of the senses to produce knowledge.
Descartes actually only relies on this argument for a small amount of perceptions. Some perceptions seem too simple to doubt:
The doubt of all that is received through the senses is then reliant on the notion that a person may be dreaming or in a delusionary state. Some of the arguments against this proposal are opposing the idea that dreams are 'qualitatively indistinguishable'. Arguments point out the differences between dreams-states and the awake-state. These criticisms fail to notice that this is not a problem, as long as people have believed that they are awake when they have in fact been dreaming. Descartes (XXXX) even concedes that there are differences between dream-states and awake-states, that: "dreams are never connected by memory with all the other events of my life". It would be fair to say that dreams are not permanently qualitatively distinguishable, or indistinguishable and that this lack of clarity allows Descartes' doubts.
Hume and Descartes would appear to agree that the senses cannot produce indubitable cases of knowledge. When Hume argues that the senses are unable to produce the belief that objects have continued and distinct existence he appeals to his belief in 'sense datum'. The senses tell us nothing about the actual world:
The belief sense datum need not be required to dismiss the ability of the senses to produce knowledge. Hume's (XXXX) dismissal of reason states that: "all knowledge
degenerates into probability". Anything learned through the senses would therefore be induced learning and subject to the problems of induction. While Descartes is explicit about the need for indubitability, Hume is less interested, though he does mention:
Hume is more focused on the causes of beliefs rather than finding truths or justified beliefs.
These differences in overall project greatly affect the two forms of scepticism. Hume for instance ignores the question of whether he actually has a body (a subject that Descartes dedicates quite some time to):
The body is also taken for granted in many of Descartes arguments but as Descartes' project is more far-reaching, concerned with more than the causes of knowledge he obviously investigates this.
It is questionable as to how seriously Hume and Descartes actually take their scepticism. They both make comments on the fact that this level of scepticism disregarding so many previously held beliefs being unreasonable in ordinary life. When considering how he will operate after considering his scepticism Descartes concedes: "I willingly slip back into my old opinions" (Descartes, R. p.65 XXXX). Hume equally confesses: "neither I, nor any other person was ever sincerely and constantly of that opinion." (Hume, D. p234 XXXX) when contemplating whether he should sincerely believe his own scepticism.
Hume's scepticism regarding reason, begins by stating that:
Hume (XXXX) asserts that: "in all demonstrative sciences the rules are certain" but that humans are fallible and that in every reasoning we must check to see how many times that they have acted according with the rule and how many times they have not. At this stage in Hume's reasoning I would agree. Even for a rule that has always produced certain definite and true answers, the rule is limited by the problem of induction. If Hume at this point made a similar declaration to Descartes about the need for indubitablity of knowledge, this would be sound.
Hume further argues that any rule (or case of knowledge) would be subject to further amendment based on the probability of the understanding of the person involved. If a person were "foolish and ignorant" they would have a lower probability to a person with "solid sense and long experience" (Hume, D. p 233 XXXX). This probability would surely already (at least partly) have been included in the first probability. Hume (XXXX) then purports that, having found new uncertainty, the probability must be amended again this cycle will continue until the probability degenerates to zero.
Hume's argument is widely considered to be incorrect:
This attempt to discredit reason is because Hume is searching for the cause of human belief in the external world.