The most plausible account of meaning would be an atomist view that originates with a form of causation, but one that also accepts the influence and effects of the community and society on language.
This essay will examine some of the various accounts of meaning, assessing the positive and negative aspects of the theories and will ultimately draw conclusions as to what I find to be the most plausible.
The theories that this essay will primarily address are: The Griceian theory, The verificationist theory, Linguistic externalism and the causal theory. There are many terms and distinctions made by these accounts and these will be explored with the theories.
It is my opinion that a large number of problems in debating meaning stems directly from the problems of language. The fact that words have multiple uses and 'meanings', and that there are not words for some actions or objects, cause problems. Even the term 'meaning' is affected by this confusion of meanings:
The various accounts of meaning are so incompatible, because they are in fact accounts of different types of meaning, whether it propositonal, utterance or individual word meaning. While it is accepted that philosophers have made these distinctions: "philosophers of language have found it necessary to distinguish between sentences, meanings, statements and propositions, among other things..." (Martinich, A. P. p.30 2001) the level of compatibility/incompatibility is not always fully discussed.
Grice made a distinction between two senses of the word meaning. There is a sense that to 'mean' is to indicate: "Those spots mean you have measles" (Grice, H. P. 1957 p. 377). There is however another sense that is more important to Grice that he labels 'non-natural meaning'. This is the actual meaning of a sentence or utterance. This 'non-natural meaning' is abbreviated to 'meaningNN'. Grice's attitude is that meanings are 'in the head', that intention is essential for an utterance to be meaningful. Grice's theory is essentially:
This description mentions nothing about using a language that is recognised by a community and so at this point is susceptible to criticisms concerning communities communicating without a common language. Grice purports that, to say "x meansNN that so-and-so" is derived from "A meantNN something by x". That, speaker meaning is derived from utterance meaning.
This is to say that meaning comes from, or is at least influenced by the community using it. With this attempt to constrain his theory, I believe that Grice has found an important aspect of meaning. However, issues remain with this theory. The case given by Searle (1971) in what is a speech act of an American soldier speaking German words with the intention of making Italian soldiers believe that he is German, clearly show that this model for meaning may be applicable to utterance meaning, but is not widely acceptable. In fact Grice (1957) even talks about other 'acts' such as deliberately frowning to convey displeasure that also fit this model and are acceptable.
I would argue that Grice has provided an adequate theory of utterance (or some kind of communication) meaning that is able to explain features of language that other accounts of meaning cannot such as sarcasm and metaphors. Its detection of intent, and detection of recognition of intent are important to communication, but this account of meaning does not cover a more fundamental account of meaning that must be understood before these complexities should be attempted. I would argue that sentences could be understood in a literal sense before even considering the intentions of the speaker. This difference of meaning is well illustrated by Austin (1961): "You know, I haven't the least idea what he means, unless it could be that he simply means what he says." An utterance may have meaning that is different to the words, but the meanings of the words themselves are also essential.
Another account of meaning that I consider to be successful, but slightly misguided is that of the Verificationists or Logical Positivists. That this account is only applicable to propositions is initially concerning as it would seem to be very limited.
For a proposition to be meaningful for the verificationists, it must be empirically verifiable or an analytic truth. A proposition does not need to be true, but its' truth-value must be ascertainable. Problems exist when trying to define what makes a proposition verifiable. Must the truth-value be conclusively provable (if this is even possible), or would a high probability be acceptable. Many of the objections to this theory are because it poses as an account of 'meaning'. I do not consider this to be so. This theory is able to uncover senseless propositions, but to imply that anything other than empirically verifiable propositions are meaningless is surely mistaken. A moral statement's meaning may be questionable and something more subjective, but could it really be described as meaningless?
Linguistic externalism moves away from this view of meanings being in the head, but to a view that is less plausible. The argument for this externalism as championed by Putnam is dependant on a distinction between 'extension' and 'intension'. The Externalists believe that extension plays a role in the meaning of a word. Putnam believes that his 'twin thought experiment' proves extension to play a part in meaning. A planet that is the same as earth in every way, with the exception of the substance that we call on earth 'water' and know to be described by the chemical formula H20, is in fact something else on 'twin earth'. It is described by the formula 'XYZ' but is referred to by the same name of 'water'. Putnam concludes that water does not have the same meaning on both planets. This is a supposed proof that extension is involved in meaning. It is not clear that this is so. Aside from the very implausible coincidence of a world identical in all respects (including language) with the exception of the chemical composition of the 'water' on 'twin earth', there is no reason that we should compare these two planets. As we are to presume that they are independent, we should not expect language to be identical.
Putnam's argument that psychological states do not play a part in meaning is even at fault (though I also believe that they have no effect). Putnam (1973) asserts that people on earth and twin earth would use the term 'water' with the same intention (and so, psychological state), but he believes with different meaningsNN. We allow for different languages and communities on earth using the identical with different meanings or different words with the same meaning, and this is another example of different communities using different languages.
Putnam does make reference to an idea that I would consider very important to meaning. In discussing who can actually identify water, Putnam mentions that societies often refer to experts:
The community therefore becomes linguistically deferential to the experts. I would argue that this is not merely something that applies to the realms of science and technical definitions. In the same way that a child generally is linguistically deferential to adults, the majority of the population is deferential to experts in the field of language.
If a person does not know the meaning of a word or would like a more accurate definition, they will use a dictionary to find the meaning of the word. The dictionary becomes the source of meaning. The question of meaning then becomes, "how does the lexicographer know the meaning of the word?"
The lexicographer is merely presenting the language as used by a community.
After objects, actions and concepts have been named, (thus receiving their meaning causally), this is the way that I see communities learn meaning, and how meaning is able to change. A dictionary is effectively a catalogue of meanings of words produced by a community. It makes maintaining a 'causal chain' from the naming simpler. Dictionaries are however subject to change, new words are added and meanings updated reflecting the language that is also changing. If a word is misused, or used differently to apply to something new and this word becomes used commonly by a community, it will be incorporated into that communities' language and will therefore be added to their dictionary.
The Millian view of meaning is that words simply stand for the object that they refer to. The theory applies to both nouns and adjectives, but I see no reason that it not be extended to all words. Kripke asserts that the linking of a word to an object comes from a naming ceremony (though this need not be formal). The meaning is passed on through communities and eventually people who were not present at the ceremony will come to understand the meaning of the word. This according to Kripke is as follows:
This account of meaning does not consider meaning to be internal or external. Names are arbitrary and attached to certain objects or actions or concepts.
This 'causal chain of reference' maintains that words are used in the same way as was intended in the original naming. I would argue that it also accounts for how a name might change over time. If a name is used incorrectly, and this use is overheard and assumed to be the correct usage this could create a new 'causal chain'. There will even be a time when users of the word may not know the origins of the word, but understand the meaning.
An atomist view of meaning does not necessarily accept all words to be the same and subject to the same rules. Mill actually makes distinctions between different types of names: general and singular, and concrete and abstract. For the general-single distinction, Mill gives the example of "man" and "John" (Mill, J.S. 1881). Man can be "truly affirmed in the same sense, of each of an indefinite number of things." 'Man' expresses certain qualities, and these qualities are true for all cases of 'man'. This is not the case for 'John'. While it is the name of many people, it does not indicate any qualities common to all bearers of the name John.
The meaning of 'man' could be found easily in a dictionary and the attributes described would describe all cases of 'man'. The meaning of 'John' however would not, and would need to be an exact description of this person. A description featuring: birth date, fingerprint, DNA, brief aesthetic description should be conclusive. It is conceivable that two people may exactly fit the above criteria (identical twins would share birthday and have identical DNA, and could possibly have finger-prints similar enough to be confused) but these cases will be very rare and further criteria may be added to further distinguish (i.e. 'was born first'). I would argue that these 'singular names' are subject to very different rules to the majority of language, but they do not pose a problem to a causal atomist view of language and meaning.
This essay has discussed some of the most popular accounts of meaning assessing positive and negative aspects of each and concluding that the most plausible account of meaning I have found is the 'Causal Theory'. Some accounts were dismissed, as they did not completely fit the criteria of a theory of meaning. Accounts that only considered propositions were obviously limited to only explaining the meaning of propositions. Accounts of utterance meaning though also somewhat successful in their own right were also dismissed, as I believe a more basic account is requires. The 'Causal Theory' avoids the idea that meaning is derived from intention or that it is affected by the extension of a word. It is also able to give an atomic view of meaning which is something that I consider to be most important. The continued influence of society must also be considered as language and meanings are not fixed and are liable to change.