This doctrine is successful in proving that space and time are human intuitions, yet is misguided in suggesting that space and time are not also feature of an objective world. It straddles the line between realism and idealism, but is unable to avoid the scepticism related to realism, as it is not able to prove how appearances can be produced by the external world.
Kant's doctrine of Transcendental Idealism is a bold theory attempting to correctly describe the relationship between the knowing subject and the external world and explain how it is possible for that subject to have knowledge of that external world.
This doctrine was borne out of Kant's dissatisfaction with the two most prevalent theories regarding the metaphysical nature of this relationship.
Realist's claim that there is an external objective world, and that we are able to know this world, and the objects that inhabit it 'in themselves'. Idealism conversely considers that the objects and world we experience to be mind dependant. Idealism is free from many of the sceptical worries regarding realism such as the concern that there may be a difference between how the world actually is and how it is perceived.
Kant opposes the common sense view that we experience the external world and that our experiences conform to that world. His Idealism is transcendental because he claims it can explain certain occurrences that realism cannot. Kant (1781) argues that we are able to have synthetic a priori knowledge and that this would not be possible if the realists were correct and we were actually able to know 'things in themselves'. Kant claims his Transcendental Idealism is able to explain how synthetic a priori knowledge is possible and therefore is the preferable theory. He compares this substitution of theories to The Copernican Revolution when Copernicus introduced a theory of how the solar system functioned that was better than the existing theory being used.
Kant views experience as a very active event. The agent receives intuitions from outer objects impinging on the senses. The sensibility then organises these intuitions spatially and temporally. The basic information received about the external world is given the attributes of space and time. The understanding then takes this processed information and applies concepts to it. The whole process is very active with the mind playing a vital role in the incident making experiences spacio-temporal and applying concepts despite the sense being impinged upon in a fairly passive manner. This theory of experience clearly shows Kant as an Idealist due to his belief in the mind dependence of experience.
Kant wishes to distance himself from the strong Idealist positions such as that of Berkley (Gardner 1999) as he considers it to reduce the empirical world to mere illusion. While Kant subscribes to an Idealist view in terms of accepting a level of mind dependence, he also posits the existence of 'things in themselves', something that Berkley denies (Gardner 1999). It is also necessary for Kant to do this, if he is to maintain "his claim that transcendental idealism agrees with our ordinary view of the empirical world" (Gardner, 1999 p. 271).
There is some disagreement about the nature of Transcendental Idealism. While Kant
may wish to distinguish his position from stronger or Berkleyan forms of Idealism, there are commentators such as Van Cleeve who consider TI to be much closer to an Idealist position. Van Cleeve (1999) concedes that Kant is not a complete Idealist as he does accept that the world contains a "noumenal element" but due to his attribution of much of the world to the phenomenal side (space, time, concepts) Van Cleeve believes that TI should be considered very much an Idealist position.
This argument seems fairly sound and certainly places Kant more firmly in the Idealist camp than some other commentators would agree with for instance Walker and Mathews with whom Van Cleeve takes issue. Van Cleeve does however construct some arguments in favour of TI being strongly idealist that do not have as much success:
This argument appears to be condemning all Idealism that is not a form of strong idealism. It appears to state that objects may only be mind dependant if they are entirely mind dependant. This seems to not only be a poor interpretation of TI (Kant expresses disapproval of Berkleyan idealism and posits 'things in themselves') but also a very crude way of approaching idealism. I would contest that it is entirely plausible that an external object could be a stimulus but, that the human interpretation of that stimulus could be unique and that agent not able to know the object as a 'thing in itself'. Secondary qualities would to be prime examples of this.
Van Cleeve also takes issue with the double aspect view of TI. This view considers that appearances have spacio-temporal form but objects as 'things in themselves' do not (Van Cleeve 1999). This could be considered this to merely be a tautology as to say that: "If things had no spatial characteristics, then they would have no spatial characteristics." (Van Cleeve 1999 p. 8). I would only regard this to be a tautology if TI does prove to be incorrect and that spatial characteristics are in fact in features of the objective external world and are not subjective human intuitions. If spatial characteristics really are as Kant (1781) proposes, it is essential to think of appearances and 'things in themselves' in this way.
One of Kant's strongest arguments for his TI is that it is able to explain how we are able to have propositions that are synthetic and a priori. Kant claims that we are able to know that some propositions are necessarily true (1781). Kant agrees with Hume that it is not possible to gain knowledge of a proposition being necessarily true through empirical means (Gardner 1999). For us to then have this knowledge indicates to Kant that we have an a priori intuition of space:
I would regard Kant's basic argument that it is only possible for propositions of geometry to be synthetic a priori if space is a subjective condition of intuition (Dicker 2004) to be mostly sound, though I would add that this does not rule out the possibility of space also being a feature of the objective world as well.
Problems do arise with this theory however, when considering if these propositions of geometry really are synthetic a priori. One particular proposition that is well contested, is that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line. Problems with this proposition vary from suggesting that this proposition is a posteriori or merely analytically true depending on the definitions of a straight line (Dicker 2004) to claiming the proposition is simply false as modern physics has proven Euclidean geometry to be false (Gardner 1999). This case is often used to discredit the credibility of TI, but I would argue that it is in fact a poor example and that others Kant gives such as the sum of two sides of a triangle always being greater than the third side (1781) are much harder to question. Though it may be possible to construct case for this also being an analytic proposition, this would only be possible if using a very detailed definition of a triangle. This definition would certainly not be one that is commonly used. This proposition would also appear to be more resilient to claims that it is only knowable a posteriori.
Some commentators (Gardner 1999) have identified weak and strong interpretations/conceptions of TI. Both versions consider space and time to be human intuitions, but the stronger version goes on to make a: "negative ontological claim about objects outside our cognition." (Gardner, 1999 p. 100). It claims that space and time do not exist in the real world. The weaker conception claims that we cannot know if things-in-themselves have spacio-temporal characteristics. The weaker form is much more defensible as it is not attempting to make claims about the nature of the world that do not seem verifiable.
As Kant claims that we are not able to know how things are in-themselves, only how they appear (Allison, 1983), it would not seem possible to make claims about how the world is apart from appearances. Kant actually attempts to use reason to prove that space and time are only subjective human intuitions, and that they are not objective features of the real world.
The existence of a priori necessary truths of geometry are used successfully as has been stated to show that agents must have the intuitions of space, but this argument is not sufficient to show that space and time are not real features of the objective world. That space is an intuition does seem to be the only explanation for how: "we can know them a priori and thus as necessary" (Gardner, 1999 p. 102). This argument does not however infer that space is not also a real feature of the world.
Kant's next suggestion is that if space and time are real we are required to accept that "our cognitive powers are capable of knowing two infinite and yet non-substantial things" (Gardner, 1999 .102) and that space and time "must continue to exist, even although all existing things be removed." (Kant, 1787 p. 89). This argument relies on the presupposition that we cannot have knowledge of "infinite non-substantial entities" (Gardner, 1999 .103). It would be acceptable to take issue with the lack of reasoning to support this presupposition, but this argument also appears to presuppose that to know space and/or time is to know them as infinite entities. I would contest that although space and time would be infinite, it is not necessary that agents know them as infinite entities.
Kant continues to argue that space and time: "consist in nothing but relations and that things in themselves cannot be constitutionally merely relational." (Gardner, 1999 .102). He also argues that space and time, if real would be "conditions of God's existence" (Gardner, 1999 .102). These points however also rest on debatable premises and presuppositions such as the concept of God being coherent (or that God must exist in space and time) and that things in themselves cannot be constitutionally relational (Gardner 1999). With these two details being far from fact, it does not seem possible for these arguments that space and time are not features of the objective world to be accepted.
As Kant has attributed two major features of reality (space and time) to subjective human sensibility, it would not seem unreasonable to question what is the nature of this external world. Kant distinguishes this external world of 'things in themselves' from the appearances that we entertain (1781). Kant does affirm the existence of 'things in themselves' and the existence of an external world (1781) but this is an unsubstantiated assertion as: "it does not concern the structure of experience, and indeed goes beyond experience" (Gardner, 1999 p 283). I would not consider there to be sufficient evidence from Kant to endorse this claim. Gardner maintains that Kant provides little to prove this point:
In attempts to rectify this omission, it could be proposed that 'things in themselves' exist as they are the cause of appearances, but this presupposes that appearances are the effects of something (Gardner 1999). Another point is to assert that: "the realm of appearance does not contain the reason for it's own existence" but this seems to be a mere rephrasing of the preceding argument.
Gardener (1999) attempts to support Kant's confirmation of the existence of thing in themselves by claiming that if appearances were not grounded in something external, they would need to be grounded internally and that this would make humans: "non-finite, God-like creators of themselves and all their objects". I do not see this to be an argument that may be derived from the idea that appearances could be grounded internally.
This vulnerability to sceptical concerns would not be an issue if taking Van Cleeve's (1999) reading of Kant and does appear to support the idea of considering TI as a strong form of idealism, but this is again against what Kant is proposing, as a theory in line with our ordinary view of the empirical world and would equate to making the empirical world an illusion (Gardner 1999). Kant does not however seem to be able to give appropriate argument to support these common sense assumptions.
I would argue that Kant is trying to overcome the sceptical problems associated with realism by compromising with idealist ideas and through the use of transcendental reflection (reasoning). This is where Kant allows himself to make the claim about things in themselves existing. This however is not reasonably justified and transcendental reflection is not able to posit things in themselves.