The railroad narrative of progress had a number of similarities which it shared with the axe and mill narratives, but there were far more differences. To an extent, the railroad narrative was seen as merely an extension of the previous narratives in that it allowed man to triumph over nature, the only difference being that more developed technology was involved in the process. However, this difference must not be underestimated as it had a major impact on the landscape as well as on the economic and political climate. Power was concentrated in the hands of a few corporations rather than the individual, which created many problems for the railroad workers; huge cities were built rather than villages and towns; the destruction of the environment was on a far greater scale; there were numerous accidents associated with the railroads and finally the actual railroad workers had poor reputations unlike those involved in the axe and mill narratives. This essay will compare the railroad narrative to the two which came before it, the axe and the mill narratives, and conclude that there were a far greater number of differences than there were similarities.
Like the axe and mill narratives, the railroad narrative was seen as beneficial to the United States as it helped to 'unify, dignify, expand and enrich the nation'. It was seen as being able to bind the nation together politically and economically: 'the construction of transport links became the equivalent of constructing the nation itself, in a process that could be seen epitomized in the growth of commerce and the establishment of new towns'. Between 1830 and the end of the century the railroad had expanded from a few miles of track to become absolutely vital to American life and commerce. The railroad linked the individual's actions to those of the national market. 'The settlement of the West and the building of the railroad system could thus be understood as a natural process in which the American people... overflowed their banks and surged into a new region. Expansion seemed a partnership between man and nature, ordained by the creator'. Settlement and progress were seen as railroad creations. The railroad was playing a central role in westward expansion, of which there seemed to be a certain sense of inevitability. The railroad was seamlessly integrated into both the national identity and the national economy.
Its technology was seen as being especially valuable as 'the railroad seemed the most obvious example of a liberating machine'. This was similar to the mill and axe narratives which had also lightened the workload of humans. 'The railroad company entered an undeveloped region and used its powerful technology to transform it, creating new towns and bringing new settlers', as was also the case with the axe and mill narratives. Americans often sought to integrate both nature and industrialization. The fact that the 'railroad was regarded as an engine of progress' means that it was inherently similar to the axe and mill narratives of progress in terms of its ultimate aims, despite it being far more technologically advanced. This was because many Americans, such as Ralph Waldo Emerson, preferred to see the railroad as an extension of nature rather than a corruption of it. Logically, the railroad could not pass through an area which had not already been cleared by an axe. Thus, the railroad narrative was embraced into the American ideal based on its intentions, the spread of progress to the American people, despite its technological dominance compared to the axe and mill narratives.
Indisputably, however, there were far more differences when comparing the railroad narrative of progress to those of the axe and mill. The railroad's huge sphere of influence was undoubtedly the most significant distinction: 'Whereas the narrative of the axe concerned solitary individuals, and the narrative of the mill described the emergence of towns, the foundation [narrative] of the... railroad projected new cities and massive growth for entire regions." The settlements along railway lines were usually set out in a grid pattern. This was unlike the axe narrative in which settlement was more random and the mill narrative where settlements followed the course of rivers. The railroad produced a very systematic development of towns. However, 'The very ease with which cities might rise at the side of the railroad suggested their fundamental instability and weak social fabric." Many grew rapidly for ten years but then stagnated. The simple fact that the railroad affected so many people meant that it was vastly different to the axe and mill narratives.
The construction of the railroad also led to new forms of economic and political power which were not associated with the mill and axe narratives. State and local authorities often found it tremendously difficult to control railroad corporations: 'From 1850 to 1870, railroads were given land... by the federal government. In all, government gave 131 million acres of land to the railroads, most of which they later sold for $7 - $10 per acre' thus making huge profits. In fact, the railroad companies often kept the land for many years, waiting for it to increase in value before selling it on at high prices. They were often attacked for wielding too much economic power. The axe and mill narratives had nothing that could even remotely compare with this. The railroad companies were seen as monopolies controlling western development rather than opening up the West to the common man. Those who lived in the towns created by the railroads often felt controlled by the companies. This can be seen in the citizens' support for the striking railroad workers in the late nineteenth century. They disliked the railroads' monopoly of their towns as well as the railroad crossings which were a danger to their safety.
Railroads were private investments, run for private gain. Towns were built only because the railroad directors had instructed them to be built there. The axe narrative was primarily about the individual working for himself or the community. The mill narrative, it cannot be denied, ultimately had private aims. However, its proponents were far less monopolizing than those of the railroad whose control reached epic proportions: 'The power of the railroad began to resemble that of an absolute monarch." 'They had vast assets [and]... owned 16 percent of all land in California as early as 1860." Despite the government granting the railroad companies land on a large scale to help settle the continent, their aims were far from utilitarian. Indeed, 'by 1870 some railroads were being built primarily as a means to receive grants'. The land grant system encouraged promoters to build railroads in the wilderness in order to acquire the land on either side of the tracks. Railroads also charged different freight rates all over the company depending on competition.
'By 1890, Congress had been induced to rescind some of the land grants, typically in cases where lines had not been completed, and 25 million acres reverted to the public domain." However, railroads still held onto land where they could exploit natural resources which by law they should have sold onto settlers. 'The market invaded by the railroad was not free. Instead of increasing access to what was perceived as the natural abundance... of the American West, the railroad controlled access to that abundance and exacted a heavy toll." Many attacked the railroads for their single-minded pursuit of riches and power. Railroads did not unite America or increase national unity as had been hoped, but instead had concentrated economic power among a self-interested minority. 'The railroad had not brought prosperity to all classes, nor had it been equally beneficial to all regions." Unlike the axe and mill narratives, the railroad narrative of progress was the complete antithesis to being utilitarian in terms of its aims.
The men building the railroads often had poor reputations. Whilst the axe narrative was about the individual man striving to clear woodland and set up a log cabin with its associated virtues, the men who built the railroads were transient and 'often drunk and disorderly... [and] quickly gained a reputation as rough, combative, and profane." The middle class were particularly worried about the railroad workers and there was a feeling that 'communities had been invaded by foreign elements'. This was exacerbated by an increase in Catholic Irish workers whose shantytowns seemed threatening to the largely Protestant middle-class households. Indeed, 'The predominant forms of recreation were drinking, gambling, whoring, and fighting." In Nathaniel Hawthorne's novel, The Celestial Railroad, he depicts the railroad workers as 'dark, wild, and smoky, with a singular resemblance, indeed, to the native inhabitants, like whom, also, they had a disagreeable propensity to ill-natured gibes and sneers'. The participants in the axe and mill narratives were generally not perceived in the same negative manner - their actions were seen as virtuous and beneficial to the American nation.
The workers themselves, though, faced their own problems. 'Building... railroads was dangerous, wages could decline or disappear without warning, and a life of constant movement left men with no community to fall back on." These workers were perhaps the first industrial proletariat of the United States since they were cut off from the land and relied on large corporations for their subsistence. This was an extremely risky area in which to work as the pool of labour consistently outpaced the demand, and railroads consequently cut wages and tightened their control over workers. Strikes followed in 1877 and were numerous between 1881 and 1894.
Although the axe and mill narratives had a degree of danger to them in terms of accidents, this was far outweighed by the danger emanating from the railroad narrative of progress. Explosions were commonplace, and there were frequent accidents due to poorly constructed tracks and bridges. Signalling and braking systems differed according to individual railroads and freight cars. Unbelievably, 'during the 1880s fatalities on American lines were 50 percent higher than in Britain, and the accident rate was twice as high'. 'Between June 1905 and June 1906 a total of 3,807 men were killed and 55,254 injured' excluding injuries to passengers. Eventually legislation and liability suits forced the railroads to improve safety but there was only a significant decrease in accidents after 1893 with the Railroad Safety Appliance Act.
Railroads also devastated the natural environment and the habitat of the Native Americans to a degree not seen in the axe and mill narratives. Sparks from engines caused fires on the prairies and companies hired gunmen to kill buffalo herds that may have interrupted development. Buffalo were significant to the Native Americans as they provided the primary source of both food and clothing and there mass slaughter by the railroad companies had a disastrous effect on the Native Americans population of the Plains. The environmental effects of the railroads were highly damaging as well: 'Residents along the first lines complained of the noise, smoke, and sparks of the locomotives." Coal smoked in particular was identified as the most significant problem. It was not burnt with the same efficiency as was the case in large factories. Coal smoke damaged humans, plants and animals. 'A Chicago study estimated that railroads contributed 22 percent of that city's smoke population, and its inspectors focused particularly on locomotives." Air quality remained poor in most cities until the middle of the twentieth century. Railroads also had a negative effect on the environment not only due to pollution but also because of the need for wood. Of course, the destruction of woodland was a theme of both the axe and mill narratives of progress, but with the railroad narrative, the scale of devastation was far greater. 'Of the many industries and activities that depended on the products of the forest, those of railroad construction and operation made perhaps the greatest impact." The railroads in the West damaged much of the landscape they claimed they were making available to the American people. Fires were frequently used to clear woodland in order to make way for railroad tracks.
Therefore, in conclusion, although the railroad narrative of progress was similar to the axe and mill narratives in terms of its ultimate aim (the triumph of man over nature), there were far more differences when comparing the various narratives. Some of these differences included the development of cities rather than towns or villages, the perception of the railroad workers, the hugely damaging environmental effects, a large number of accidents and deaths caused by the railroad and the problems that the workers faced due to the enormous control that the railroad corporations held, which was undoubtedly the most significant difference. The immense power that the railroad corporations exhibited can best be summarized by the fact that the railroad was the 'largest business in the United States, the most powerful technical system, the fastest and most convenient form of transportation, and a state and national political force." One could certainly not describe the influence of the axe or the mill in this way.