Thoughts are caused by the extra-cranial world but the contents of those thoughts are not determined by the external world as the meaning of thoughts are not determined by the external world. The content of thoughts is narrow rather than broad.
Answers to this question may be broadly divided into two large categories. While there is general agreement that the external world is able to cause thought, debate exists between the Externalists who propose that the content of our thoughts are determined by the external world. In contrast the Internalist/ individualists believe that mental states are products of intrinsic states only, with no reference to the external world.
This essay will address and critique the main arguments given by the Externalists Putnam and Burge that began a large turn to Externalism. By highlighting the problems with these theses, it will then show a more viable Internalistic account of mental content.
Much of the debate in this field of philosophy of mind is concerning the linguistic issue of meaning. The central dilemma may be rephrased as the question of whether 'meaning' is in the head or caused by the external world. There is the underlying assumption here that by studying linguistics, we are able to understand the nature of the content of thoughts (Cain 2002). The idea is that language is used to express beliefs as expressed by Segal (2000):
This essay will now examine the Twin Earth thought experiment from Putnam as evidence for externalism.
In order to show that the nature of the external world impacts upon the meaning of words Putnam (2002) proposes a "Twin Earth". This Twin Earth is identical to Earth in nearly every way. On Twin Earth however the substance that fills the seas and lakes, that agents drink and treat in the exact same way as inhabitants of Earth treat water is chemically different. On both Earths the substance is called "water", but on Earth, we know this to be "H20", whereas on Twin Earth the chemical composition is abbreviated to "XYZ".
Some important details of this thought experiment must now be highlighted. The "water" on Twin Earth, or Twater as it is often referred to must be used in the same ways as water on Earth to ensure that the mental states of the agents on each planet are identical. For the thought experiment to be useful, there must be only one variable - the chemical composition of the water. Putnam (2002) then concludes that as this is the only variable, that meaning must therefore be attributed partly to the influence of the external world (Cain 2002). Putnam (2002) also asserts that even in the early eighteenth century, prior to the discovery of the chemical compositions of water and Twater, the agents on the two planets still "understood the term 'water' differently" (p.590) even though they were in the same psychological/mental state.
The meaning of "water" (and this is extended to all natural-kind terms) is "decomposed into two factors" (Segal 2000, p.27). He accepts that there must be a set of descriptions: liquid between 0 and 100 degrees Celsius, expands when frozen. There is also a second part of meaning that is more Externalist:
As the two substances named "water" on Earth and Twin Earth have different extensions (H20 and XYZ), the two twin agents on the planets Oscar and Twin Oscar are said to mean different things when they use the term "water".
The debate therefore becomes about whether the twin agents, use of the term with the same psychological/mental state on their respective planets has the same meaning.
It would at first appear hard to disagree with the reasoning given by Putnam. Questions have been raised regarding the nomological possibility of this Twin Earth scenario. There is the problem that humans are "largely made of H20" (Segal 2000), but this is viewed as a fairly trivial point and not relevant to some of the other examples given by Putnam. As "water" is the most widely used case from Putnam's paper, it is this example that the essay will continue to address regardless.
Segal (2000) voices the objection on Kuhn that "nothing with a significantly different structure from H20 could be macroscopically very like water" (p.25). If the twin agents are to have identical mental states regarding the two substances, then they would need to be very similar. Fodor's counter examples of "jade and jadite" (Cain 2002, p.178) show the possibility of two substances with very different chemical structures appearing to be the same does however suggest that the Twin Earth scenario is nomologically possible, though this case does not have the same level of detail regarding similar properties.
If the thought experiment is deemed nomologically possible, or at least not ruled out as impossible, attention must be turned back to whether the terms on the different planets have the same meaning.
The reason that this thought experiment does not show extension to be relevant to meaning and thus support the suggestion of broad content is that Putnam assumes that "water" is coextensive with "H20" (Chomsky, 2000). Putnam (2002) does add that this is "give or take certain impurities". This supplementary condition, would perhaps allow for isotopes of elements/heavy water particles, mineral content and other small variances but I would argue that it is not enough to rescue the proposition from normal usage of the term. "Water" is used to describe many things. Though sometimes a greater description is given, I would argue that "sea water", "tap water", "purified water", "carbonated water", to name but a few, are all mostly referred to as "water".
As Chomsky (2000) illustrates with his example of whether people would call a liquid tea or water:
That H20 and "Water" are not interchangeable salva veritatae is shown by Burge (2002) with the example that it is possible for a person to think/assert that they do not believe that "water is not fit to drink" but not that "H20 is not fit to drink". We may accept that every adult English speaker on Earth knows that "water" is chemically H20 (though this is certainly not the case) but still maintain that under normal usage, agents do not 'mean' H20 when they use the term. Indeed, as Chomsky (2000) asserts it is wrong to take ordinary usage of language to be able to tell us more complex scientific facts.
The Internalist therefore has the simple answer to the Twin Earth problem in that both Oscar and Twin Oscar are using the term "water" in the same way in terms of both their intrinsic, internal states and in meaning. The meaning is simply the list of descriptions that advocated by Putnam. "Water" must on both planets: freeze at 0 degrees Celsius, boil at 100 degrees Celsius, be clear, odourless, thirst quenching. They must be the same so that the internal states of both agents on both planets are the same as has already been stated. Counter arguments may be made that this comprehensive list of properties is not required, and the two substances may vary in ways that are not known to the agents (like their chemical composition to twin agents prior to approximately 1750). This is not a problem to the Internalist as the level of ignorance regarding "water" must be identical on each of the twin planets for the thought experiment to hold. Were the differences known to the agents, they would not have the same internal, intrinsic states. Therefore the definition of "water" used on both planets at any given time will be the same.
This essay will now address the argument given by Tyler Burge supporting the Externalist view of mental content. Burge imagines another scenario where the intrinsic states of two agents are identical, but that meaning of a term is again different.
An agent who is "generally competent in English" (Burge 2002 p.600) and suffers with arthritis visits the doctor and explains that his arthritis is now affecting him in his thigh. This is not possible as the term arthritis means an "inflammation of the joints". The doctor informs the agent of this fact and "The patient is surprised, but relinquishes his view and goes on to ask what might be wrong with his thigh." (Burge 2002 p.600). Burge (2002) then proposes another situation (or Twin Earth scenario) where the standard use of the term arthritis actually encompasses the patient's misuse, that a pain in the thigh may also be arthritis.
Though the case given by Burge is often seen as requiring less imagination from the reader (Cain 2002), I actually find this case more problematic. I would not suggest that it is impossible, but I find the idea that the "patient's nonintentional, phenomenal experience is the same." (Burge 2002 p.600) and yet that the community held meaning of arthritis is different less plausible.
Burge's example has slightly more scope than that of Putnam as his extends to more than natural-kind terms and so would be considerably worse for the Internalist's if shown to be correct as they would need to accept extension's role in mental content for a far greater proportion of language. Burge (2002) states this greater scope explicitly:
It is this concept of a subject's incomplete understanding of a "notion" that I would consider to be the major problem with Burge's argument. Indeed, Internalists are able to counter this argument that it is not possible to believe a thought that "one does not fully grasp" (Segal 2000 p.65).
Burge could suggest that this problem is resolved once the patient realises he "does not fully grasp what he believes" (Segal 2000 p.65). This would be wrong as the problem is not that a false belief (that arthritis can occur in the thigh) may be rectified, but rather that conclusions may be drawn regarding mental content and extension from these false beliefs.
Burge (2000) accepts that his argument rests upon the possibility of having a propositional attitude/mental content despite incomplete knowledge of a "notion". Burge attempts to appease critics by contending the error the agent often makes is not "conceptual or linguistic, but empirical in an ordinary and narrow sense." Though this may be accurate in his description of the colour of a swan being part of it's meaning, I cannot see this as a transferable argument to the arthritis case. The arthritis case is however a clear case of misunderstanding of the concept.
This essay will now address an issue that was raised by Segal primarily as a criticism of Putnam's Twin Earth thought experiment, but that stands alone as an argument for narrow content. This is that:
Ghosts serve as an excellent example of kind terms without extension. Segal (2000) devises his own Twin Earth thought experiment incorporating our planet where we do not have ghosts and two other twin planets that do have Ghosts (that they really exist) but their relationship to the human counterpart is slightly different. In all of the Twin Earths, the agents have the same conception of the Ghosts. The mental content is therefore the same for all twin agents, and the lack of any possible extension on one of the planets serves to prove that extension is not required for mental content.
This is a devastating blow to Externalists, particularly if they subscribe to Putnam's (2002) conception of meaning as requiring both a description, and to meet extension conditions of being like a sample of a paradigm case.
This essay has analysed the two most prominent criticisms of Internalist theories of mental content and shown that they in fact do not function as problems for the Internalist. Putnam's Twin Earth thought experiment ascribes and incorrect meaning of terms to its agents. Chemical compositions of natural kind terms are shown to not be the same as normal usage of terms such as "water". The cases of incomplete comprehension of terms given by Burge were not useful due to the incoherence of supposing that an agent may know a term that they have an incomplete conception of. The existence of terms that exist without extension was finally shown to prove that mental content may indeed be narrow and that extension conditions are not required for a definition of linguistic meaning, or mental content.