The analogy is not strong enough to bear the weight Plato places upon it. Plato is performing a fallacy of equivocation with this unjustified assumption that justice in the state and justice in the soul are analogous. The reason(s) for Plato's analogy between the State and the Soul are problematic, poorly argued with little depth and in fact prove to be false. The analogy is not only an inaccurate picture, but when examined in detail, lacks internal consistency with regard to the parts of the soul. This essay will examine Plato's conception of justice, the analogy of State and Soul, the reasons given for assuming such a similarity exists and will argue that the venture is in fact misguided.
Firstly, some terms and assumptions must be addressed. Plato's theory of justice is agent centred rather than act centred and has drawn criticism as any act performed by a 'just' agent will be deemed 'just' (Pappas, 1995). This debate is too large to be explored in this essay and an agent centred theory of justice will be assumed to be valid. The fact that only the Guardians would appear to be described as 'just' or self motivated to be 'just' will however be addressed.
The meaning of "justice" must also be addressed. In the Republic (Plato, 1976), Socrates and Glaucon debate weather justice is something that is good in itself, good for its consequences or both. Glaucon proposes that the commonly held view is that justice is good only for the consequences or that to be just is "painful but beneficial" (Plato, 1976). Plato however considers justice to be good both in itself and for its consequences. "Justice" is described as a unity. In the soul, this is a unity of the three virtues (spirit, desire and reason) and in the correct relations to each other. In the state this is the unity and correct relationship between the three levels of society (productive class, auxiliaries and Guardians):
This definition of justice does not depend on how a state interacts with neighbouring states and hence how a single person or soul interacts with others, but is regarding how a soul/state is "internally constituted" (Pappas, 1995 p. 60)
Adeimantus proposes "since justice is the essential social virtue, it must amount to cooperation" (Pappas, 1995 p.62). Plato considers this to be a simple definition for a simple society and that more complex definition is required for more complex societies i.e. that cooperation is required between the social classes (Pappas, 1995 p.62).
The theory of justice Plato offers bears no resemblance to the two theories that had been previously suggested by Thrasymachus and Glaucon (Santas, 2006). Plato arrives at the conclusion of justice being the unity of these three qualities (wisdom, courage, moderation) by looking at the perfect city he has imagined. As the city is perfectly good it must be wise, courageous, moderate and just. Pappas (1995) points out that this is a massive assumption that for something to be good, it must be: wise, courageous, moderate and just. It is also assumed that these four attributes provide an exhaustive list of what is required for something to be good. Though Plato suggests moving tentatively from the provisional idea of justice found in the state to the soul (Singpurwalla, 2006), it is not clear that any revisions or alterations are made, and it appears that Plato accepts the just state as an acceptable model for the just soul. Plato overlooks this assumption and does not provide reasoning for it. This therefore means that the definition of justice, and therefore the analogy of state and soul are based upon "an unexamined causal belief" turned into a "technical claim" (Pappas, 1995). It appears apparent that these unexamined beliefs are societal. The four virtues were accepted by Plato's peers (Field, 1967), but a Christian may wish to include humility and/or love (Pappas, 1995) and there are a host of other characteristics that could be considered to be part of 'being good'. It is therefore unlikely to be the case that this is an accurate depiction of justice.
Moving from this problematic description of justice to the analogy, investigation is required to ascertain why Plato requires this analogy.
The reasoning for this notion that the two examples of justice will be analogous can be found in Plato's metaphysical theory of forms. Plato (1976) postulates the existence of eternal, unchanging forms, and that the world that we perceive is made up of inferior copies of those forms. The form of justice is therefore something that would be the same in the two examples. Annas (1981) states that Plato is "bringing in a metaphysical assumption from outside the immediate discussion" (p.144) but this does not appear to be a completely damning blow to the analogy. It is possible that the analogy will hold, even without subscription to Plato's theory of forms. Though virtues may be similar in the two cases, I would not be willing to ascribe the same definition of a 'just state' to a 'just soul' as this "analogy implies that the state is like a very large individual" (Groves & Robinson 2000 p.89). Conversely, it is possible to say that the individual is like a very small state, though the former is the direction that Plato chooses (using the larger to illuminate the smaller), though the difference should be irrelevant if the analogy holds.
This essay will now address the problems of the internal consistency of the analogy of state and soul.
Each of the social groups in performing their different roles are said to be dominated by different characteristics: the guardians are described as being dominated by reason, the auxiliaries dominated by spirit and the productive classes are dominated by desire. The soul however is only said to be just when reason is controlling both desire and spirit. This implies that the only class of citizen that is indeed just by this definition is the Guardians. This is illustrated when Plato uses types of people as examples of city structures. The Oligarchic man, the Tyrannical man, and the Democratic man are used to show how the different arrangements of power would not create a just state. The Tyrannical man is the only example who does not have a level of internal harmony. The other men, though not ruled by reason appear to have at a degree of internal harmony. Plato however considered all of the men to be unjust (Annas, 1981). This reinforces the worry that only the Guardians may be just. Despite the Auxiliaries and the Productive Classes having internal harmony, they are dominated by spirit and desire respectively and by Plato's definition cannot be just.
A response to this point could be that the Guardians are the only class that is "self motivated to be just" (Annas, 1981 p.136) and that the Guardian's justice is then imposed upon the remaining classes (Rice, 1952). Indeed, as Plato proposes there will be
This demonstrates the inferiority of the lower classes and the requirement to defer to the Guardians. I find this idea that the only class that is self-motivated to be just (particularly since Plato defines justice as something that is both good in itself and for the consequences) is the smallest class. The Guardians are indeed the rulers and their rule may make it possible for the other classes to be just, but this would be through no trait of their own.
Plato has then provided us with a theory of justice in the state and soul, where only a small minority of agents are actually self-motivated to be just. This does not appear to even disprove Thrasymachus proposition that justice is merely the want of the ruling class (Plato, 1976). Plato would probably disagree with this point however as the Guardians are not acting in their own interest, but rather in the interest of the state (Plato, 1976).
At this point, the suggestion that the Guardians would be altruistic rulers who care only for the benefit of the state will be examined. Plato proposes an education system for the Guardians that is vast in its' scope to include all aspects of a young Guardian's development and conditioning. This totalitarian education system seems to give Plato free license to make any claims he desires about the Guardians. Plato claims that order in the state will be maintained through the "nurture and education" (Rice, 1952 p.57) of the Guardians and the propaganda used by the Guardians.
He is able to claim that they will only be concerned for the welfare of the state and that they will be perfect rulers because they have been taught so well. Any attempt to show this to be impossible, or example of a Guardian not behaving in this way would not be a problem for Plato, because he would be able to propose that the education had not been adequate. As a perfect education system would be impossible to realise in the real world, so therefore would be the possibility of these perfect Guardians. This may prove to be a very small objection to Plato's conception of education and the Guardians as they could very well be near - perfect with little consequence to the rest of his arguments, but to propose something that is impossible does not seem beneficial. If the society Plato proposes could not possibly be realised and is fictitious, so would be the soul in the analogy he is attempting to draw.
This essay will now examine the virtues/ separate parts of the soul. Plato subscribes to a theory of fragmented soul because of the "Principal of conflict" (Annas, 1981 p.137). This is essentially, that as humans are able to entertain conflicting thoughts, there is an element of disunity in the soul and this must be resolved by positing constitutive parts of the soul (Singpurwalla, 2006). A person may want a drink, but know they should not have one (Annas, 1981). While this concept seems initially sound, investigation Plato's constitutive parts shows this to be incoherent.
There is debate over whether desire should be seem as contentless as in Hume's theory of action (Annas, 1981), but this does not fit with Plato's description of the money-loving person. This quality is attributed to desire (Singpurwalla, 2006), but to desire money is a long-term method of fulfilling desires (Annas, 1981). It is certainly not like desiring drink with no reference to type, temperature or quantity of drink.
Responses to this problem have attributed degrees of reasoning powers to the spirit and desire to resolve this issue. These parts can then be criticised for being Homunculi (Annas 1981). If the constitutive parts each can be further divided, they themselves suffer the same problems as the whole. Annas (1981) maintains that as the parts are simpler than the whole and they relate directly to the original, they may not be described as a homunculus.
Desire, as a constitutive part is not in fact united at all. It is possible to desire many things that conflict. Annas (1981) contends that "there is nothing in their nature that makes them necessarily conflict" (p.137) but if we are to follow the 'principal of conflict' this surely implies that we may have many desiring parts. Plato attempts to overcome this obstacle by drawing a parallel with the productive classes who are not unified, and are indeed each set on his/her own personal/particular aim (Annas, 1981 p.129). This seems to be a clever slight of hand, reintroducing the state-soul analogy to avoid a problem created by the 'principal of conflict' and should not be entertained.
The depiction of spirit is also problematic:
With the strong division of desire and reason, finding where sprit should fit seems quite challenging (Annas 1981). Spirit seems to be also very susceptible to the criticism of it being a Homunculus. The reasons for it being given this separate status from reason and desire given by Plato are that it may oppose desire and that it may be present in children and animals where reason is not (1976). As has been shown earlier, it is possible to entertain conflicting desires, so an argument may be made that spirit is part of desire. The contention that it may be present in children and animals, without reason is a very thin and unsubstantiated. It is this awkwardness in the account of spirit that has lead "many interpreters" (Annas, 1981) to conclude that Plato did not actually think there was a third part of the soul, but he added it later to correspond with the auxiliary class and maintain his analogy.
Plato does not give an adequate description of how the separate parts are able to function.
This essay has examined Plato's conception of justice and found it to be based on assumptions that are the product of environment as opposed to reasoned argument. It has highlighted the analogy's dependence on Plato's metaphysical claims of Forms. It has finally investigated the lack of coherence of the parts of the soul, and how they are to operate/interact. The analogy of justice in the state and soul is therefore not strong enough to bear the weight Plato puts upon it.