The book by Michelle Marra, Modern Japanese Aesthetics presents an overview of the concepts and discourses on Japanese aesthetics, and more importantly the theories of Japanese thinkers in their effort to 'master, assimilate, and transform Western philosophical systems to discuss their own artistic heritage'. Due to the limited scope of this review the following lines will attempt to summarize only one of the chapters, namely Sakabe Megumi's 'Mask and Shadow in Japanese Culture: Implicit Ontology in Japanese Thought'.
As it can be deduced from the title, the focus of this writing is the conception of omote - the mask (used in no), or the face and the notion of kage - the shade, or reflection, in the context of the structure of 'reciprocity' and 'reversibility' in the traditional Japanese culture. By illustrating these concepts on the example of a no performer, Sakabe proposes that "presence of a self as a 'surface' or omote implies the existence of a structure of 'reciprocity' and 'reversibility' that problematizes the visual self as something that is seen by others, that sees itself, and that sees itself as the other".
The text is divided into five parts. The first, introductory section starts off with expressing Sakabe's concern about the disappearance of the typically Japanese lyricism and dissolving of the traditional community and its customs. Nevertheless, it brings in the main aim of the study: to extract the traits of the Japanese culture which continue to be observed. Claiming that human movements represent a relationship with others (whether human beings, or the 'Other that is invisible and transcendent') and by speculating about the ambiguous boundary between the natural human movements and the ritualized ones, he bring us to the question of mask or omote...
Second section elaborates on the notion of omote by mentioning other concepts such as the related omo-zashi (facial features, intention, aim) and mana-zashi (the gaze). The difference between the two is crucial, according to Sakabe. It lies in the 'unidimensional intentionality' of the latter compared to the 'multidimensionality' of the former. Omo-zashi is therefore what is seen by others, that sees itself, and that sees itself as the other and serves as the basis for a structure of reciprocity and reversibility. The way this applies to the a no actor is that "he puts on a mask, he sees in the mirror his own face or own mask; at the same time he is seen by the mask and thirdly he sees himself transmogrified in some deity or demon", illustrates Sakabe and leads us to the next section.
Idea of strictly reversible and reversible visibility and invisibility in Japanese thought are explored in the third part. Using the example of a no actor, Sakabe demonstrates the significance of 'detached view' by using Motokiyo Zeami's words: "an actor must come to have an ability to see himself as the spectators do, grasp the logic of the fact that the eyes cannot see themselves, and find the skill to grasp the whole - left, right, ahead and behind." Because omote also means 'surface', it can again be used to describe this relationship; there is a play of identity and difference, grids of surfaces which are reversible into one another and reflected back (also in song 'utai' and chorus 'ji-utai', in interchangeable characters on the scene and so on...)
The next section commences with the second main concept - the kage, which controversially means 'shade, reflection, light'. Sakabe argues that shade and light are the same (transparent shade of the glass bottle = way of both being entirely terrestrial) and therefore nothing exists but reflections, shades, images kage, and thus nothing exists but what is reflected in succession or reciprocally; what can be called changing, happening or infinite transmogrification. Taking yet another term utsutsu (to be conscious of the actual presence of something, to be awake) and subsequently yume-utsutsu (yume = dream + utsutsu = consciousness) Sakabe brings us to think of the concept such that we cannot tell exactly which of the domains (dream or 'reality') is the reflection and which is the original; 'which one is the truest and deepest reality: the image or its reflection in the deep water'. And this is exactly what happens on the no stage: the actor being nothing but a reflection of something unseen and transcendental, as Sakabe concludes in this section.
The final conclusion reached in the last paragraphs of the chapter can be expressed, as Sakabe says, using Goethe's famous quote "Everything that goes by in this Earthly world in nothing but metaphor". It is exactly this feeling, according to the author, that the Japanese traditionally always attempted to recreate in 'light gestures that are very reduced or slightly ritualized', like raising hand or gently tilting the mask...