Branca is a Mediterranean Restaurant situated in Jericho, an affluent area with many bars and restaurants in Oxford. Dishes on Branca's menu are Italian although it can not be classified as typical Italian cuisine. The restaurant has 32 tables and a small bar located at the front. Guests are served by fourteen waiting staff, which are managed by three managers, including a General Manager, a Restaurant Manager and a Bar Manager.
To gain more information on the restaurant, the General Manager Jeevan Perinpanayagam was interviewed. For a transcript see appendix 1.
The restaurant targets three different markets including business customers, singles who live locally, and families.
Business customers are aged between 30 and 50 and are very loyal as their place of work is in the same geographic location. Their psychographic profile consists in them combining lunch with business meetings.
Singles are aged between 25 and 35 and are part of the upper socio-economic class. Again they live in the same location as the restaurant. Their behaviour is characterised by them seeking convenience eating out.
The final target market is full nesters with children aged from infants to teenagers. The full nesters are residents of Oxfordshire and look for a family friendly atmosphere. Being families with younger children places them in the demographic segmentation variable. For more information see appendix 2.
The following report will include a PESTE analysis, a competitive analysis, and a SWOT analysis. Recommendations will be drawn from the findings of these analyses. Performance measurements will be introduced to examine the accomplishment of the recommendations. Finally, a conclusion will be developed.
Every business is affected by external factors, may it be in a positive or a negative way. These external factors are referred to as the macro-environment which includes "political, economic, socio-cultural, technological and environmental forces [...] and is therefore known as the PESTE environment" (Bowie & Buttle, 2004: p16). According to Bowie and Buttle (2004) the external influences can affect businesses severely and consequently it is essential that managers are aware of the macro-environment. The following section will discuss factors influencing Branca.
Kotleral. (2003) define a competitive analysis as "an analysis of the primary strengths and weaknesses, objectives, strategies, and other information relative to competitors". (Kotler et al., 2003: p781)
According to Bowie and Buttle (2004) competitors are businesses that:
As could be seen in the introduction, Branca targets three different markets. For the single and business customer market, the two main competitors are Loch Fyne and Le Petit Blanc. As they are in the same location they are direct competitors. For the third target market, families, the primary competition consists of Quod and Portobello. They offer similar products and prices and attract the same clientele.
Lewis and Chamber (2000) highlight that it is essential to not only look at the physical feature of the competition but also look at the service they provide. According to Kotleral. (2003) this should include looking at the "service level, cleanliness, staff knowledge and the responsiveness of the sales department" (Kotler et al, 2003: p 758). As explained, the real advantages of an establishment are the things noticed by the guests and that convince them to buy the product. The purchase attributes that Branca's different target markets look for can be seen in appendix 2.
Information about Branca and its competition was gained by visiting the different establishments. (See appendices 6, 7 & 8). Additional knowledge about Branca was obtained through completing a customer audit trail. This was executed to rate the service paying guests receive. The strengths and weaknesses are summarised below, for a detailed description see appendix 9.
The main strength of the restaurant is the friendliness of the staff before and during service. Through being recognised at the door the customer feels special and welcomed. The staff are also very attentive and happy to fulfil special wishes e.g. extra bread. A weakness of the restaurant is that once the bill has been paid, the friendly service ends as customers do not part from the restaurant with a farewell.
"The overall evaluation of a company's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats is called SWOT analysis" (Kotler et al., 2003: p93). Strengths and weaknesses are always internal factors and opportunities and threats are external factors.
The following recommendations will follow the approach of the marketing mix. The marketing mix is "tools that marketers use to influence demand" (Bowie and Buttle, 2004: p26). In the literature the marketing mix mostly consists of seven different elements, however, Bowie and Buttle (2004) have created another factor by dividing 'place' into 'location' and 'distribution'. The report will analyse each aspect individually and bring forward recommendations for Branca.
"The balanced scorecard is a management system that enables organisations to clarify their vision and strategy and translate them into action" (Balanced Scorecard Institute, no date). According to Kaplan and Norton (1996) the benefits of the balanced scorecard is that it not only measures financial aspects but also the customer perspective, the internal business processes and the learning and capability of the organisation. Therefore it gives a wider picture of the actions of the business.
The balance scorecard in appendix 15 shows how Branca can measure the performance of the recommendations that were made earlier in the report. The best way to look at how customers perceive the changes is through questionnaires. It was considered for Branca to employ a consulting company to measure customer satisfaction. However, it was decided that the cost implied would be too high for a non branded restaurant. Therefore a questionnaire incorporating questions on all changes should be designed to avoid customers being over exasperated.
It is hard to measure the learning and capability of the organisation. Most of the recommendations do not involve employees having to be trained as there will not be any changes to the service procedures.
Quality and service recovery can not be measured in financial terms. For the other recommendations it should be calculated if revenue increases to supervise the effectiveness. This is especially important for the change of the menu as it was suggested to do this four times a year. If it is seen that there is no significant increase, it should be considered to only alter it twice yearly.
Should the restaurant make any future changes, these should be monitored to assess their effectiveness. This should include financial as well as the other introduced measurement perspectives. Through examining these modifications continuously, management is able to detect any discrepancies that should occur and take appropriate action.
It is essential that the business is aware of changes in the macro-environment. It is also important for Branca to monitor its competition. These issues can result in opportunities and threats to the business, just as any internal influences can become strengths or weaknesses.
From analysing all these aspects recommendations have been drawn. Branca should implement various changes, the main two being the following: the menu needs to be changed more frequently and the internet should be used to its full extent. This will result in Branca gaining a competitive advantage, having satisfied customers and increasing revenue.