For this assignment I have chosen to research witchcraft. The essay title I will research is, 'Witchcraft is often thought of as destructive and irrational. Discuss why it persists as an important part of life in many African societies'. The key concepts I will pick out of this title is, witchcraft in African societies, by looking at how long it has been around, how often and who performs it. While also looking at the underlying issue, why is witchcraft important to people in African societies and not to people in other cultures/society. Therefore I will get a range of articles about different African societies to get different perspectives on witchcraft. I will also touch on an outsiders view.
When choosing which database to use for my research, I decided to try some out to see which one worked best for me. I tried using the Anthropological Index which was recommended but found the system hard to use. To use the search engine you had to be aware of what article you were looking for as you search using the date of the article, region it is form etc, and I am not aware of what article I need at this present time. Therefore this database did not seem right for what I am doing. I also found it very complicated and confusing to use.
I also tried using another database, Web of Science this was also recommended to me, I found this database relatively simple to use, as it had a good layout and a simply process. However once I had searched and found an article I could not work out how to read the article or obtain an abstract. Obviously this is important to be able to do so as I know that I have the correct article for my piece of work, without having to read through the whole article.
So to research my title I chose to use the search database International Bibliography of the Social Sciences (IBSS), I choose this database as it was simple and straight forward to use. I could also search just using a keyword or term; I did not have to know the article I was looking for, which I found very useful. I was also able to do an advanced search to narrow the results down and once I had found a chosen article it was very easy to obtain an abstract of the article, with useful information about it and the author. Therefore I decided this would be the best search engine for me to carry out my search with.
Before I began my search I made a list of relevant keywords and phrases relating to the title. To start with I searched using the search term 'witchcraft' however this produced 1548 journals. I realised this term was far to board as it brought up too many results, about witchcraft in many countries, and most were based very loosely around the subject.
I decided to search using the words 'witch and Africa' by using the word 'and' I was able to search through all journals with both of these words in. So I was able to narrow down my search and it came up with only 23 journals. Although these search words produced articles relevant to the title I decided to narrow down my search further.
So I decided to search by using the words 'witch* Africa*' by using an asterisk (*) at the end of the words it gave me alternative endings e.g. it will not only find journals with witch in but witches, witchcraft etc. This search came up with 7 journals, which was a perfect amount to look through. It brought up some very useful journals, which related well to my title.
Manderson, Desmond (2005). Possessed: drug policy, witchcraft and belief. Cultural studies, 19:1, pp. 35-62
This journals main theme is about drug policies, however it touches on the European belief in witchcraft, looking at it in the sixteenth century. This essay argues that our drug laws are not intended to get rid of drugs, any more than the Inquisition wanted to ban witchcraft and the devil. Although the article only touches on witchcraft, I would be able to use this article to get a European's perspective on witchcraft and how it is thought of by others as destructive and irrational therefore get an opposing view. At the same time gain some history on witchcraft itself.
Melland, F.H (1967). In witch-bound Africa; an account of the primitive Kaonde tribe and their beliefs. New York: Barnes and Noble.
This book looks at the views of the Kaonde tribe in Africa, looking at the tribe's beliefs and traditions. Especially concentrating on the tribes believes in witchcraft. Why do they feel so strongly about it and where did these rituals come from? This article will be very useful for my essay as it is a first hand account of the Kaonde tribe, concentrating on how they feel about witchcraft, which is an angle the other articles only touch on.
Rasmussen, Susan-J (2004). Reflections on witchcraft, danger, and modernity among the Tuareg. Africa. 74:3, pp. 315-340.
This essay explores the different ways witchcraft is implicated today in an African society, in the Tuareg of the Republic of Niger. The essay analyses the power and dangers of witchcraft in case studies, suggesting the ceremonies which take place to be very traditional. It also looks at questions such as 'why is it so important to the Tuareg people?', which will help expand my essay.
Salamone, F.A. (1980). Gbagyi witchcraft: a reconsideration of S. F. Nadel's theory of African witchcraft. Afrika and Uebersee 63 (1), pp. 1-20
This article looks into S.F. Nadel's theory of African witchcraft of the Gbagyi people. It touches on many topics such as some of the ceremonies which take place. Of which some are more important than others and why this is the case. It also looks at the history of witchcraft, when the first cases were recorded, and why he believes it started. He looks at why certain rituals are so important to the people of Gbagyi and why it is still so commonly used. This article has strong links to my essay title and will enable me to get detailed information on the importance of witchcraft in African society.
Sanders, Todd (2003). Reconsidering witchcraft: postcolonial Africa and analytic (un)certainties. American-anthropologist, 105:2, pp. 338-352.
This article looks at how witchcraft in African society is deeply religious. That in Africa witchcraft is experienced in different cultural and historical settings. The article mainly explores witchcraft amongst the Ihanzu people of Tanzania and suggests how witchcraft in there culture is about tradition, which is a topic one of the other articles touches on. Therefore this article will enable me to get in-depth information on why witchcraft is still so important in the African society. Enabling me to structure my work.
Through this project I have been able to gain information on five journal/books based around my essay title. These articles would enable me to write a lengthy, in-depth essay about the importance of witchcraft in African society. I have been able to do this firstly by choosing the appropriate search database to me, then narrowing down the search using a variety of techniques to gain the correct articles for my essay title.