Species evolve to survive their specific niches and have intrinsic social and biological needs as a result. When forced to live outside of their familiar environment and placed in captivity (by which animals are confined within an area of well-defined boundaries; Poole, 1990), individuals adapt to their new surroundings to different degrees (Gaspari et al., 2000). The captive animal may acquire routines beneficial to life in confinement, or adopt 'abnormal behaviours' aiding survival in no apparent way (Poole, 1990). Abnormalities and disturbed behaviours reflect a poor fit between the species adaptations' and the alien captive environment (Miller-Schroeder & Paterson, .....psych wel). This appears particularly evident among the highly intelligent and social old world primates (Yerkes, 1925; In Dickie, 1998). Psychological problems associated with captive primates impose a marked change from the original behavioural baseline of the species resulting in abnormal behavioural 'stereotypies', thus observing an individual's behavioural repertoire in captivity may be used to assess the animal's mental experience of its housing environment (Wemelsfeder, 1999). Increased aggression, lethargy, hair plucking, self mutilation, coprophagy, reingestion and regurgitation all provide evidence of poor welfare, indicating an attempt by the individual to cope with an intolerably unstimulating environment over which it can exert little control (Poole, 1990). For most animals stereotyping can be greatly improved if their environment improves, suggesting they retain the capacity for normal behaviour (Tudge, 1991).
Numerous studies have provided evidence that nonhuman primates, specifically the great apes, share many elements of our own mental processes (Bramblett et al., 1975). Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) have evolved a brain structure permitting complex cognitive abilities and demonstrating a capacity to learn, think, feel and express a range of emotions believed to be uniquely human (Balls, et al., 1988). They appear vulnerable to depression, boredom, fear, sensitivity and anxiety (Goodall, 1968). Although there is no compelling evidence that chimpanzees have an awareness of their own existence, the possibility must not be overlooked, especially when making a comprehensive evaluation of a primate's well-being, in response to the effects of captivity (Bayne, 1989). Human awareness of the sentience of other species and our ability to empathize with suffering leads us to a responsibility, recognized by our society to treat primates with compassion. In view of our close evolutionary relationship to the nonhuman primates it is our duty to make determined attempts to ensure that their mental needs are satisfied in every captive situation.
This essay will consider how captivity affects the psychological well-being of primates, with specific reference to the restricted conditions of zoos and laboratories, as these tend to be the commonest conditions of captivity and represent the greatest departure from the natural state (Poole, 1990 ). Using chimpanzees as a specific example, the guidelines compiled in order to minimise mentally detrimental effects will be examined, and methods in how to best achieve these goals discussed.
Zoos and laboratories should strive to carry out environmental enrichment providing an interesting, varied and stimulating environment for the primates to encourage natural patterns of exploratory behaviour and social interactions. Recommendations to improve the psychological well-being of captive chimpanzees have been formulated. A number of enrichment procedures are suggested highlighting the importance of providing; space for vigorous activity, frequent social contact with conspecifics and human caregivers, the opportunity to establish social bonds among a group of mixed age and sex, the presence of intellectual stimulation and a variety in basic routines, including diet, objects for manipulation and social setting, (International workshop of captive chimpanzee professionals. In: Balls et al., 1988). These will now be looked at individually with suggestions as to how these goals might be achieved.
All parameters of the primate's physical environment should be enriched, including enclosure design, substrates, furnishings and novel objects; the aim being to create an artificial habitat that lies within the adaptive range of the species allowing individuals to respond appropriately and thrive in their new surroundings. Quantitative evidence suggests that a complex, enriched and more naturalistic setting for captive primates discourages the development of abnormal behaviour and promotes psychological well-being (Fox, 1968).
Primates are generally social animals, thus the opportunity to interact socially is critical to their psychological well-being (Fouts et al., ). To develop properly primates need to be housed in species-typical groups and to have the opportunity to play with conspecifics; vital to the psychological and neurophysiological development of young primates (Mason, 1965; Macaca mulatta: Harlow & Harlow, 1962; Liebermann, 1965; Homo sapiens). Housing chimpanzees in social groups in large outdoor areas positively affects their psychological well-being as conspecifics provide a wide variety of species-typical stimuli that serve a therapeutic function. Appropriate socialization leads to a significant decrease in abnormal behaviour (Rumbaugh, etal., ...) indicating the important role of conspecifics in promoting the mental well-being of captive primates. Housing in isolation or small cages will have negative affects (Fouts et al., ...). Isolated caging is likely to engender idiosyncratic behavioural response patterns such as self-directed social behaviour, juvenile behaviour, and self-directed aggression shown in figure 1 (Pereira et al., in Box, 1991). It is essential, to promote social interactions at all times, even during the process of quarantine, to ensure the mentality of chimpanzees (Erwin, et al., 1993). In laboratory conditions chimpanzees must be housed in compatible groups of at least two (Balls et al., 1988), but life in a larger group more representative in complexity to sociological structures seen in the wild will promote well-being further (Poole, 1990).
Primates exhibit a natural tendancy to invent, manipulate and investigate (e.g. chimpanzees of the Tai Forest spontaneously use stone anvils to crack open 'ramy' nuts; Boesch, 1997). In captivity opportunities to exercise these mental abilities can be provided through object manipulation or feeding devices. Adopting enrichment strategies as part of daily husbandry schedules, allows both animals and caretakers to become familiar with the expected sequence of activity thus keeping stress levels to a minimum (Bramblett & Drickman, 1982). While nonhuman primates should be provided with a stable environment, there must be sufficient variability in the form of temporally or spatially unpredictable events and objects to provide adequate levels of stimulation (Poole, 1990).