Bushmeat is an important source of protein and fat for many rural and urban families in much of central and western Africa (Auzel and Wilkie, 2000). Wild animals have traditionally been hunted at a sustainable level, by indigenous forest foragers, for many years (Robinson and Bennett, 2000). Recently, however in response to an exponentially expanding human population and with the development of international trading the demand for bushmeat has grown (Bushmeat Crisis Task Force, BCTF, 2003). The introduction of modern hunting technologies has meant that enormous quantities of wildlife can now be extracted from forests annually allowing the sale of wild animal meat to evolve into a vast global trade. It has been estimated that sixty-three kilograms of wild meat per square Kilometre of forest, per year, is extracted for commercial sale in Bioko, Equatorial Guinea (Robinson and Bennett, 2000). It is thought that commercial hunting has become the most immediate threat to the future of wildlife in the Congo basin and has resulted in widespread local extinctions throughout West Africa (Warrick, 1998). Alarming findings have provoked concern from the western world and as a result a number of "anti-bushmeat" projects have been established, such as the Bushmeat Crisis Task Force (BCTF) and the Cameroon Wildlife Aid Fund (CWAF). Such organisations hope to instigate a worldwide ban on the use of bushmeat, but just how realistic is this as a conservation goal? This essay will discuss whether or not a total ban is a realistic option and suggest what the implications of enforcing a ban in central and western Africa might be to those people who depend on the trade in wild animal meat both for their livelihoods and their protein?
One million metric tonnes of wild animal meat is consumed in Africa every year (Bristow, 2002). To enforce a ban on the use of bushmeat would mean identifying the main consumers and finding a means to stop huge quantities reaching target groups. So who are the main consumers and how is the meat getting to them?
It is believed that the logging industry inadvertently facilitates the bushmeat trade by opening up previously inaccessible areas of forest to hunters. It has also been suggested that bridges and roads used by the logging trucks should be destroyed and made impassable in sections of the forest that have already been logged (Robinson and Bennett, 2000). Loggers also often assist hunters in return for easy payments, providing transportation to markets via logging vehicles (Auzel and Wilkie, 2000). Abolishing the service provided by logging vehicles can lead to some hunting camps shutting down altogether (Pearce and Ammann 1995). In some instances, however, even when laws are passed illegal practices continue to take place. For example, in areas of the Congo where transporting bushmeat is prohibited company policy logging truck drivers continue to carry loads of up to two-hundred kilograms on a regular basis (Goodall; BCTF, 2003).
In addition to providing the link needed to transport meat from hunting grounds to markets, loggers can also be big consumers of bushmeat, often doing more damage than their village counterparts (Auzel and Wilkie, 2000). Research found that one thousand two hundred logging company employees consumed up to eighty tonnes of bushmeat in one year in a camp near Lope reserve in central Gabon (BCTF, 2003).
In light of the above, it seems that in order to successfully implement a ban on the use of bushmeat it is necessary to work towards reducing, if not eliminating altogether, deforestation in areas where wild animals are hunted. Logging companies in central Africa have a distinct role in deciding the fate of the bushmeat trade and so efforts have been made in the past, by the Congo government to improve relationships between loggers and conservationists (New York Times, July 7, 2001). Working alongside powerful logging companies, rather against them, may be another useful strategy to substantiate conservation policies.
The continuous demand for wild animal meat in cities across central and western Africa fuels the bushmeat trade, along with the relatively quick income it can generate to both the hunters and the transporters (BCTF, 2003). In cities bushmeat is sold mainly to the urban elite and restauranteurs (Peterson and Ammann, 2003) and so continues to be a valuable commodity to many businessmen and women. Specialized restaurants receive deliveries of a range of wild species from approved suppliers despite laws against its consumption (Peterson and Ammann, 2003). In Cameroon three to four metric tonnes of bushmeat continues to arrive by train per day into one of its main cities, Yauonde (Bristow, 2002). Consumers appear oblivious to the importance of these species within the ecosystem therefore, informing local people about the implications of over harvesting may be essential in altering attitudes towards utilising bushmeat. The Conservation Education Committee has recently brought out an education resource guide in an attempt to increase public awareness and education in Africa (BCTF, 2003) but changes have yet to be observed.
In central and western Africa hunting, and the use of bushmeat in religious ceremonies and for decorative and ornamental purposes has been part of a cultural tradition passed on through generations (Bristow, 2002). Banning the use of bushmeat would mean converting rural communities to producing and growing alternative food sources and may include initiating new trades, such as gardening crops and vegetables or becoming wildlife guides (Peterson and Ammann, 2003). For these people, conserving wild animals means accepting a complete change in lifestyle. The hunter-gatherer society of Karagoua in Cameroon, have replaced the sale of gorilla meat with ecotourism and many ex-hunters have become tour guides and trackers (Bristow, 2002). Apart from the cultural and economic implications involved in banning the use of bushmeat there may be little else available to rural people in terms of providing food for their families. This leads onto the next issue of how banning bushmeat could affect people in western and central Africa.
Many of the world's poorest populations live in Africa. The depth of poverty in a country can be summarized by means of the "Human Development Index" (1998) listing one hundred and seventy-four countries in order of poverty. All but one of the countries in the Congo Basin are ranked at one hundred and thirty or lower (Davies, 2002). Fifty percent of people in this region are also food insecure (FAO, 2000). In comparison to the volume of food available in the developed world only a tiny proportion reaches human populations in central and western Africa. For many African people eating wild animal meat is often the only means of acquiring essential proteins. For example, approximately thirty million people live within the forested regions of central Africa relying on bushmeat as a primary source of animal protein (Redford, 1992). Between sixty and forty percent of the population inhabit cities with no other meat available to them apart from what little arrives from the forest (Peterson and Ammann, 2003). The effects of placing a ban on the use of bushmeat in these areas would undoubtedly have phenomenal effects on both urban and rural dwellers, and may result in driving further human populations to starvation.
Not only would a ban in the use of bushmeat mean eliminating a valuable food source but it would also eliminate a precious trade. In Bomassa, in the Congo, hunters can earn up to $395 per year through the sale of bushmeat (Robinson and Bennett, 2000). The combined subsistence and commercial value of wild meat produced per square kilometre in a year at Ituri Forest, democratic Republic of Congo is US$318 (Wilkie, 1989). Earnings such as these are abominably high when compared to the average daily income received by people in the poorest parts of Africa of less than US$ 1 a day (Davies, 2002).
The importance of the bushmeat trade as an economic commodity becomes apparent with the annual global value of approximately US$ 50 million (BCTF, 2003). The trade in bushmeat and timber exploded across Cameroon initially, following a collapse in the international markets for cocoa in 1988. The crash led to a twenty percent increase in the number of people subsisting below the official poverty line. As a result rural communities became dependent on hunting and trading bushmeat, as a way of earning an income as many persist to do so today (Peterson and Ammann, 2003). The logging industry also continues to be a dominant economic activity in much of central and western Africa. It generates US$506 million per annum for national governments in Cameroon (ITTO 1988; BCTF, 2003) as well as providing healthy profits for the logging companies. Not only has this industry provided a number of well-paid jobs for many locals but it in turn it has contributed towards a US$ 50 million trade in animal meat, increasing the number of poor people by over fifty percent (Davies, 2002). In this sense the logging industry proves to be indispensable to the African people and their economy.
Hunting and logging are so closely linked that unless effective laws are passed in order to create clear barriers between the two, abolishing logging areas in order to successfully pose a ban on the use of bushmeat, may be the only option. By reducing timber production in central and western Africa, locals will lose jobs, which could potentially make earning an income very difficult. Less regrettably, logging companies will lose profit. Although opposing development in Africa seems inappropriate and unjust (Peterson and Amman, 2003) without placing some limitations on resource exploitation these valuable commodities may soon cease to exist.
Due to inadequate implementation of legal policies, political unrest, poor communication and a lack of commitment from officials, so far most conservation efforts have contributed very little towards reducing the use of bushmeat. In March the CITES Bushmeat Working Group published a legislative review in support of their goal to harmonize wildlife laws in central Africa (Bushmeat Quarterly, 2003). However, communication within the Central African Republic has become so increasingly difficult due to political changes that reports from the area are no longer available. Independent sources confirm that poaching is increasing especially with the proliferation of weapons due to internal fighting. The markets of Bangui are flooded with bushmeat. Information coming from war zones within the Democratic Republic of Congo reveals a wildlife massacre from armed men. Large mammals including elephants are killed to feed troops, and the meat and ivory sold to finance fighting.
In the latest report from the BCTF it was decided that solutions to the bushmeat crisis require international collaboration on policy reform, sustainable financing, long-term support for protected areas, developing protein and income alternatives, awareness and education campaigns (Gartland, 2001). Despite efforts from conservation organisations and governments to compose regulations considering all the above, high densities of wild animals are still being killed for their meat. People driven by survival and long-standing traditions, who have little else to rely for food or money, will continue to hunt. While the consumption of certain species may seem unacceptable to many in the western world, for people in central and western Africa all wild animals are regarded as a valuable source of meat (Peterson and Ammann, 2003). People battling to ensure the continued existence of their own families understandably may not share the developed worlds concerns about the death of another species. Therefore raising concern in the countries where it matters most may prove a tricky feat.
Successfully banning the use of bushmeat not only seems an unlikely goal but in many ways an unsuitable one. Allowing the use of bushmeat to continue at a sustainable level may prove to be a more realistic aim. To do this human needs must be met without exceeding acceptable losses in biodiversity (Robinson and Bennett, 2000). However, considering that nearly half of today's two hundred and fifty extant primate species already face the threat of extinction (Mittermeier, Konstant, Nicoll and Langrand, 1992) and taking into account the prediction that one-fifth of all living species could disappear within the next thirty years (Washington Post, 21 April, 1998), controlling the amount of bushmeat being harvested, to a sustainable level, may also be quite a challenge.
With three hundred and fifty thousand humans being born each day (BCTF, 2003) the consumptive requirements for protein will continue to grow. As a result of an unfair and unjust distribution of resources around the world, people in un-developed countries continue to suffer from famine, while mountains of meat go to waste in other countries. Considering the facts it seems unlikely that "humans needs" will ever be met. With or without bushmeat people will go hungry and wildlife will be eradicated. While the decision to abolish the use of bushmeat in central and western Africa may be an unfavourable option for many local people, soon the privilege of choosing may be eliminated forever.