Sensation and perception are easily confused, so to clarify the boundary between the two I will define these terms. Sensation is recognised as the immediate and basic experiences which are generated as stimuli fall on our sensory systems, whereas perception refers to the interpretation of these sensations by the brain giving them meaning and organisation (Matlin, 1997). The speed at which a sensation becomes a perception is so great that many people take for granted the way sensations are processed and interpreted by the brain, to the extent that they do not realise any sort of processing is carried out. Questions regarding the information which informs us of what we perceive a sensation to be have been considered for hundreds of years with many different theories being formed. The theories can be divided into two groups: those which outline a top-down process and those which outline bottom-up processing. Top-down processing refers to the way that our brain interprets sensations according to our own knowledge, whereas bottom-up processing involves us understanding the meaning of a sensation purely from the information the stimulus itself provides us with (Gleitman, 2004). More than 80% of perception is accounted for by vision, so most of the case studies I will use will investigate how visual sensations are perceived.
The first top-down theory I will present is one which says that we are each born with innate knowledge about the world which allows us to create accurate perceptions from sensations we have never before experienced. It is necessary to investigate subjects who have no previous experience of certain sensations, such as blind people who have no experience of visual stimuli, or young infants who have not experienced much at all, so we can be sure that the knowledge used for perception is in fact innate and not learned already. A case for innate knowledge involving infants has been researched by Gibson and Walk (1960), who were interested in the way that infants perceive depth. They conducted an experiment which involved a 'visual cliff' (see fig. 1); this is a table topped with glass strong enough to support a child's weight.
Directly underneath the glass, on one side, was a piece of checked material. On the other side there was also checked material but it was a considerable distance below the surface of the glass. In this way, it looked as though there was a drop down although the glass was in fact very strong and the child could not fall. The infants were tested by placing them on the centre board of the visual cliff and firstly asking their mothers to call them across the 'shallow' side of the table. The infants would crawl to them quite happily. However, when their mothers called them across the 'deep' side, 92% of the children would not cross over it. The experiment was repeated with day-old chicks, newborn goat kids and kittens, and none of them would cross over the 'deep' side. This seemed to show that the perception of this apparent dangerous fall was innate, however the results for the animals will have been more valid than those for the children. This is because the animals had far less visual experience than the children, who were old enough to crawl and thus had probably had around six months' visual experience which could have been the reason they knew to avoid the apparent drop (Hayes, 1993).
The Gestalt school of psychology began in Germany in the 1930s and these psychologists drew up a set of principles about perception. This approach to perception denied the role of experience in building up perception, and said that elements of illusions that we see fall "naturally" into some sort of order which is not under our control (Gregory, 1995). The Gestalt principles stated that we would, if possible, see a complete object rather than a series of random marks, and many illusions known as Gestalt illusions demonstrate our natural tendency to do this. Figure 3 demonstrates how most people see a white triangle rather than three separate circles. It is implied that these tendencies are innate, since we never learn to perceive visual stimuli in this way.
Another top-down idea is that we use our previous experience of a sensation to help us form an accurate perception. A study by Turnbull in 1961 involved taking pygmies out of their natural environment and putting them into a situation of which they had no previous experience. Since pygmies live in dense forest, they do not have to see things from far away in everyday life. Turnbull took a pygmy from the forest onto some open plains, where he showed him a herd of buffalo grazing in the distance. The pygmy said the buffalo must be insects because they appeared to be so small. Similarly, the pygmy described a boat across a lake as a scrap of wood floating. This shows that previous experience has a strong impact on the way we perceive things, which is only noticed when we present someone with a type of stimulus they have never encountered before.
A group of psychologists from the U.S.A. in the 1940s and 1950s known as transactionalists put forward the idea that all stimuli are ambiguous, and perceptions are constructed largely from past experiences (Colman, 2003). They were called transactionalists because they believed perception was a transaction between the observer and the environment. As part of their research they constructed a well known distorted room which, although it was far from square and 'normal', appeared normal to someone standing at a designated point. The distortion is only noticeable when two objects of the same size are placed in the room at different points (see fig.3). It highlighted the fact that we are creatures of habit and will see things they way we expect them to be, even though we are vulnerable to trickery such as the distorted room. We assume that the world is usually very stable and is thus not usually subject to misinterpretation.
The top-down approach to how sensation becomes perception is essential to understanding how we perceive more than two sensations simultaneously when they contradict each other. If a human is shown a video on which they see lips saying one thing, but hear the person saying something different, it is difficult to derive a perception from the sensation itself (the bottom-up approach), since there are two sensations which are different. Altering what someone 'hears' by showing them the lips of the person pronouncing a different sound is known as the McGurk effect. Another sensation which involves the battle between two senses is the size-weight illusion, which involves two cubes, one of which is bigger than the other but both of which are the same weight. Most people believe that the smaller cube is heavier than the larger one. Again, this illusion can fool us into perceiving something which is false.
James Gibson's theory of how sensation becomes perception was a bottom-up one. He said that our perceptions can be rich and elaborate because our stimuli are rich and elaborate, not because our thought processes make them so. His approach is known as the Direct Perception Approach because is says that we directly perceive our environment from information provided by the stimulus we are presented with. In addition, Gibson claimed that we see objects in three dimensions due to information we are given from the stimulus such as its surface texture. If you compare the texture of an object far away with that of an object closer you will notice that the texture becomes denser the closer the object becomes. This information helps an individual to judge distances; no past experience of the sensation is necessary (Matlin, 1997).
Information about depth can be obtained from simply observing a stimulus, because we can take on board depth cues from an object, that is how far it is from the observer and from other objects. One important cue for depth comes from the fact that we have two eyes, and are thus binocular creatures. Each of our eyes sees the world from a slightly different position, and the difference between the two is called binocular disparity. Binocular disparity can induce the perception of depth even if no other distance cues, for example texture, are present. In addition, we can also judge depth with one eye closed, from what are known as monocular depth cues. These rely on objects being bigger or smaller in proportion to other objects, since bigger objects are generally closer and objects further away appear smaller.
According to my research, there are far more top-down theories of how sensation becomes perception in our minds than bottom-up ones. This means that much of our ability to perceive sensations accurately comes from knowledge we already hold, and implies that people who has not had much past experience of sensation and how it should be perceived, babies or blind people for example, are likely to make mistakes. The clues we can gain from simply interpreting a sensation by itself, without assuming any knowledge whatsoever, seem limited; only depth has been mentioned here. Whether or not our knowledge comes from past experience or is innate has been questioned, but it seems that the case for us having innate knowledge of perception is flawed by the difficulties encountered in controlling the amount of stimulation a subject has already experienced.