Natal dispersal, or the movement of organisms away from a place of birth, occurs among a range of species (Brookeral. 1999). Dispersal to a new group may be temporary, or a permanent transfer (Pusy & Packer, 1987). Individuals often go to extreme lengths to migrate from their natal group, e.g. Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata) have been seen travelling 60 kilometres to reach new breeding groups (Pusey & Packer, 1987). Long distance dispersal of this nature may be costly both energetically and through the increased risk of predation and potential aggression from strangers (e.g. vervet monkeys (Chlorocebus aethiops): Cheney & Seyfarth, 1983; olive baboons (Papio anubis): Packer & Pusey, 1979). Dispersal often incurs locational costs as individuals leave behind a familiar home range (Isbell & van Vuren, 1996), e.g. individuals from a group of red howler monkeys (Aloatta seniculus) suffered protein and phosphorous deficiency due to a poor diet as a result of reduced foraging efficiency in unfamiliar forests following dispersal (Pope, 1989). Primates are predominantly social mammals spending a high proportion of time making fervent bonds and securing relationships with group members (de Waal, 1988). Therefore, the social costs of leaving a familiar family group may also be high.
Despite the apparent drawbacks dispersal by one or both sexes occurs frequently among primates (Greenwood 1980). So what are the benefits and why do so many group-living animals choose to disperse? This essay will look at the reasons why non-human primates disperse from their natal groups, the different strategies employed, and the genetic consequences for the individual, the social group and the species population structure. Finally the consequences of dispersal on conservation will be considered.
Although group life provides safety in numbers there is a price to be paid. This comes in the form of competition for food and access to mates (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000). Seeking unexploited resources and avoiding intra-sexual competition provide possible explanations as to why primates disperse (Waser, 1985). Avoiding the deleterious genetic consequences of close inbreeding, causing lethal and semi-lethal recessive genes to become fixed within a population, is thought to be the main factor promoting dispersal (Bengtsson, 1978).
An individual's decision to stay or go depends on the cost-benefit balance for dispersal and remaining at the natal group, or being philopatric (Korstjen & Schippers, 2002). Several studies have found a complex set of variables to be the proximate cause of natal dispersal across a range of species (Belding's ground squirrels (Spermophilus beldingi): Holekamp, 2004; olive baboons: Pusey & Packer, 1987; vervet monkeys: Cheney & Seyfarth, 1983). Motives for dispersal will vary throughout an individuals' lifetime, and between animals of different age or sex within the same species, thus a broad selection of patterns exist (Isbell & van Vuren, 1996; Pusy & Packer, 1983).
For some species dispersal is seasonal, e.g. woolly monkeys (Lagothrix lagtricha) and for others it occurs throughout the year, e.g. other muriquis (Nishimura, 2003). It is influenced by group size, range size and proximity to neighbouring ranges (Isbell & van Vuren, 1996). Dispersal may prevail where risks are minimal, e.g. when habitats overlap and individuals may transfer into a new social environment without incurring costs of locational dispersal (Isbell et al, 2003).
Gene dispersal is an important factor determining the extent of genetic structure within wild populations and is therefore an essential parameter to define optimal sampling strategies for conservation purposes (Hardy et al, 2000). On occasions gene flow can be detrimental. Where dispersal occurs between populations of different species hybrid individuals may evolve, (e.g. among five wild and captive populations of macaque species at Wantabe: Camperio et al 1989; Bartonal. 1996: Brotoisworo: Brooker et al 1999). This often causes confliction over taxonomic definitions and can have implications in identifying conservation priorities. If gene flow is limited when group size is small low heterozygosity may result between groups, e.g. ethiopian vervet monkeys (Turner, 1981). Isolation of small sub-populations will often reduce the predicted long-term probability of the species survival, e.g. the golden lion tamarin (Lentopithecus rosalia) (Dietz et al., 2000). Inbreeding will increase and the population may become genetically weak, or monotypic. For example, adult and sub adult male lion-tailed macaques (Macaca silenus) restricted from immigrating between forest fragments experienced a loss of genetic variability and inbreeding depression (Kumar, 1987). Individuals able to successfully migrate to another fragment in a degraded forest landscape assist species persistence and will have important implications on the conservation of the species population (e.g. chimpanzees, red-tailed monkeys and howler monkeys: Silver and Marsh, 2003).
The ongoing study of primate behavioural ecology is necessary in order to determine species longevity in specific areas. Among the essential behaviours to be studied are the movement patterns of individuals within and between communities (Reynolds,al. 1997). Examining species dispersal strategies is imperative for the successful design of effective biological reserves and could greatly enhance conservation efforts of species threatened with extinction. Sutherland et al (2000) hypothesized several ecological and morphological characteristics of species that may be correlated with natal dispersal distance to be used for biological conservation purposes (Mayer,al. 2002). Through these efforts we can start to make educated decisions about areas and populations that should be priorities for conservation, and aim to ensure successful strategies to preserve viable, robust populations with the ability to overcome stochastic events.