While our own species continues to expand exponentially wild populations of nonhuman primates are experiencing a global crisis (Leakey and Lewin, 1995, Diamond, 1985). Almost half of today's two hundred and fifty primate species are thought to be of conservation concern in all of the ninety-two countries in which they occur (Rowe, 1996). Even more alarmingly, one in five primate species are classified as being endangered or critically endangered by the Primate Specialist Group of the World Conservation Union (IUCN), suggesting their viable extinction within the next two hundred years (CITES, 2002).
The threat facing primate populations is not evenly distributed. Results show a strong positive correlation across the continents, between extinction risk and human population growth (Wright and Jernvall, 1998), (see Appendix, figure 1). It has been found that those primates most at risk of extinction live in regions where human figures exceed 0.28 humans per hectare (Wright and Jernvall, 1998). While disease, predation and famine influence species densities the impact of human activities are so profound that they appear to over ride all other factors. Four anthropogenic activities (known collectively as the "Evil Quartet", Diamond 1984, 1989) are largely held responsible for the diminished primate populations apparent today (Struhsaker, 1997). These factors are: the introduction of exotic species, secondary extinctions, habitat destruction and hunting (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). As a result of an increasing demand for food from humans and the potential for generous economic gain, hunting currently poses a particularly serious threat to primate species.
In this paper I will discuss how the effects of hunting has led to extinctions in the past and currently threatens primate populations today. I will then suggest reasons why some primate species may be more vulnerable to hunting pressures than others, concentrating mainly on hunting for food and trade, habitat disturbance and proximity to human populations.
Hunting by man is not a new phenomenon. It is thought to have been the main determining factor pushing many of the prehistoric mega fauna to extinction. It is thought that the ancient, giant, grazing baboon, Theropithecus Oswaldi, was eradicated through hunting some six hundred thousand years ago by prehistoric man (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000). In just the last one thousand years human beings have been responsible for the elimination of the orang-utan (Pongo pygmeus) in Java, and fifteen species of giant lemur in Madagascar (e.g. Archaeoindris) (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). These species may have been particularly easy prey for hunters as their bulk would have made them slow (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000), most were diurnal; so could be found fairly readily, and living on the ground made capturing them a simple task (Godfrey  et al. 1997). More recently local extinctions have also occurred as a result of heavy hunting pressures with the impending loss of many more primate species looming in the not so distant future.
There is a wide range of evidence suggesting the susceptibility of colobine monkeys to hunting (Haddow, 1952; Struhsaker, 1981; Howard, 1991; Kano 1997). For example, Miss Waldron's red colobus (Procolobus badius waldroni) is thought to be extinct across its entire range in West Africa and Eastern Cote D'Ivoire due to a high level of shotgun hunting (Wright and Jernvall, 1998). The inconspicuous, social nature of this species may have made them easy for hunters to track and led to a dramatic loss in numbers and eventual total elimination. After being eliminated in the Semliki Forest of Western Uganda Elliot's red colobus (P.rocolobus badius ellioti) exists only in Western Zaire, and Preuss's red colobus (Procolobus badius preussi) is also under serious risk due to over hunting. There have been reports that colobus monkeys are favourable targets for many hunters as they do not run and hide when hunted (Struhsaker, 1997). There is also evidence that colobines favouring highly fibrous diet may be disproportionally endangered compared to other species due to their solitary dependence on leaf matter (Wright and Journal, 1985).
In addition, between the 1980's and 1990's the mangabey (Lophocebus aterrimus) was hunted to extinction in the Wamba area of Zaire (Struhsaker, 1997). The grey-cheeked mangabey (Lophocebus albegina) exisits in an extremely limited patchy distribution due to local extinctions caused by hunting (Struhsaker, 1997), and, in Bia National Park, Ghana, the roloway guenon (Cercopithecus diana roloway) and the white-naped sooty mangabey (Cercocebus atys lunulatus) both now face the risk of total extinction having succumbed to heavy hunting pressures (Oates et al, 1996; McGraw, 1998).
Evidence suggests that mass extinctions of the past were severe, wiping out a huge range of species over relatively short periods of time. However, the development of new technology and modern hunting equipment, together with an increased demand from an ever expanding human population have all played a role in maintaining a comparable current rate of extinction loss. One in three of the world's apes, monkeys, lemurs, and other primates are endangered (National Geographic, 2002 - Conservation International (CI) and IUCN, 2000) and there are suggestions that we are currently experiencing the sixth mass extinction in history (Leakey and Lewin, 1995).
According to a recent list of "The World's Top 25 Most Endangered Primates " compiled by experts from around the world, a variety of different primate species are currently threatened with extinction (see Appendix, figure 2). There appears to be no obvious trend suggesting why the primates on the list should be prone to extinction, so what are the under lying causes behind what makes some primates more vulnerable than others?
From the examples discussed in this paper it appears obvious that a range of factors play a part in deciding the fate of primate populations across the globe. During the 19 th Congress of the International Primate Society in Bejing, China, in 2002 it was decidedly agreed that primates are under threat of extinction mainly as a result of rapid habitat loss and exploitation for food and body parts by humans (National Geographic, 2002). Indeed Leakey and Lewin predicted more than seven years ago that: "if unchecked human activities will continue to result in an upset balance of species interactions of altered ecosystems and extensive habitat and species loss." Hunting at a sustainable level may prove to be an effective conservation strategy for many species. However, recent reports suggest that current sustainable rates of harvesting gorillas and chimpanzees may be just 1% and 4% respectively (Peterson and Ammann, 2003). Therefore for primates, sustainable hunting may not be a realistic option.
As a result of the diminishing natural environment it has been calculated that further losses in primate diversity could occur as soon as within the next twenty to fifty years (Kudla, Wilson and Wilson, 1997; Struhsaker, 1997). If predictions are accurate, large, highly conspicuous, specialized, terrestrial primate species inhabiting areas prone to habitat degradation are most likely to be lost first. While religious, cultural and traditional beliefs protect certain species from hunting pressures, people's personal views and attitudes towards primates will, in addition, shape the future of their communities.
Throughout history humankind has decidedly influenced the diversity and distribution of primate species and will continue to do so for as long as the two co-exist. Ultimately it is the rate at which the human population continues to grow, combined with species-specific resilience to anthropogenic pressures that will decide the future of remaining primate populations.