This literature review will examine the different approaches used to tackle truancy within schools. It will in look in detail at the methodology used to research the effectiveness of such interventions. My second year placement has just been completed with the Education Social Work Service in Oxfordshire and this has given me an insight into the issues surrounding truancy and how they are being addressed. In the past few years there has been a high-profile publicity campaign and various approaches have been used to tackle truancy. However, history shows that with all the work being done the scale of school absenteeism has hardly changed. For example, in 1870 before compulsory education was introduced the school board in Leeds achieved attendance rates of 89% among children on the school roll. In comparison the attendance returns made in June 2001 indicated the attendance rates among Leeds secondary school was also 89% (Zhang 2004). In addition the unauthorised absence rates in the past ten years has remained stable at around 1% for secondary schools and 0.5% for primary schools. The latest campaign introduced by the government is a system of Fast-Track prosecution of parents. The education minister, Ivan Lewis said in 2003 "the message is clear - prosecution works" (Zhang 2004). However, this is not based on thorough academic enquiry, in fact, my literature search on this subject shows that very little research to prove this statement has been carried out.
There are further debates, which show the effectiveness of placing an Education Social Worker within the school. This tackles truancy by being readily accessible to pupils and parents and to be able to investigate the reasons behind truancy. This enables the ESW to work in partnership with other agencies to put supportive measures in place before the situation reaches crisis. In my experience on placement it was apparent that truancy cannot be addressed without investigating the wider family circumstances. It seemed that the Education Service and Social and Health Care were working in isolation and it was very difficult to enlist the help of Social and Health Care even when the family appeared to have reached crisis point. When looking at research it can be seen that truancy is a serious indicator of physio-socio education disturbance (Pritchard and Williams 2001). It can not effectively be addressed by using just one method of intervention such as the prosecution of parents. (Zhang 2004).
A thorough literature review on this subject has been carried out and seven pieces of research have been identified together with articles in Community Care and Zero2Ninteen. The following two pieces of research were found on the Dfes Website.
The methodology of this research was not clear, it only stated that data was collected from 12LEA's over an 18-month period. There appeared to be both qualitative and quantitative data collected but I felt this paper did not go into sufficient detail for me to analyse.
This research was carried out using a telephone survey of 2000 parents/carers' but it did not specify whether this was quantitative or qualitative data that was collected
Furthermore, as this research was carried out on behalf of the DFES and funded by them the ethical issues must be considered and, indeed, whether the findings would be impartial. For this reason these pieces have not been included in the final analysis.
The search was then widened using Caredata and the following study was found looking at a long-term approach to tackling truancy.
This was very descriptive regarding the way the scheme was used in the schools but did not give me a detailed account of the methodology used.
The following study was found when looking at the Scottish Council for Research into Education (The SCRE Centre).
This research looked at the link between truancy and pupil performance in examinations. When looking at their research questions they did not look at the approaches to tackling truancy but was purely looking at the statistical relationship. In addition it looked at the impact of the truants behaviour on other pupils and teacher's which was not relevant to this literature review.
Having considered the above pieces of research this essay will now focus on the three remaining pieces of research. A summary of the articles will be given together with details of the methodology used. In addition the methods will be critically analysed in terms of the impact on the information generated.
This project was a school-based child and family social work service set up in four schools in Dorset (two primary and two secondary). The schools drew their pupils from the county's most socio-economic disadvantaged areas. The hypothesis was that poverty, low intelligence and early school failure lead to truancy, lack of educational qualifications and low status jobs. The aim of the study was therefore to measure at the outset of the project and after three years, pupil's attitudes, truancy, delinquency and school exclusion rates. For this literature review the parts of the study that relate to truancy only have been analysed. A qualified social worker worked with two schools averaging 960 pupils unlike the standard ESW potential caseload of 4000 pupils. We must be aware of the ethical issues here. The pupils who had the enhanced social work intervention were put in 'control' groups and were deliberately given a better service by the ESW than pupils at the comparative schools. (Blaxter, Hughes and Tight 2004). The first role of the social worker was to provide parental support, helping to reduce family disturbance. It involved counselling, practical advice and advocating on behalf of the pupil and family with outside agencies. The second role was to offer a consultation service to teachers.
The aim of this research was to measure the effectiveness of parental prosecution with regard to lowering truancy rates and the data was collected for the period 1999-2002. An article summarising this was located in Zero2Nineteen (June 2003) using Caredata and the full research study was requested direct from the author.
This research was commissioned by the Local Government Association and was conducted between May 2002 and October 2003. The aim was to:
Analyse the prosecution process and their outcomes.
Gain the views of parents, young people and professionals
Explore the relationship between successful outcomes and age of the child at the time of prosecution.
There is no doubt that many different approaches have been used to tackle truancy with the most recent being parental prosecution. However, the evidence from this does not show a positive relationship between prosecution and the reduction of truancy. Earlier research has shown the effectiveness of placing a qualified social worker within the school who can work in partnership with parents, pupils and other outside agencies. However, from both viewpoints there is no doubt that early intervention is essential. There is very little research into the effectiveness of parental prosecution but one factor that was highlighted in both pieces of research was the difference between primary and secondary school pupils. It is clear therefore that further research is needed to find out whether the attendance legislation needs to be amended to take into account the child's age.