This essay will describe and critically assess the methods used to construct the "Responding to Others" interview. It will highlight any strengths and weaknesses that became apparent during the interview and look at ways of developing better interviewing skills. However, before this an 'interview' must first be defined. It is a formal meeting for the purpose of assessing their merits and to obtain information. This specific interview was to assess an applicant's suitability for a position in Health and Social Care.
When constructing the interview we looked at the three different types of interview, unstructured, semi-structured and fully structured. As the purpose of the interview was to ascertain as far as possible whether the interviewee was the kind of person who would be suitable to work in a health care setting we decided upon a semi-structured interview. This type of interview allows for the interviewer to follow up ideas, probe responses and ask for further clarification. Similarly there is scope for the interviewee to choose what and how much they say about a particular topic. A purely structured interview is very specific and does not easily allow the interviewer to gain an insight into a persons beliefs and values. On the other hand an unstructured interview could end up with a lot of "chatting" but no real important issues learnt. Using a semi-structured interview allowed us to ask 'open' questions which gave the interviewee complete freedom when replying. An example of an open question is "Tell me about the way you first learnt of your diagnosis" (Yaskowich & Stam 2003). As you can see from this question it allows the interviewee to "tell their story".
We thought that the first few questions needed to get the interviewee talking in order that she would feel at ease before the more probing questions towards the middle of the interview which would ask for her ideas and opinions. We therefore put question two at the beginning hoping this would encourage the interviewee to relax and talk about herself.
As a group we decided to record the interview on tape in order that the interviewer could concentrate asking the questions and observing the interviewee rather than spending the time making notes. We were aware that this would be time consuming if there were many interviews to be done but for the purpose of this interview we felt that it would be the best method. It would also enable us to not only listen to the words used but also where the emphasis was placed on particular words. This can be very important because the meaning of a sentence can be changed completely.
It became apparent once we had piloted the interview that some of the questions needed amending slightly in order and content. For example questions eight and nine should be merged into one question as we were getting the answers to both when asking question eight. Although we were trying to get the interviewee to tell us about herself in question two we soon realised that it needed to be more specific. It was too vague and did not give a clear idea of what we wanted thereby making the interviewee feel more nervous which was in complete contrast of what we were trying to obtain. We should have led into the question by referring to the details on her Curriculum Vitae. This would have given her some direction as to what information we were looking for.
We were aware that we needed to keep the questions clear and use no jargon as this could easily confuse the interviewee and make her more nervous. It can be seen that jargon is often used by professionals to protect them from having to face up to the impact of the information on a patient. For example, it has been found that 7 - 53% of patients claimed not to have understood the information given to them. In addition to this 50% of well educated students did not understand the meaning of terms such as anti - emetic or dilated (Lee 1997). In addition to this we felt that it was necessary to have prompts ready in case the interviewee was too vague with her answers and they would help to make the interview flow more easily. A further point that we needed to bare in mind when constructing the questions was to be careful asking questions drawn on concepts. An example of this would be a question with regard to sexual harassment which is a common phenomena today. However, a study has shown that when asking women in there 70's and 80's about incidents of sexual harassment during the war there were many blank expressions on the women's faces. It was the concept they had difficulty with because when the question was rephrased to "if they could recall experiencing anything at the hands of men which they perceived as ill-meaning, mischievous or unkind", the stories began to flow. (Summerfield 1998). It can be seen therefore that the question needs to be phrased in a way that is going to be understood by the interviewee.
The interview was conducted in a small room but unfortunately there was another interview being conducted at the same time. This was not ideal and was quite difficult at times because the interviewer could not always hear the answers given by the interviewee. The interviewer introduced herself and gave a brief summary of the sort of questions that was going to be asked. As we had decided to use a tape recorder we asked permission before we began with the questions. Permission was given but on the understanding that the tape would be destroyed once it had been transcribed. The interviewer sat with open posture and head slightly forward thereby giving the impression that she was very attentive and interested in what the interviewee had to say. There was good eye contact throughout the interview and some humour was used which we felt helped to make the interviewee relax and open up further. The interviewer improvised with the questions where appropriate, the script was not followed exactly as planned. When the answers were being given the interviewer gave plenty of agreeing nods which once again showed interest. We were aware that the interviewee needed time to answer the questions and when there was a slight pause the interviewer smiled and did not rush in with a prompt too quickly. However, it was noted that the interviewee was sat with a straight back and hands crossed on the desk throughout the interview.
Non-verbal communication plays an important part when interviewing, this is made up of such things as eye contact, dress and body language. It has been seen to be four times more powerful than verbal communication. In addition to this it must be understood that cultural patterns differ with regard to non-verbal communication. A study has shown a difference in the timing of gaze while speaking and listening between USA white and African Americans (La France & Mayo 1976). It is important to avoid misunderstanding provoked by cultural differences in both verbal and non-verbal communication. The spoken word can be interpreted in so many different ways depending on the tone, pitch, volume and perhaps the most important part of this is where the emphasis is placed on certain words.
When all questions had been answered the interviewee was thanked for her time and acknowledged that she gave some very interesting answers. This was to convey a positive attitude and show empathy. Before closing the interview we asked if there were any questions the interviewee wanted to ask and then stood up to shake her hand.
The interview was piloted three times before we came up with what we felt were the right questions in the right order. We each took a turn at the different roles and this allowed us to critically analysis the methods we had used and develop ways of improving our skills. As an observer we were able to take more notice of non-verbal communication such as body language and to see how the interviewee reacted to certain questions. Being the interviewer gave an insight into any additional questions or probes that we needed to include.
This part of the essay will look at what needs to be developed in order to improve interviewing skills as a health and social care professional. I will reflect on the things I have learnt but first reflection needs to be defined. This is the ability to examine your own actions, thoughts and feelings. It is a key issue when developing professional knowledge and judgement. It is described as " The creative process whereby novel solutions are found to professional problems at work". (Schon 1983)
When looking at the interview one of the first and possibly the most important issues that we did not establish was the interviewee's name. This is essential to ensure that you have the right person and to avoid any breaches of confidentiality. Also at the beginning of the interview it would have been better to state how long it was likely to last. This enables the interviewee to prioritise her thoughts and answers and it avoids the difficult situation of the interviewer having to cut short any answers. In addition to this we could have made "small talk" about the weather or the journey as this is helpful in reducing the interviewee's anxiety. However, if this goes on for too long it could in fact cause more anxiety. Furthermore, at the beginning of the interview we briefly explained what sort of questions we were going to ask and said we would include a question on disputes within the workforce. It could be argued that by using the word 'dispute' we immediately made the interviewee feel anxious and it may have been better for us to be more general about the content of questions we were going to ask.
Interviews should be as 'normal' as possible for the interviewee which means the vocabulary used should be as close to the persons normal everyday social conversation in order not to distract the interviewee and make them feel overwhelmed by the questioning. It can be seen that this can often be a problem as the professional can be worlds apart from the interviewee in education, income and class. A real effort must be made to put all these things aside in order to obtain the information that is needed from the interview. (Newell 1994)
I have also learnt that the conditions of the interview need to be carefully considered in order to optimise the chances of a successful interview. For example, excessive noise can raise stress levels and also gives the impression of a lack of privacy. This was evident in our interview and could have been one of the reasons the interviewee's hands remained crossed and she did not appear to be relaxed. If this cannot be avoided the noise should be acknowledged with the interviewee and if it is too difficult to continue then as a last resort it could be rescheduled (Newell 1994). In hindsight we should have mentioned the noise levels during our interview.
Furthermore we needed to be aware of critical thinking as this is a very important quality for a health and social care professional to have. Research has shown that it makes a big difference to the quality of service that the service user obtains when the professional is a critical thinker. This involves the careful examination and evaluation of beliefs and actions (Gibbs and Gambrill 1999). With this in mind I feel we could have altered our questions slightly to probe more into whether the interviewee was a critical thinker. We needed to confirm that she could recognise many different perspectives within one topic and would not just accept an outcome if she did not agree with it but would be ready to "question the answer". Without critical thinking the outcome could be helper induced harm, for example institutionalised healthy deaf children could become incorrectly labelled as having emotional problems (Lane 1991).
When we came together in our group we decided we would each come up with a set of questions and then meet on another date to collate them and pick out the best from each list. We decided this would be a better method than brainstorming in a group because it has been seen that it is more creative and does not inhibit the individuals ideas. We were able to be critical of each others questions and reword them to the satisfaction of all and it was therefore a very positive exercise. When we came to pilot the interview one member did not want to be the interviewer or interviewee but we felt this was possibly due to nerves. However, if they are not willing to partake fully in other group activities then the theory of social loafing must be recognised.
During my placement a particular incident has highlighted to me the importance of effective communication when working within a multi-disciplinary team. I was visiting a family who had been referred to Home-Start by their Health Visitor. The mother was struggling to cope with her two children under the age of two and was again expecting another baby. The health visitor felt that she was isolated and needed help to encourage her to participate in toddler groups and other activities. At the first visit the co-ordinator from Home-start outlined the situation as she saw it and of course mentioned the pregnancy. However, it turned out that she had lost the baby two weeks prior to our visit and the Health Visitor had failed to notify Home-Start. This shows a complete lack of basic communication skills between the professionals and is wholly unacceptable.
In conclusion, therefore, effective communication and interviewing skills between a multi-disciplinary team and the service user are possibly the most important issues when trying to ensure the service user obtains the correct care.