Using the appropriate CASP guidelines for quantitative research the following paper will be critically appraised:
Robbins et al (2003). Minor Illness Education for Parents of Young Children. Journal of Advanced Nursing.
Quantitative research has been defined as the process of testing relationships, differences, and cause and effect interactions among and between variables. These processes are then either tested with hypothesis and/or research questions (Haber, 2002). He also comments that research questions and/or hypothesis' are usually embedded in either the introduction or background of a research study.
A clearly focused research question was not evident in the introduction or background sections of the study, furthermore through reading the whole paper a research question still could not be found in another section. Knapp (1998) describes a research question as an interrogative sentence that poses a researchable problem regarding the advancement of knowledge. He discussed that it includes three aspects; it must be a question and not a statement, it must be capable of empirical solution and it must be directed towards the advancement of general scientific knowledge.
A hypothesis is a formal statement of the expected relationship between independent and dependent variables in a specified population (Burns, 2003). The independent variable is the variable that is manipulated by the researcher, within the study; this variable appears to be the educational programme (providing booklets and advice). The dependent variable is influenced by the independent variable, which appears to be the parent's ability to cope with their child's minor illnesses (quantitative marketing research, 2000). Thus a hypothesis within the study would have been appropriate as it would have looked at the relationship between the intervention group and how providing booklets and advice would alter their ability to assess and cope with their child's minor illness.
Randomization is a sampling selection procedure in which each person in a specified population has an equal chance of being included in the sample (Nieswiadomy, 1998). Parents were collected from one medical practice located in Scotland. To be eligible parents must have been registered with the medical centre in question and have a new baby (born between February and July 1999). Parents who fit the criteria required to take part in the study (stated above) were given the opportunity to take part. It was completely their decision whether to consent and take part or refuse. Consequently each eligible parent had an equal opportunity to be included. Eligible families were visited by their health visitor, appropriate information was given and consent obtained.
Stratification was used to select two equal samples from each of the subgroups, which then received either the educational programme (intervention) or standard care programme (Control). It appeared that the study used stratified random sampling; this is a random sampling process which selects a sample after the population has been divided into subgroups, according to some variable of importance to the research study (Decker, 2001). The study divided the eligible parents into subgroups depending on whether they were first or second time parents.
120 eligible parents were identified from their practice birth registry, of these 103 parents consented to take part. There were 54 parents in the intervention group and 49 parents in the control group.
The intervention group received a booklet and a home visit which included advice from health professionals. In contrast the control group continued to receive their standard health visitor's visits, no additional booklets or advice was given. Of the 103 participants who took part there was one participant from each group that was not accounted for at the end of the study, thus 2% the overall sample size. As the percentage of dropouts appeared significantly small it would be unlikely to have a significant effect on the overall results of the study (Coyne, 1999).
The most significant difference between the intervention and control group was the amount the parents visited the child health clinic; parents in the intervention group visited it on fewer occasions then the parents in the control group. This could appear to show that the extra advice and booklet may have had an effect on the intervention groups' confidence in identifying when their child has a minor illness, thus preventing them from using the medical centre as often as the control group.
As the study adhered to a local 'health service ethics committee' guidelines there would have to be elements of the study if not all that would have had ethical considerations. All parents were informed of the study protocol via information sheet, and verbally by a qualified healthcare professional. Consent was taken to indicate that they were willing to take part. Consent must be taken by each participant in a research study, and to consent they need to understand exactly what the study entails (Dodd, 1996).They were able to withdraw at any time and still be able to use their medical centre as often as they liked. Parents were provided with contact numbers for any further advice, and confidentiality was maintained throughout including anonymity in reporting.
Blinding is a method used to keep information concerning the study groups and allocation concealed from the subjects, the healthcare staff and/ or the research staff (Decker, 2001). Blinding is not always possible to maintain as in some circumstances the process of collecting and allocating participants can be evident (Hopkins, 2000). Health professionals at the medical centre and research staff were concealed from the allocation process; this can be considered a double-blind study as two groups of people were unaware and concealed from the allocation process (Hopkins, 2000). However the blinding process appears to have flawed in this study as the intervention group were recognizable due to being the only group who received booklets and additional visits. The 1 st research nurse provided educational visits to the intervention group before the questionnaires were provided. The 2 nd research nurse collected the questionnaires at seven months from all participants during a home visit, and collected data from both groups on their uses of services over the seven month period since their child's birth. As the 2 nd research nurse had visited the participants as a whole and provided the same service to all 'observer bias' would be unlikely to occur. Observer bias can occur when an observer, and their results, may be influenced by prior knowledge, or experience of the groups and participants under investigation (Keegan, 2004).
Validity refers to the accuracy and truth of the data that are produced to the extent which a measuring instrument e.g. questionnaire really measures what the researcher intended to measure (Polit-O'Hara, 1995). Questionnaires were the main collection tool in the study, which included 5 illness scenarios in which parents were also asked how confident they would feel in managing each scenario. It appears that the study was valid; as the instrumental tool used to collect the data included scenarios and questions. This provided the researcher with answers that showed whether there had been improvement in parental confidence and knowledge dependent on the group which they are from.
Sample size can be dependent on several factors:
It appeared that the sample chosen were homogeneous on all variables other than the one being measured; they all had children of similar ages, lived in same area and all belonged to the same medical centre. Thus a small sample would have been sufficient for the researchers study according to Nieswiadomy (1998).
Most research reports present their findings in both a narrative form and in tables (Nieswiadomy, 1998) and this appeared to occur in the study's results. Tables are used as a means of organizing and summarizing data so they are easily read and interpreted within a research paper (Burns, 1995). Bell (1993) discusses that the findings of a study should be clearly explained within the text to support tables and figures, subsequently the tables were supported in the study with plenty of narration and explanation making the findings easier to follow.
No clear confidence intervals were reported; instead p-values were used to show the probability of an observed result happening by chance which should occur under a null hypothesis (p-value, 2004). However a criticism could be that no hypothesis, whether a null or an alternative was stated within the study when quite clearly a hypothesis would have been appropriate. Subsequently a p-value perhaps should not have been calculated as there appeared to be no null hypothesis, which as stated should be apparent when using p-values.
The study was conducted in one practice covering one geographical area. Subsequently even though the findings may not be feasible to other populations; the findings from this study appeared to represent the participants as a whole, together with all demographic characteristics. Additionally the study appeared to not take into consideration how the findings may differ if the participants were from ethnic minorities or areas of more or less deprivation. Subsequently if the study was conducted again and those people were used within the sample, the overall results may have been very different.
Findings showed that an educational intervention resulted in a reduction in visits to the child health clinic. A greater certainty for intervention group on the home care options they would choose, thus a reduction in consulting a doctor. However the study found that parents in this group felt less confident and knowledgeable by the end of the study. Reduced confidence and knowledge raised concerns over the educational service as the benefit of the education does not seem to outweigh the fact that parents' competence levels were affected. Consequently their children could potentially be at risk if they ever were in a situation where a medical decision needed to be made.
Robbins, H suggested further research is needed to identify how parents utilize educational messages when caring for sick children and the influence that those have on other factors e.g. confidence. Additionally it is apparent that health professionals need to rethink their aims in providing education, especially learn to appreciate that trying to reduce consultations may not always be appropriate or achievable.