Using the appropriate CASP guidelines for qualitative research the following paper will be critically appraised:
Farrell et al (2003). Management of Childhood Constipation: Parents' Experiences. Journal of Advanced Nursing.
The aim of qualitative research studies should be consistent with the identified statement of the problem (Haber et al, 2002). Farrell clearly stated his aim to:
"Explore parents' experiences of consulting health professionals about management of their children's constipation".
The study title clearly reflects Farell's intended aim; the title conveys the study will explore parents' experiences of their children's constipation, and in comparison the aim integrates the title and develops it further to explain the area of healthcare the parents' experienced.
Nieswiadomy (1998) describes qualitative research as research that questions human experiences conducted in natural settings, and uses data that are words or text rather than numeracy in order to describe the experiences that are being studied. The paper studied used in depth interviews surrounding families' real life experiences of childhood constipation. A literary approach was taken thus fulfilling all the criteria for a qualitative research study and making a qualitative approach appropriate for the study.
The research paper discusses that the design of the study was underpinned using the Heideggerian approach to phenomenology. A phenomenological method uses a process of learning and constructing the meaning of human experience through intensive dialogue with persons who are living the experience (Haber, 1998). The main focus of the study uses parents real life experiences of their children's constipation, this is why a phenomenological approach was taken, as the researcher seeked to give voice and an understanding to human experiences.
Diversity within a sample is essential to understand and develop further knowledge derived from people from different backgrounds and who have had different experiences in life (Anderson, 1996). Subsequently children of all ages from who had received treatment for constipation in diverse clinical settings were targeted for the study sample. A sampling matrix was used in the study to identify the required characteristics of the sample they were looking to gain (Miles and Huberman, 1994). A sampling matrix was important to use as the researcher was looking to capture the diversity of parents' experiences when they accessed health services by different routes for their children's constipation episodes.
Hospital records were reviewed and 20 children who had received care in the last 12 months and fitted the required criteria were contacted in writing. Reply slips and pre-paid envelopes were included with an invitation to participate. Only eight parents' replies were positive to take part, the other twelve either did not reply or their responses were negative. The researcher did not appear to state what the reasons for negative responses were or whether parents just did not reply.
Interviews are a method of data collection where a data collector questions a subject verbally (Decker, 2001). The interviews were conducted face-to-face and included discussion and prompt questions to help parents discuss and share their experiences from past encounters with health professionals. As there appeared to be no clear guidelines for the interviewer to follow during interviews, an unstructured method must have been conducted. Unstructured interviews do not reflect preconceived ideas about content or flow, and are done with little or no organisation (Morse, 1991). An unstructured method is not completely accurate; consequently variation between interviews would be more likely to occur.
The success of an interview is dependent on the type of physical and phychologic setting the interviewer constructs. The place of interview should allow as much privacy as possible, with minimal distractions (Wong, 2003). Choice was given to parents on the most convenient and comfortable setting to conduct their interview. All but one parent chose to be interviewed at home; the other parent chose a hospital environment. Home environments may not always be the most appropriate settings to conduct interviews, it was not stated but there could have been several distractions within the home such as their family, in particular their children, telephones or televisions which may have delayed or altered the data collected from the interview.
All interviews were audio-recorded, with the researcher making additional notes. Audio-recording of data is an appropriate way to collect data as it can prevent systemic bias that could occur during data collection or interpretation (Morse, 1991).
The researcher did not appear to consider how his own potential bias could occur in the study. Sampling bias occurs when samples are not carefully selected (Nieswiadomy, 1998). It has not appeared to have been considered that two members of the research team invited parents from their own caseloads to take part in the study, thus could lead to sampling bias. When collecting data, during the interview process the parents who were known to the researchers may have been more willing to share experiences as they may have felt more comfortable talking with interviewers they were familiar with. The other participants may have been more hesitant to share their experiences, subsequently could have lead to shorter interviews leading to more variance between the data collected.
The researcher has considered ethics by seeking local academic and ethical approval as well as obtaining consent from each participant. Informed consent is the legal principle that Govan's a persons ability to accept or refuse treatment (Haber, 1998), or in the case of this study whether they are willing to participate in the study. Each participant was anonymised throughout the study. Every participant has the right to anonymity and confidentiality according to the American Nurses Association (ANA) guidelines, confidentiality means that individual identities of subjects will not be linked to the information they provide and will not be publicly divulged (Wong, 2003).
An analysis leads the researcher to ask other questions about the data in order to build a strong theory (Haber, 1998). Within the study Farrell, M has included a brief description of the analysis process. Collected data from the interviews were fully transcribed, interpreted and then checked several times before significant statements were taken from the transcripts. Thematic analysis appears to have been used in the study as the statements were clustered together to support a theme which expressed one of the feelings described such as 'asserting the need for action'.
The findings appeared to show that there were six key themes identified; 'enduring and extreme constipation', dismissed and fobbed off', 'asserting the need for action', 'validation and acknowledgement', 'being vigilant', positive responses from health professionals'. The findings conveyed within these themes supported fears that poorly managed health consultations for problems of childhood constipation can have a very negative effect on parents.
The researcher discussed that there have been concerns surrounding the reliability and validity of qualitative research in the past (Appleton, 1995). Farrell used additional strategies to allow the study to be more credible. Strategies included coding checks, whereby interview transcripts were analysed and coded by the lead investigator (qualitative researcher) and member checking, where participants were invited back to provide feedback about the trustworthiness of their findings . Three parents attended the event and another four questionnaires, providing feedback were returned. Only 50% of the participant's feedback was accounted for, as a result the feedback provided was only representative of half of the participants. The other 50% of participants who did not provide feedback may have had very different views, and if their opinions were accounted for the study may not have appeared so credible.
The researcher identified from his findings that there is a need for policy change, as reported in the NHS plan (DOH, 2002). Services and responses need to be geared so that patients and their families experience positive health care encounters, and effective communication skills are needed to achieve a positive health consultation. Kennedy (2001) highlighted that there are deficiencies in paediatric health care settings, and it is evident that there needs to be improvements so that children can experience health care services that are appropriate and tailor made to them.
The researcher recognized that the sample size was very small, and the experiences and findings that were collected from the sample cannot be considered representative of a larger population. However the findings from the study can be used to work towards more community-based nurse-led services for the management of childhood constipation, and work to provide better education and support for the children and their families. So that hopefully in the future patients and their families experiences' of childhood constipation, in particular can be more positive and lead to better management of care.