The above statement is one of thirty nine recommendations made by the Acheson report in 1998. The report was commissioned in 1997 in response to a feeling that there was a need to address and attempt to reduce the many inequalities within the NHS at that time (Acheson 1998 cited in Purdy and Banks 2001). Fairness or Equity has been an underlying principle of the NHS since its foundation in 1948 (Green & Thorogood 1998). It has always been understood that resources are limited and have to be allocated in a way that was deemed "fair", and although this allocation could, in fact be referred to as a rationing of services; politicians prefer to use the term priority setting (King's Fund 1997). In this essay I will discuss the concept of equity in healthcare focusing on three areas: variations and inequalities - what causes these and why are they there? Equity in primary healthcare and whether the government is doing enough to ensure that this is happening; and finally the equitable (or not) treatment of the disabled and chronically ill. For each area I will be exploring the provision of and access to care and resources and the experiences of the general public. Where possible, I will be citing examples from the Mental Health field to illustrate my points as this is where my experience lies. To put these ideas into perspective, I will begin the essay by giving a brief historical overview of the history of the NHS and how we have arrived at the point we are at today with the service.
The NHS was established in 1946 with cross party support to provide a comprehensive health service, free at the point of delivery which was available to all no matter what their circumstances (Purdy & Banks 2001 :4). The creation of the NHS was part of the Labour government's plan to provide a "Welfare State" which would tackle the problems of poor education, health and poverty by providing finance and expertise from a central location. This spirit of collectivism lasted until the election of a Conservative government in 1979 by which time the NHS was perceived to be in crisis due to funding issues and problems with the structure of the service as a whole. The Tories embraced a philosophy of individual responsibility, encouraging government services such as the NHS to be run more like businesses and for the public to take responsibility for maintaining their own health. This government devised financial incentives for healthcare workers who met their targets and they used the achievement of these targets as performance criteria. There was also a move away from providing care within hospitals to care in the community, the belief at the time being that this was a more cost effective way to manage illness. There were some thoughts that this may be the beginning of the end for the NHS, emphasis was now on efficiency, effectiveness and accountability and levels of funding were adjusted accordingly; the service was now to be funded via National Insurance contributions rather than direct taxation. Although the Conservative government's approach did make some contributions to improving health by educating the nation and encouraging personal responsibility, the net result was still that the gap between the rich and poor of England grew. "New Labour" when they came to power wanted a "new NHS"- a system based on partnership and driven by performance - they called this the "third way" (Secretary of State for Health 1997 cited in Purdy & Banks 2001 :41). This "third way" did not intend to return the NHS to the centralised command of the 1970s, but neither did it want to continue with the bureaucracy which had developed in the 1990s - it took ideas from both collectivism and individual responsibility and added something of its own. New labour have called their approach "Communitarianism" and promise to provide the "world view" for health, healthcare and the experience of health and illness deep into the twenty first century (Purdy & Banks 2001 :5).
The historical overview of the NHS mentions that during the 1980s the gap between the rich and the poor widened, there is also a direct correlation between poverty and ill health (King's fund 1997) and so this variable was affected too, as the rich got healthier, the poor became less healthy. Before we begin to look at the factors which may contribute towards variations and inequalities in health, it is important to look at what we mean by "health" since it can be a very subjective experience and therefore difficult to measure. Mildred Blaxter (1990) notes that there are 2 models of health - the biomedical, based on scientific knowledge and the more holistic, less scientific model sometimes referred to as lay concepts(cited in Purdy & Banks 1990 :184). Blaxter noted that the middle classes were more likely to describe health as a positive attribute and that the working classes tended to associate health with illness and ailments, however the studies that she cites are not fully described and so the results could have had something to do with the interviewing technique. The information that we have about the health of the nation is collected via hospitals, GPs and surveys; mortality rates are also considered. When the NHS was established there was not the wealth of information that we have today about hospital admissions and waiting times, what we do know though, is that there was already a North/South divide with some prosperous regions with almost twice as many hospital beds per head of population than other regions (Tones & Tilford 2001). The first public document to identify these inequalities was produced in 1980 and has come to be known as the Black report. The report measures the inequalities in health between social classes and uses mortality as a measure of health, its findings were clear - mortality rates were higher amongst the lower classes in both childhood and adulthood. The fact that certain parts of the population were dying more quickly than others, did not fit with the concept of equity which underpins our National Health Service.
There are other factors which contribute towards differences in health which should also be mentioned, these are gender, ethnicity, marital status and geography (U205 course team 1985). Mortality rates have shown us that women tend to live longer than men but do not explain why, some explanations have cited hormonal differences, different amounts of social pressure, greater use of dangerous drugs and alcohol amongst men and reactions to stress (U205 course team 1985). It is also true that women are more likely to consult their GP during the early stages of an illness and therefore arrive in time for treatment to be effective (Banks 2000). The government's response to the findings of the Black report was to try to improve health education by placing health promotion leaflets in Doctors' surgeries and schools, however since literacy was a problem amongst the lower social classes, this again, only addressed the needs of the higher social classes. Later government reports, the Widening Gap (1999) and the Acheson report reinforced the findings that there was an association between health and social class but also went on to note that during the 1980s the gap between rich and poor got wider as did the difference in mortality levels (Philmore et al 1994 cited in Purdy & Banks). The Acheson report prioritised the need to address the problems of the living standards of the poor although it still appears to be a problem today, 5 years later. It has been found that something called the inverse care law (Hart 1971) exists, which states that "the availability of good medical care tends to vary inversely with the need for it in the population". Effectively this means that the needier members of society tend to get served by the medical professionals who can not get jobs in the more affluent sectors, probably because their standards are not as high as those of their colleagues. This means that the lower socio-economic classes are definitely disadvantaged by the current system and are obviously not receiving the same standard of service as their more affluent counterparts.
The concept of individual responsibility has become popular within the healthcare setting and it should be questioned whether this is in some way linked to the inequalities and lack of equitable treatment that some people receive. One example of a group of people who may receive different treatment when they become ill is smokers. Smoking is seen as a lifestyle choice and there is now plenty of free support available for people who want to quit (doh website) so healthcare professionals have begun to stipulate that heavy smokers must quit before they will be allowed to have certain operations. The treatment of smoking related illnesses cost the NHS around 1.5 billion pounds every year (BBC News website). There are wide differences between the different socio-economic groups; only 16% of men and 12% of women in professional groupings smoke compared with 40% of men and 34% of women in the unskilled, manual categories (BBC News website), so by placing these stipulations about giving up smoking, the medical professional is making it harder for the lower classes to receive equitable treatment.
Britain's obesity problem is also greater amongst the working classes and this is because high calorie, high fat foods have become cheaper and more readily available over the years and it is only now that the government are beginning to realise that Britain may have an obesity problem on its hands and that they are going to have to take strict measures to control it. It has also been found that there is a correlation between social class and mental illness (Heller et al1996) . High levels of suicide amongst working class men prompted the government to set a suicide reduction policy in its health of the Nation report (1992), Schizophrenia is also 3 times more common among the working classes than among those from other backgrounds (Gomm 1996 cited in Heller et al ).
With the election of a Conservative government at the beginning of the 1980s and a shift towards individual accountability for health, the focus moved away from secondary care in hospitals and a big drive to treat people in the community emerged. Local primary care trusts were established that managed their own budgets and financial incentives offered for successful management. This, however, reinforced the inverse care law where the successful practitioners who managed their budgets were rewarded and the less successful had to manage with a smaller allocation of funds.
During the last 10 years, the NHS has also become the largest provider of private health care (Adams et al 2002), trusts have been allowed to rent out their facilities to private patients which in some ways could be considered hypocritical, especially when we see situations such as the NHS dentist in Scarborough, East Yorkshire who recently opened and had a queue of over 3000 people wanting to register (The Sunday Times 22.2.04). The government's aims were for local doctors, nurses and health authorities to ensure that the local NHS is built around the needs of patients and these were outlined in the whitepaper "The new NHS - modern, dependable" (Secretary of State for health 1997 cited in Purdy & Banks 2001). In this same white paper, reference was made to how National Service Frameworks (NSF) would be used to ensure consistency of service and quality across the country. No budget was allocated to fund the new supposedly "person centred" primary care services which were to allow the patient as much access to and choices about their treatment as is possible, however, it appears that some regions are able to provide this better than others in what has been dubbed "the postcode lottery"(Press Association 2003). When we look at the areas that are best served by the NHS with more choice and lower waiting times, the pattern emerges that it is the more affluent areas where you will receive the better treatment.
The new NHS is about encouraging individuals, community and the government to work together and become involved in promoting health as part of the Government's "third way". Studies have shown that by promoting social inclusion and encouraging individuals to take an active part in the community, mental and physical health can be improved (Duggan cited in Adams et al 2002, Kemper & Metler 1990). This is quite pertinent for the care of the mentally ill within the community, a group that until recently had been excluded by being locked in asylums with no hope of social rehabilitation. The move towards community care has on the whole been a good thing for the mentally ill, preventing people from becoming institutionalised but resources were very scarce at first and it is only now that more money is being invested in services outside of institutions. In 1999 a government white paper was published, "Saving lives our healthier nation" set goals for achievement of healthcare targets for the next 10 years which included a reduction in the death rate from suicide, a large problem amongst working class males. Suicide is usually preceded by a depression and a lot of treatment for depression is today managed by the GP and it is now commonplace to find leaflets on dealing with depression in Doctor's waiting rooms since early treatment by GPs may stop suicide attempts and hospitalisation. On the flipside of this, a recent report by the Independent (2004) states that Mental health conditions account for one in four visits to GPs, but doctors do not have the resources to deal with them effectively. "Patients can be left untreated, put onto medication or referred for secondary treatment that is not appropriate," says Harrison Riley, the senior commissioning manager for mental health and community services in the Heart of Birmingham Teaching Primary Care Trust (PCT). "Someone who has suffered a bereavement may be put onto antidepressants when what they need is specialist counselling."
NHS Direct is another primary care initiative worth mentioning, launched in the last few years is designed to deliver healthcare right into the home via the phone or the internet. The Government's NHS plan (DOH 2000) also talks about health education being available via digital TV in the future - although forward thinking, these ideas really cater for the middle classes who do have access to multimedia and inaccessible to those who do not have internet access or digital television.
Some would argue that a shift towards primary care has meant that a lot of in-patient services are now poorly managed (Butler 2003), citing incidences of cutting non-essential inpatient services, MRSA in hospitals caused by poor adherence to proper principals of infection control because of the emphasis on paperwork and target achievement are being blamed. Closer scrutiny of expensive secondary care means nurses become bogged down with paperwork (The Sunday Times February 8 th 2004). This has been addressed by the development of "modern matron" role - what some may call a "backward step" for healthcare.. The government has also recognised that the media has a part to play in health education, particularly prime time "soaps". Health issues, both mental and physical are now tackled fairly regularly on television programmes and will usually be followed by a method of receiving further information, whether this is a phone line or a web site address. Health promotion advertisements such as anti smoking and drink driving campaigns also receive a lot more prime time television coverage than previously since it has been realised that this is where most people will receive the information.
In this part of the essay, I will look at whether the provision, access and experience of the healthcare system is the same for chronically ill and disabled people as it is for the rest of the population i.e are they treated equitably? The World Health Oraganisation (WHO) has defined disability as "any restriction or lack of ability to perform an activity in the manner or within the range considered normal for a human being." (WHO 1980 cited in Scullion P 1999). Many disabled people have dismissed this definition as too medical and not taking into account the role of socio-cultural factors, since regarding disabled people in this way reinforces the stigma which many people already have about them. Disability and chronic illness is seen as a drain on resources by many of us (Jones 1988) and this is where some of our stigma comes from. Goffman (1968) defines stigma as "the situation of the individual who is disqualified from full social acceptance." It is worth bearing in mind that although we consider ourselves a tolerant society, we do not readily accept deviations from the norm - indeed, until the 1960s, homosexuality was still treated as a mental disorder. Goffman breaks stigma into categories, separating physical deformations into one group and mental disorder into a group he calls "blemishes of individual character". By doing this, I believe he has actually stigmatised mental illness by placing it in a category along with factors such as imprisonment which implies that the individual is responsible for their affliction.
Historically mental illness has always been stigmatised since people have not understood it , the "mad", have been seen as dangerous, sub-human and irrational (Jones cited in Heller et al 1996) and so punishment and imprisonment were justified. Mental illness is one of the only ailments where the stigma was so strong that the patients were locked away in their own communities called asylums outside of town and their basic human rights were infringed. The Mental Health Act (1983) governs the admission of people to psychiatric hospital against their will, their rights while detained, discharge from hospital, and aftercare - this was the first piece of legislation which provided representation for the mentally ill person. Statistics have shown that unemployment among disabled people is over twice as high as for no disabled people (Office for National statistics 1999) - yet another factor contributing to their social exclusion.
The media very often portrays mental illness in a sensationalist way, a headline which sticks in my mind is for "Bonkers Bruno" (The Sun 2003 cited on Mind web site) - an outcry from public and MIND had this headline changed to "Sad Frank......" What is more concerning about this article, though was that a lot of supposedly confidential information about a patient was leaked to the press and can only have come from inside the hospital - we must ask ourselves whether this level of leak would have occurred in a traditional hospital? Do mental health workers also stigmatise their clients? Goffman (1963) describes the way that the stigmas that we may hold about illness or disease are very often passed on to the relatives or close friends of the sufferers - he calls this this Courtesy stigma. There is an interesting article on courtesy stigma for Alzheimer's disease. (Macrae 1999 cited in Purdy & Banks 2001) which could be used as an example of the stigma we see with a lot of psychiatric conditions. The subject in the article compares her experience of dealing with her mother's diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease to the treatment of other physical illnesses where the family would be offered counselling and support by the nursing staff whereas she was given no explanations or support. The attitudes of public sector healthcare workers are also sometimes at fault (Scullion 1999) and we are encouraged to lead by example in the struggle for equality for disabled people, to become their allies rather than their carers.
In this essay I have examined some of the factors involved in how healthcare funds are allocated to try to ensure equal care for all. The fact of the matter is, there will never be enough money to please all of the people all of the time and so it is inevitable that somewhere along the line, tough decisions are going to have to be made which will be considered unfair for those people that feel the effect. It seems that the medical profession have forgotten who their customer is when making these decisions - why should they be the experts on what is fair? Some would say they are "playing God". Perhaps a more user friendly way of making "rationing" decisions would be to assemble a body of lay people to consult as part of the decision making process. It is easy to criticise these decisions once they have been made, but the main criticism is that there has been no explanation of how the decisions are reached. I feel that there are still many faults with today's healthcare system but it appears that over time, it has started to become more accountable to us, the customer, and hopefully this trend will continue.