The following case study is based on a 42 year old male client with no close family and a history of repeated suicide attempts and delusional thoughts. The client is not someone that I have nursed and so any hypothesis or conclusions which I have reached during this assignment are based on the limited information that I have about the client and the application of my knowledge and reading around the subject of Mental Health law and ethics. Mental health nursing involves a greater awareness of the law than general nursing, since at times we are treating people without their consent (Hendrick 2000), this factor will be explored in relation to John later in the case study. I have presumed that, as is the accepted practice when writing a case study, John is not the client's real name but been changed to protect his identity. Ethics can be defined as a generic term for the various ways of understanding and interpreting moral life (Beauchamp & Childress 2001). Our system of law and legal frameworks are built on what is commonly held to be right or just and designed to prevent injustice against the individual or society and maintain order. Medical ethics are a combination of what is required by law and the rules that various professional bodies have designed to help practitioners with difficult decisions. Beauchamp and Childress draw on historical ethical works along with their own observations from the healthcare environment to formulate their ethical theory which is known as biomedical ethics and has four main principles: Beneficence, the principle of doing good, non-maleficence, the principle of doing no harm, respect for autonomy and justice. All four of these principles will be discussed in relation to John within this essay.
Before compulsory admission into a psychiatric hospital is allowed to happen, it must be proved that an individual is suffering from a mental illness. Defining a mental disorder is always difficult since no one is ever a text book case; this is one of the reasons why most compulsory admissions require the agreement of two medical practitioners (Jones 1996). The case study that we have about John does not tell us whether he already has a diagnosis of a specific mental health problem, although it does tell us that as well as a history of repeated suicide attempts, he also experiences auditory hallucinations and persecutory delusions. The Mental Health Act (DOH 1983) states that a person may be compulsorily admitted into hospital where it is in the interests of his or her own health, or in the interests of his or her own safety, or for the protection of other people. If John were detained, the reason used would be that it is in the interests of his own safety since he is a risk to himself; the professionals would cite his past suicide attempts and his current low mood and suicidal thoughts to illustrate this. The Mental Health Act is a legal document based on considered opinion of medical professionals and is designed to protect the best interests of the ill person; it is therefore both a legal and ethically binding piece of work.
Since it is likely that John is already known to the services (the fact that he already has an appointed CPN tells me this), he should have a plan of care where the risk of deterioration of his condition and any possible consequences have already been explored at a time when he was not quite so ill. The plan of care involving the service user is based on the Care Programme Approach (DOH 1999), referred to hereafter as CPA, which encourages collaboration in order to better meet the needs of the service users and to empower them to express these needs (Barker & Whitehill 1997). Psychiatric nursing, perhaps more so than any other branch has to take a holistic view of the person that they are treating, not just the illness or the healing of a wound. It is essential that we try to understand the values that an individual holds and try to accommodate these into the plan of care. As professionals, we would not want John to feel he was being bullied into a hospital admission and become more agitated - there are ways of explaining a situation to a client without being threatening and this must be attempted even if one thinks that the client is too ill to comprehend what is going on. Whitler (1996) suggests some ways that we can assist clients to make decisions about their future care, as well as personalisation, he prioritises information giving and mentioning opportunities. It must be remembered when using Whitler's work that his subjects were older adults in care homes and so the results may not be directly applicable to a patient of John's age.
John could be admitted into hospital using a section 2, 3 or 4, the implications of these sections and the persons involved will be discussed in the next few paragraphs.
The application to admit John must be made by either his nearest relative or an approved social worker (ASW) since these are people who are seen as acting in the best interests of the client. Since we are told that John has no relatives, the application would have to be made by an ASW. For admissions under both sections 2 and 3, there is a need for the opinion of 2 doctors, one of whom must be section 12 approved which means that they are registered with the home office as a specialist in mental health. The second opinion doctor could be John's GP. It is likely that John's CPN would also play a part in the admission by acting as an advocate for John and to co-ordinating the planning of the Mental Health Act assessment.
If John is not deemed to be in immediate danger, it is likely that he would be admitted using section 2 of the Act which allows detention for assessment and if necessary, compulsory treatment for up to 28 days. He could be admitted using section 3 of the Act (admission for treatment lasting up to 6 months) although this stipulates a condition that medical treatment is likely to alleviate, or prevent a deterioration in his condition (Thomas et al 1997) which, since he has been treated with ineffective medication in the past can not be proven to be true leaving a possibility that John could contest his admission on these grounds. It is likely that if John begins to respond to treatment whilst on the section 2, this would be converted into a section 3 to allow him to complete his treatment in hospital. John could also be admitted to hospital using section 4 of the act if the CPN and GP think that he is in immediate danger and that he needs to come into hospital straight away then he can be brought in with just the GP's recommendation and application by the nearest relative or ASW. This section can last only 72 hours. There is no information about whether John has been admitted into hospital before but if he has recently been admitted using a section 2 then the healthcare professionals would be likely to admit him using section 3 of the act if the presentation of his illness has not changed significantly. There are cases of patients who lack the capacity to consent and are admitted into hospital voluntarily (Dimond & Barker 1996), these people are outside the capacity of the mental health act and so in some respects, the nurse may be acting in the patient's best interests by allowing them to be sectioned rather than an informal admission. A section gives the patient clear rights whereas a patient who has been informally admitted may be unsure of their rights and see the possibility of being sectioned as a punishment for bad behaviour.
Depending on what section John has been admitted on, there is every possibility that it would be legal to treat him with medication against his wishes, however this is a practice that is a last resort and the client will very often be "encouraged" to comply with medication rather than have it forcibly given (this is usually administered as an intra-muscular injection). Having medication forced upon oneself must be a very unpleasant and frightening experience, it could be said that the client's body is being violated and indeed many patients do regard non-consensual Intra Muscular (IM) injections as assault (Barrett 1992 cited in Glenister 1997 pp46). The practitioner would in all cases try to convince the client to admit themselves into hospital as an informal patient. The case study tells us that trials of various medications have proved ineffective for John's condition, so perhaps it can be deemed not unreasonable that he is currently refusing to agree to treatment. Psychiatric medication can have various unpleasant side effects and if John were experiencing any of these, combined with the fact that the medication was not improving his symptoms then we should ask ourselves if it is right to subject him to forced treatment when we do not know how effective it will be. Another treatment method which may be considered is Electro Convulsive Therapy (ECT). ECT is at times prescribed for clients exhibiting a severe depressive state, it is usually after trials of various drugs have failed to alleviate symptoms and it is a commonly held view that it is a last resort since although it can yield excellent results, physicians still do not know exactly how it works and it can also have some unpleasant side effects. In all cases consent is sought from the patient prior to the treatment. The rules and regulations surrounding this treatment are different to those dealing with drug administration since it is viewed by the government and the Mental Health Act as an invasive treatment (Bartlett & Sandland 2003) and as such it is not automatically covered as a treatment which may be administered without consent on a sectioned patient; instead the RMO must apply to a tribunal for permission to treat.
I found it interesting when researching this assignment to realise that sectioned patients actually have clearer rights than informal ones. I found the nurse's role in scrutinising medical recommendations such as section papers(Dimond & Barker 1996) and making sure that all is correct particularly relevant since an example of this happened incorrectly whilst I was in practice. Section papers were accepted by nursing staff and it was later found that neither of the doctors was section 12 approved and therefore the section was invalid. This had major implications since meanwhile the patient was restrained which they could have used as grounds to sue the trust. I was also unaware that post registration, each practitioner is personally responsible for ensuring that practice meets legal requirements and maintaining professional competence, which means keeping up to date with new procedures and policies (NMC 2002). An ethical issue that has come to the forefront whilst writing this assignment is the helplessness felt by some sectioned patients and in future I will be much more aware of the fact that we are treating vulnerable patients and the balance of power is strongly in the professional's favour so this must not be abused.
Ethical frameworks within nursing are tools to promote discussion. There is no categorical right or wrong and every situation must be judged separately. Personally I feel that it is important to have a set of professional conduct rules such as the NMC guidelines, but to stick to these rules religiously and to interpret them literally could potentially lead to nursing practice becoming dehumanised ( Glenister 1997). Ethical theory is based on other people's interpretation of the best way to deal with a situation and in writing this case study, the thing that has become clearer to me is that we must also try to empathise with the service user. I have read many accounts during my research for this essay by "survivors" of the mental health services in Britain, all of whom have identified a feeling of helplessness whilst being treated. I have spoken at length in this essay about over-ruling a person's autonomy when they are mentally ill and this seems to be what users find most abusive about in-patient treatment. Whilst I am training and after I qualify, I am going to attempt to involve users more in their treatment plans and better understand the CPA model which I have heard being referred to in practice but never actually observed procedure being adhered to as it should - by collaboration with the client.