The subject of this case study is a male in his early sixties with a diagnosis of Schizophrenia and an extensive psychiatric history which is documented in his medical notes from childhood. The client gave his permission for me to work with him and to access his notes for the purpose of an academic assignment. He was being treated in the community at the time of writing this case study although he has had a number of inpatient admissions over the years, the most recent of which was 18 months ago. The client has two estranged daughters whom he has not seen for over 25 years and currently lives alone in rented accommodation with no significant family or friends involved in his care. The client has been in prison several times in the past for theft and violence and is at risk of becoming violent when unwell. He is prescribed an atypical antipsychotic medication to help alleviate his condition and is visited on a regular basis by a Community Psychiatric Nurse (CPN) with less frequent appointments with a consultant psychiatrist. In accordance with Nursing and Midwifery Council guidelines (NMC 2004), every effort has been made to keep the client anonymous. Throughout this case study, I will discuss the client's mental health problems and will attempt to evaluate whether the assessment and interventions that he has received have been appropriate and stem from a solid evidence base.
Schizophrenia is term used to describe a major psychiatric (or cluster of psychiatric disorders) that influence an individual's perception, thoughts and behaviour; it falls within the classification F20-29 within the ICD-10 and affects around 1 in 100 people (Thomas et al 1997). Symptoms are divided into positive symptoms including hallucinations (e.g. hearing voices) and delusions (bizarre or unusual ideas and beliefs), and negative symptoms such as emotional apathy, lack of drive, poverty of speech, social withdrawal and self neglect. This client has both sets of symptoms; his delusions include paranoid thoughts that paedophiles are living in the area and children are at risk, when acutely ill, he has also suffered from auditory hallucinations. The average age of onset of the first episode for men is the middle twenties (Shultz & Videbeck 2005). The client received a formal diagnosis at the age of 33 of "probable Schizophrenia with paranoid attitude"; prior to this, psychiatrists had thought that he had a psychopathic personality due to a disturbed and insecure childhood. Three phases can be identified within any one episode: prodromal, acute and third residual or chronic phase where very often a blunted affect is the most obvious symptom (Royal college of Psychiatrists 2004). This client, along with a small proportion of other sufferers is unlikely to ever recover from the illness and remains in the chronic phase. Identifying the client's illness has resulted in treatment with anti-psychotic medication which has alleviated some of his symptoms; his level of violence has also reduced by practitioners educating him about his illness and causing him to feel less frustrated.
The label "Schizophrenic" is possibly the most stigmatising of all mental illnesses. Sufferers of the illness are perceived by the majority of the general public as highly dangerous and unpredictable, (Philo et al 1996) and the few who have committed crimes, such as Christopher Clunis (Laurence J 2003) have been demonised by the media, re-enforcing the public perception. Amongst sufferers themselves, the public and even some practitioners there is a feeling that this group of people can not function as part of ordinary society (Gamble & Curthoys 2004).
From a young age, this client has attracted a number of different "labels" because of his socially unacceptable behaviour. He attended a school for "maladjusted children" after his grimacing and twitching behaviour deemed him inappropriate for mainstream school. His childhood was spent in and out of foster care with brief spells of being cared for by family members who also appear to have had mental health problems; one can hypothesise about whether this may have made him feel different and socially isolated from his peers. Viewing a psychotic episode as a mental illness and treating it with medication is a very western way of dealing with the problem. Studies by anthropologists have found that in countries where individuals suffering from a psychosis are treated within the community by members of that community, rates of recovery are very favourable (Warner 1996). Further to this, once the episode is over, the sufferers have resumed their original role within the community and have not attracted a "diagnosis"; it is accepted that they were ill and now they are better. Warner also notes that in some cultures, individuals can actually gain status by suffering a psychotic episode as it is believed that they have the capacity to communicate with the spirit world. If the developed world were more tolerant of mental illness it is possible that we could see lower relapse rates.
The exact cause or causes of Schizophrenia remain unclear but genetic, environmental and social factors are all thought to influence its development (Royal College of Psychiatrists 2004). Although genetic factors may predispose certain people to the disorder, environmental and social factors, such as stressful life events, can precipitate its onset or a relapse. This certainly seems to be the case with the identified client, who has a family history of mental health problems, but whose major psychotic episodes seem to happen at times of extreme stress; for this reason, I have chosen to consider both the social model and the stress-vulnerability model when discussing the development of his mental illness. The social model proposes that mental disorder is triggered by life events that appear to be independent; social forces linked to class, occupational status and social role are the precipitants of mental disorder (Tyrer & Steinberg 1998). In support of this idea, studies have found that people from lower socio-economic backgrounds are more likely to attract a diagnosis of Schizophrenia (Jarman 1983, Thornicroft 1981). Barbigan (1985) found that Schizophrenia is three times more common amongst those from a working class background than those from other backgrounds.
The Stress Vulnerability model (Zubin and Spring, 1977) suggests that stress is a variable which influences the manifestation of psychological and physical symptoms (Brennan 2000). The client's hospital admissions have been preceded by events such as admission to prison, breakdown of close relationships and instability of personal circumstances. One explanation for the development of Schizophrenia is a highly charged emotional family environment, this is also known as high Expressed Emotion (Brennan & Gamble 2000). Looking back at the client's early history, we could investigate whether the ambient stress of growing up in what was probably a high Expressed Emotion family increased his vulnerability to illness, or indeed caused him to develop ineffective coping strategies. Life stressors are also considered within the model and as with Holmes & Rahe's Social readjustment rating scale (1967); stressful situations or times in one's life are identified and allocated a score - the higher the score, the more vulnerable the person is likely to be to suffer from mental illness. I feel confident that were this client assessed using the scale, he would score highly around the times when he has had contact with the psychiatric services. A more recent study (Hirsh et al 1995) showed that life events made a significant cumulative contribution over time and that the risk of relapse in clients with mental health problems increased in proportion to the number of life events. The same study found that ceasing medication made an independent contribution. I have therefore not discounted the medical model when considering the client and looking at the development of his illness since he is responding well to treatment with medication and non-concurrence with his medication has also been noted prior to a relapse.
The purpose of an assessment in psychiatry is to establish the mental state of a client and decide how best to treat them in order to return them to an optimum level of functioning. Historically in psychiatry, assessment and treatment has been the domain of doctors who have identified symptoms, made a diagnosis and treated the client with medication. With the development of community care and multidisciplinary treatment teams (MDT), along with a growing appreciation of taking a person-centred, holistic approach to the treatment of mental illness; the roles of other members of a MDT are beginning to grow and to become appreciated. A growing recognition of nurses' expertise in developing and maintaining a therapeutic relationship and client care has led to a separate nursing assessment and diagnosis often being made alongside a medical diagnosis (Thomas et al 1997). The nursing diagnosis will focus on aspects of the client's life that have been affected by the illness or its symptoms and seek to help the client manage these problems.
The quality of a nursing assessment can affect the quality of future interventions and form a baseline for the measurement of their success or failure (Brennan & Gamble 2000). Hall (1981) stresses that it must include: judging the individuals level of disability, planning a program of care, observing progress over time, planning of service provision and conducting research. To perform a comprehensive assessment, the information must be gathered from a number of areas and include a risk assessment, physical and mental health status, social needs, coping skills, work skills and the client's daily activity; any medication that the client is currently taking should also be noted (Gamble & Brennan 2000). Ideally a family member or significant other would form part of the assessment information although this is not always possible. There are a number of different approaches which can be utilised and in the case of this client; the approach used is the Care Programme Approach (CPA). CPA uses the principles of the case management model taken from the USA (Warner 2004). It is a government designed assessment and treatment protocol that has been standardised for use within the trust caring for this client.
The CPA was introduced in 1991 by the government as part of its drive towards care in the community. It was revised in 1999 in response to the National Service Framework for Mental Health standards 4 and 5 (Department Of Health 1999) which highlight the need for each service user to be involved in the formulation of their CPA and to receive a copy of the completed document. It has been called the cornerstone of the Government's mental health policy and applies to all people with serious mental health problems accepted as clients of specialist mental health services (Turner 1996). It has its roots in biological and social theory focusing heavily on risks of relapse and how to avoid hospitalisation by engagement with community services (RCN Mental Health Practice Forum 2003). There are four main elements: an assessment of health and social care needs, a multidisciplinary approach to the formulation of a care plan including risk issues, the appointment of a key worker and regular review. This assessment should cover psychiatric, psychological and social functioning, risk to the individual and others, including previous violence and criminal record. CPA is supposed to take a holistic approach and to be person centered but I feel that it actually tells me very little about this client other than his medical history. No consideration is given to his spiritual needs which are evident since client is very religious and reads the Bible a lot. Perhaps if, as practitioners, we were more confident in dealing with issues around spirituality then we may be able to encourage members of church communities to reach out and help sufferers of mental illness, promoting faith-linked social inclusion.
This client has been placed on enhanced CPA since his illness is severe and enduring and he has also had contact in the past with the Criminal Justice system. The choice of a male Care coordinator was made with the client based on his own wished and the information that the team held about his past levels of violence and also the fact that he seems to communicate better with males than females.The client has seen a copy of his CPA and the file copy has been signed by him, however apart from this, user input is not evident in the document. The assessment of this client is ongoing since he has been known to the services for so long and is considered at fairly high risk of relapse, therefore CPN visits are regular and frequent - at least once a fortnight. In the case of this client, the CPA document identifies risks of relapse as aggression and hearing voices and the action associated with this is "follow up by CMHT" which I do not consider to be sufficient. This CPA documentation was produced on discharge from an inpatient ward and is due for an update; it is possible that the lack of content is due to the fact that the practitioner completing it had not done one before. I would hope that the updated version would contain a more comprehensive description of the action to be taken if a relapse were to occur. The client's last hospital admission followed a knife attack on a neighbour who formed part of the client's delusions. Prior to the attack, the client had been drinking heavily, believing that different spirits that he drank were connecting him to his dead father. He was also suffering from auditory hallucinations and had been non-concurrent with medication - he had disengaged from the CMHT. The local trust guidelines on completion of the CPA documentation state that there should be a plan in place for clients on the enhanced CPA stating what actions will be taken if the client disengages - this had not been produced. The alcohol abuse does not appear to be a current issue and is not mentioned in his current CPA document; however, since it was a contributing factor to his last admission, I think it is something which should be identified as a risk factor for relapse and is also perhaps an area which needs further in depth assessment.
The client does have some physical health problems and has recently had an inpatient admission in a general hospital. He is concerned that an x-ray has been lost and believes that doctors are keeping something from him because he has not seen it himself. I feel that there is a possibility that meeting the client's physical health needs could be improved upon with improved liaison with the client's GP. It could then be established whether there is a foundation to his health worries or whether they constitute somatic / hypochondria cal delusions - should this be the case then an appropriate treatment plan could be formulated.
Although the CPA appears to be a good, well considered framework, it is only just being adopted in the CMHT treating this client and the training surrounding its adoption appears to be very weak which may help to explain why it is not well liked amongst practitioners or as yet successful in its application. Some practitioners may also feel that the blurring of the line between health and social work is de-valuing their chosen line of work and so may be resistant to adopting this way of working. There is also the possibility that rather than being a thorough assessment, completion of the CPA becomes a chore and a form filling exercise which could result in mistakes being made or practitioners completing the paperwork in a hurry in order to get on with some "real" work.
One criticism of CPA as a standard tool does not involve any kind of benchmarking or measurement of improvement or deterioration of a person's mental state. Gamble & Brennan (2000) note how the over reliance on just one method of assessment such as the CPA can cause a blinkered approach by the practitioner and result in the assessment not being sufficiently sensitive enough to meet all of the client's needs. They suggest using a large assortment of assessment methods in order to uncover discrepancies between results; and then working with the client on the areas that they feel have been correctly identified. As we consider the psychosocial interventions that are currently taking place with the identified client, we could also consider if there are any further interventions that could be identified as unmet needs by the client of a selection of assessment tools were used. I believe that it would help the client to identify the times when he has become acutely ill and look for a common factor - an exercise such as ranking of life events in order of perceived severity (Amblas 1987) could be the first step to helping him develop future coping mechanisms. In defence of the CPA, nowhere does it state that this must be the only assessment tool used, just that it should be the main one so if the practitioner feels that it is not sufficient then there is no reason why they should not supplement it with other assessments.
Psychosocial interventions, also known as "talking therapies" (Gamble & Curthoys 2004) consist of a number of ways of working with a client to maintain or improve their mental health by promoting social skills. They include engagement and outcome-orientated assessment; family assessment of the patient's needs and psychological management of psychosis using Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT), coping strategy enhancement, self- monitoring approaches and training in problem-solving. Medication management is another intervention which can be delivered using motivational interviewing techniques (Gamble 2003). It is hoped that the development of these skills will lead to social inclusion and reduce the risk of future relapse, or at least ensure that the relapse is managed effectively by identifying early warning signs. In 1995, the government published Building Bridges: A guide to arrangements for inter-agency working for the care and protection of severely mentally ill people (DoH 1995). It stated that community mental health nurses should refocus their activities on meeting the needs of people with severe and enduring mental illness. The guide said that nurses needed clinically effective skills to work with this client group (Gillam 2002). The National Service Framework for Mental Health (DoH 1999) also states that there is a need for psychosocial interventions in the treatment of Schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia a severe and enduring mental illness; that is to say that recovery may be a long and complicated process with a possibility that an individual may never return to their pre-morbid personality. This can lead practitioners to feel that working with this group of people is unrewarding and that identified interventions do not fall within their idea of what a nurse should be doing (Brennan & Gamble 2000). Practitioners may also feel unconfident about using psychosocial interventions as a means to engage and work with clients and training should be available to help build staff confidence (Gillam 2002). Learning PSI techniques empowers the service user by showing them ways to change their behaviour or manage their symptoms; it promotes person centred care since it involves taking a different, individually tailored approach with each client based on the way that they want to be helped. This type of intervention is most commonly used in the community; mainly because of the lack of resources on inpatient units (Repper & Brooker 2002). Studies suggest that alongside medication, it is the most successful way to treat a number of psychiatric disorders including Schizophrenia (Rethink 2004).
The identified client has refused to engage with any of the community mental health services; this however does not mean that he is not receiving any form of psychosocial intervention. Social isolation is a risk factor for relapse and a good social life, an area of his life that is lacking; his thoughts about the service users he has met at groups organised by the trust are: "not my type of people". Interestingly though, he seems happy to spend time on the wards chatting with staff and even having a meal whilst visiting friends. I have not worked extensively with people suffering from Schizophrenia but those that I have met, particularly older people who have in the past have spent a lot of time on inpatient units, have expressed regret about the fact that wards are not now considered places where one can stay for a long time. Since the ward/hospital site is obviously a place where this client feels comfortable, could there be a possibility of community teams doing some further research and working with this idea to develop a service that could harness this willingness of older Schizophrenia sufferers to engage in a selected environment. It is important to consider here why we are trying so hard to engage this client in group activity. It appears that psychosocial interventions may sometimes "forced" and we must question why we think it will be so good for the client - as practitioners, we could be guilty of trying to help shape the client into a more socially acceptable role.
The visits by a CPN constitute a psychosocial intervention on their own; but if we examine the content of the interactions during the visits we can see that what may appear on the surface to be a social call is actually a number of carefully planned psychosocial interventions. The nursing diagnosis is that the client is currently stable and nursing interventions seek to maintain stability. One such intervention is working with client to facilitate his management of financial and administrative issues surrounding his accommodation and monies owed. The rationale behind this is to empower the client to manage his own affairs and to prevent a lack of communication occurring, which has in the past led to utilities being cut off and court summons for monies owed. Upon reflection, I feel that we could possibly have helped the client do more himself, and that at times we effectively made the client's problem our own, dealing with a situation for him rather than with him. One could also argue that this helped strengthen the therapeutic relationship by showing the client that help was available. Attempts had been made with the client to engage him with another part of the CMHT who could help him with money management but he refused, choosing to deal exclusively with his CPN. This is an illustration of an intervention which many people may not consider to be a nurse's job and the important thing to understand is that the skill is not in the money management but in the formation and maintenance of the therapeutic relationship.
Listening skills are very important with this client since his last relapse occurred at a time when he thought that no one was listening to him and so he felt forced to act in a violent way. I have identified as a nursing intervention, regular CPN visits where the client is able to raise issues that are worrying him and seek help and advice. The rationale behind the visits is keeping the client engaged with mental health services and an ongoing assessment of his mental state based on observation of his physical presentation and the content of the interactions. The client has been provided with the CMHT phone number in order to contact his CPN should he need to talk between visits. The rationale for this being that the client feels supported in the community. Monitoring side effects of atypical antipsychotic and ensuring that the client is compliant with medication is another intervention which happens during visits to the client. The rationale for this is that stopping medication has coincided with a relapse for this client in the past and one reason could be that side effects of antipsychotic medications can often be harder to tolerate for the user than the symptom itself. Even the newer atypical antipsychotics have their own unpleasant side effects such as weight gain and risk of cardiac problems (Thomas et al 1997). Uncovering problems early can allow mental health workers to manage the symptoms and improve the user's quality of life before they take the decision to stop the medication.
I believe that this client may have an unmet need in the form of a loss/grief issues due to his estranged familial situation. On nearly every visit with the client, he mentioned the split in his family and expressed regret and I felt that this was an area which could have been further explored by a practitioner confident enough to do so. Exploring the issue of loss may also bring to the surface other issues that the client is dealing with; he has worked for most of his life as a builder but has had some serious physical ailments which no longer allow him to do this. Loss of role is a common theme in later life and if this were identified as an issue, work could be done to help him to deal with his feelings. Documented in the client's notes is the fact that someone has already undertaken some work on anger management with him. It would have been useful to ask client how effective he found this work and what the rationale was for it - was it a forced agreement as part of a package to keep him out of prison or did he have the motivation to commit to the programme of his own accord?
I feel that the psychosocial interventions currently being used with this client are effective. He remains engaged with the service, compliant with medication and has an excellent relationship with his care co-ordinator - this is quite an achievement when this client's previously chaotic lifestyle and history of relapse is considered. Whilst I have suggested that better formal assessment of the client's needs may uncover other areas where interventions would be helpful, this is not necessary at the moment; perhaps if the client were to relapse then this would be the time for a fuller assessment.
In writing this essay, I have found it necessary to reflect on my own practice and on interactions which I observed between my mentor and the client. I feel that my mentor promoted a person-centred approach to the treatment of this client - he made it his job to know the sorts of interaction that the client was comfortable with and how often to see him. Although I have criticised CPA documentation for focusing too heavily on risk and medication, I do make the point that it can be supplemented with further care planning. My choice of model for the development of mental illness has led me to focus more heavily on the social and psychosocial interventions and treatment plans which fit with this model; however I do recognise the contribution that the medical model makes in the treatment of Schizophrenia. It is important as practitioners not to take a blinkered approach in our understanding of mental illness. We are aiming to practice in a holistic way and this means considering all possibilities available. In the case of this client, my mentor, an experienced practitioner has chosen to work on the development a therapeutic and trusting relationship with the client - engagement rather than outcome-orientated assessment. This approach is working with the client at this point in time