The Cortex is the thin covering of convoluted grey tissue which covers the human brain. Although only 4-5mm thick, it accounts for about 50% of the brain's weight due to its density and can be broken down into 4 functional units which are known as lobes. The following diagram shows where each of the lobes is situated and their various functions are described below.
A neurotransmitter is a chemical messenger used by brain cells (neurons) in order to communicate with each other and the rest of the body. There are 64 different known neurotransmitters and these can be broken into 4 groups or principal classes since they share some enzyme or metabolic pathway. Each neurotransmitter has a particular biosynthetic pathway. The first class is made up of acetylcholine alone, the second class are the biogenic amines, that are molecules formed by an amino acid losing a hydroxyl or carboxyl group. The third class is made up of excitory amino acids per se which are the fastest acting neurotransmitters. The most damaging amino acid is Glutemate, it is a much stronger messenger than all of the others and can overpower them, this is why parents of hyperactive children are advised to avoid giving them foods containing monosodium glutamate. Other amino acids are :Aspartate (excitatory), GABA (inhibitory) and Glycine (inhibitory). The forth group are peptides. Except for the neuropeptides, which are made in the nerve cell body and transported in vesicles along the axon to the axon terminals, all other neurotransmitters are synthesized at the axon terminals and stored in synaptic vesicles
Communication of information between neurons is accomplished by movement of these neurotransmitters across a small gap called the synapse. The synapse is found mainly at the end of axons and dendrites but can also be a junction with a cell body. It consists of: a presynaptic ending that contains readymade neurotransmitters in vesicles, a postsynaptic ending that contains receptor sites for neurotransmitters and a synaptic gap between the presynaptic and postsynaptic endings. For communication between neurons to occur, an electrical impulse must travel down an axon to the synaptic terminal. As the charge moves down the synapse, calcium will flood in which makes the vesicles move to the bottom of the synapse and fuse with the cell membrane. On fusion, the membrane breaks and the neurotransmitter is released. The neurotransmitter molecules then diffuse across the synaptic gap where they can bind with receptor sites on the postsynaptic ending using a lock and key mechanism, to influence the electrical response in the postsynaptic neuron. The reason that the cells communicate via a chemical messenger rather than an electrical charge is because electricity would be unsafe - 3000 cells fire in the body every second, if these were electrical charges we would explode! When a neurotransmitter binds to a receptor on the postsynaptic side of the synapse, it changes the postsynaptic cell's excitability and makes the postsynaptic cell either more or less likely to fire an action potential. Therefore, the neurotransmitter is the first messenger which binds with the receptor site to produce a second messenger, also a chemical substance, the most common in the mental health field is cyclic AMP or CAMP as it is also known. If the number of excitatory postsynaptic events (second messengers) is large enough and reaches that cell's threshold, they will cause an action potential in the postsynaptic cell and a continuation of the "message." The diagram at the end of this question illustrates how an impulse moves down a neuron and neurotransmitters cross the synaptic gap.
There is sometimes an excess of neurotransmitter in the synapse due to the fact that there are not enough receptor sites to bind to, in this case the excess will be removed, either by an enzyme released from the post synaptic neurone, or it may be reabsorbed by the presynaptic neurone in a process called reuptake. There is also a specific chain of enzymatic reactions that decompose the transmitter, either for destruction or for recycling. This is important since a synaptic signal does not subdue until the transmitter is removed from the synaptic gap. The transmitter can be degraded in the gap, or absorbed by the postsynaptic neuron or a glial cell and decomposed. Mental health problems are often the result of a breakdown in the way these chemical messages are active in the brain and as such, many drugs used in psychiatry change the properties of neurotransmitter release, neurotransmitter reuptake and the availability of receptor binding sites
There are a number of different routes for the systematic delivery of drugs into the body, each with their own positive and negative points. They are discussed below.