Social relationships which come about early in life have been thought to play an important role in the social development of humans for many years. During this time, some trends in the ways children are raised have undergone changes; from employing a full time nanny in rich Victorian households, to leaving children in a crche during the world wars, to mothers leaving work to look after their children full time. The derogatory effects of foisting ones children upon a stranger were of great pertinence after the Second World War, which, in part, prompted the commission of John Bowlby's 'Childcare and the growth of love'. The manner in which infants form relationships with their main caregiver, known as attachment theory, was first advanced by John Bowlby in 1951. For 20 years, Bowlby ran a weekly mother's group at a local clinic, where he made informal observations of a random sample of babies and young children interacting with their mothers. Attachment theory has enabled the clinician to attend to attachment experiences in their own right, not as displacements or derivatives of other motives (Parkes et al., 1991). Although the term 'mother' is used often when discussing attachment theory, it is essentially interchangeable with any maternal figure, as it represents the primary care giver in this type of relationship.
Bowlby (1907-1990) was an English psychiatrist and psychoanalyst (Colman, 2003), and Freud's views on the importance of early childhood experiences has undoubtedly influenced his work. Research conducted by Lorenz on imprinting in young birds in 1951 also inspired Bowlby's research and led him to incorporate ideas from ethology in subsequent papers (Parkes et al., 1991). Imprinting is a rapid attachment which comes about as a result of following the primary care giver soon after birth (Hayes, 1993). Although Lorenz's work was concerned with animals, there is some parity between his work and Bowlby's, which lay in the attachments formed by newborn infants and beasts. In addition, Bowlby reviewed data from academic studies describing infants' cognitive and social development including those of the famous and highly regarded child psychologist Piaget. Bowlby's broad knowledge base and breadth of research material suggests that his theory of attachment was more a refinement of prior studies than a transient idea.
To say a child has an attachment to someone means he is strongly disposed to seek proximity to and be in contact with a specific figure, and does so in certain situations, most notably when he is tired, frightened or ill (Bowlby, 1969). Bowlby wrote that the critical period for a child to form an attachment to its mother lay in the first two years of life, particularly in the later part of the child's first year. Bowlby suggested this bond would develop from a process similar to imprinting, in that it would be a unique union, unlike any other the child may develop with anyone else. He called this monotropy. At this stage, the mother could not be replaced without emotional complications arising, since the relationship was exclusive (Hayes, 1993). So compelling was his work, that he went on to hypothesise that an inability to develop intimate, personal relationships in adulthood may be related to a child's failure to form a secure attachment to one or more people in the formative stages of childhood (Bowlby, 1973).
Criticism of Bowlby's attachment theory came from Schaffer and Emerson (1964), who put forward the notion that infants formed multiple attachments which were not different in kind, following a study which observed the reactions of infants under a range of human stimuli. They also found in a third of their sample that the infant's main attachment was to someone who wasn't the primary care giver. This finding challenged Bowlby's imprinting idea, which suggests the existence of a more complex reason for bond formation. Bowlby's assumptions regarding attachment still apply to the majority of Schaffer and Emerson's sample, however so it would not be fair to say that his theory is irrelevant in this respect. Schaffer and Emerson developed Bowlby's attachment theory to say that attachment is all about the way in which people interact with a baby. Infants develop their attachments to those who are most sensitive to its needs, expressions and messages. This is known as sensitive responsiveness.
Bowlby's concept of attachment theory is hard to define, as it has been modified over many years as a result of field work and input from other scientists, most importantly Mary Ainsworth. Ainsworth shared similar fields of study with Bowlby, and as a result established a vocational rapport. In 1991, Ainsworth highlighted some areas which required addressing. These included how attachments to parental figures develop through the life cycle, sexual partnerships, the behavioural systems underlying friendships and kinship bonds (Ainsworth, 1991). Mary Ainsworth identified different 'patterns of attachment', and developed a reliable method of testing them. Although this is oft interpreted as a way of challenging Bowlby's theory, rather it served to expand upon the fundamentals of his work (Hinde et al., 1991). This evidence shows that Bowlby's concept of attachment theory has been augmented and made more relevant over time with regards to the information available. In fact, Bowlby himself said that his theory of attachment has been use to good effect to guide further empirical research (Bowlby, 1991).
In the Attachment and Loss trilogy (1969, 1973 & 1980), there is evidence to show that Bowlby has integrated ideas from such a wide range of fields as psychoanalysis, ethology, experimental psychology and learning theory among other sources (Hinde et al., 1991). This has most certainly increased the diversity of his theses' application. Although Bowlby was primarily concerned with humans, attachment theory later accrued relevance with animals, including ground nest birds, monkeys and apes (Bowlby, 1969). A famous study of attachment by Harlow (1959) investigated the motives for young rhesus monkeys to form attachment to a surrogate mother. This experiment demonstrated the importance of early attachment for the enrichment of later life. The integration of Bowlby's theory of attachment with other areas of study serves to emphasise the relevance of the former.
In 1980, Bowlby published a paper on attachment theory which was sarcastically titled "By ethology out of psychoanalysis: an experiment in interbreeding", which marked a time when the psychoanalytical roots of attachment theory were becoming the focus of research on this topic (Parkes et al., 1991). These roots stemmed from Bowlby's early interest in psychoanalysis during his career as a psychiatrist. Aged 80, and in the year that he passed away, Bowlby commented that the desire for food or sexual satisfaction are no longer regarded as the sole engines of personal intimacy (Parkes et al., 1991), rather the focus research had moved along once more. More recently, attachment theorists have contributed to the notion that the augmentation of the infant's consciousness occurs without external influence, with the social environment merely playing a supportive role. This evidence shows that Bowlby's theory of attachment has been the subject of further investigation for over 40 years, representing a studiously deliberated theory, which stands up to the most rigourous dissection.
Bowlby's principal concept of attachment has clearly been the basis of research since its publication in 1951. Fellow scientists have challenged its relevance, with the result of prompting modification by Bowlby, which he continued to do until the year he died. Bowlby knew every step of the way that his concept of attachment theory would be developed and augmented by scientists as more became known about the subject. He himself wrote: "Attachment theory is still growing. Its potential and its limitations remain unknown" (Bowlby in epilogue, Parkes et al., 1991).