For the purpose of this assignment, I have chosen to discuss two observations of the same family attending a clinic for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (hereafter referred to as ADHD). This service is provided by the child and family community mental health team (CAMHS) and is designed to offer support to families living with a child with ADHD by helping them to deal with the associated behavioural difficulties alongside treatment with medication. In accordance with NMC guidelines (NMC 2004), every effort has been made to keep the child and family anonymous. Throughout the case study, I will be seeking to use attachment theory to hypothesise about the behaviours observed and the resulting possible implications for the child's future mental health. I shall also discuss the child's development using Erikson's developmental theory (1980) as a framework. A genogram has been included in the appendices to illustrate the complexity of this family system and this will also be discussed later in the essay. Prior to the first observation, the family had already attended an assessment appointment where they had met the two nurses running the clinic; also present at this initial meeting was the client's older sister. The meetings took place in a private room within the CAMHS offices. Present at both meetings were the two nurses facilitating the clinic, myself, a student nurse, the client (a 6 year old boy diagnosed with ADHD) and his maternal grandmother and her husband; his legal guardians whom he refers to as Mum and Dad.
At the start of the first meeting, the boy was offered the opportunity to go off and play as he had done on the last visit with his sister; he declined, choosing instead to stay in the room and cuddle up to his Mum. The child was very endearing - small for his age with an elf-like face and very large eyes. I warmed to him immediately. During the meeting he spent a lot of time hiding under his Mum's coat and peeking out over the top to look at the other people in the room, then diving back under. Mum mentioned that he had been ill the week before and thought that this may be why he did not want to go and play was more subdued than usual. I was conscious of trying to focus on what was being said in the meeting rather than on the child, which appeared to be what he wanted since he was making deliberate eye contact with anyone he could and pulling faces. Whilst this could be interpreted as disruptive behaviour, it was actually thought to be very endearing by myself and the other nurses. The discussion in the meeting focused mainly around problems with getting ready in the morning and bed time although Mum was also concerned about the child's impulsivity and the idea that he may harm himself. Throughout the meeting the family were very positive about the child, attempting to include him in the conversation where possible and giving him lots of cuddles, in fact, Mum referred to him as "darling" even when he was being told off for accidentally hurting her.
During the second session, the child again declined to go into the play room. He was snuggling under his Dad's arm and hiding his face and Dad was patting his back in a reassuring manner. The child fiddled with his Dad's keys throughout the first part of the session and occasionally made eye contact when he heard mention of ignoring instructions or something that he found amusing, giving a cheeky smile along with the eye contact to the nurse(s). The discussion during the meeting was about the difficulties that the parents had in getting the child to behave; whilst Mum was describing scenarios, her hands were clenched and she gesticulated heavily implying a sense of frustration. Dad seemed tired and on several occasions appeared to have his eyes shut; he was fidgeting with his left foot. One of the nurses began playing on the floor in an attempt to engage the child and this appeared to work, as he gradually moved away from the safety of his Dad's lap, using him as a base to return to at first before fully engaging in play. As the child played, the parents seemed to become more relaxed with the conversation. The subject of the mother's worry about accidental injury as a result of the ADHD behaviour arose again and wringing hand gestures were evident at this point. The parents were keen to mention the positive aspects of the child's behaviour such as the quality play time that he engaged in with his sister; as well as the difficulties and they seemed very aware of the impact that negativity could have on him. Dad at this point put his arm on the child's shoulder and said "alright mate?" The child continued to play on the floor with the nurse and made a comment which I thought showed empathy and sensitivity; when she changed position he asked "are your legs tired?" After around 10 minutes of play on the floor, the child suggested that he and the nurse go off to the playroom to get more toys. When the child left the room, the parents relaxed further and talked about some novel ways that they had come up with to manage difficult behaviours, turning tasks such as taking medication into games. Mum voiced her fears for the future of the child, she feels that she should be doing more for him and feels guilty when the family have had a bad day even though this is not her fault. She admitted that in the past both she and her husband have been on anti-depressant medication. The lead nurse drew the meeting to a close by presenting the family with the main action points from the meeting which they agreed to work on before the next session. When the child returned to the room at the end of the session, he climbed happily back on to his Dad's knee who greeted him with "Alright spud?"
Attachment theory (Bowlby 1969) proposes that the successful early formation of attachments to caregivers has a direct impact on that individual's ability to form relationships throughout their life. This can affect such factors as the achievement of developmental milestones, formation of peer relationships and, in adulthood, their own parenting ability. The theory could be criticised for its lack of consideration of environmental factors which are also needed in order for a child to thrive, but it is generally accepted as an excellent framework to motivate parents and other caregivers to provide sensitive and responsive care to children (Pendry 1998). This child was removed from the care of his natural mother before he was three months old and Bowlby's theory would support the idea that the child should have been capable of forming a successful attachment relationship with his main caregiver(s) provided that the care delivered was consistent and sensitive to the child's needs. Whist talking about the difficulty in the parenting relationship, it was proposed that the lack of initial attachment could be a reason, the client's Mum responded defensively to this, claiming that she did form an early attachment relationship with him and this was not a problem; I would suggest that my own observations alongside the empirical evidence support her opinion. Both of the observed interactions appeared to indicate a secure attachment (Ainsworth et al 1978), with the child initially wary of the strangers in the room but comforted by the presence of the parents and becoming more confident throughout the progression of the meetings, using his parents as a base to explore the room and the other adults; finally feeling confident to initiate leaving the room with the confidence that his parents would still be there when he returned.
From a systems theory perspective, we would be looking for patterns of behaviour or events and considering the impact that these could have on the client's current and future mental health. As we can see from the genogram provided for this client in the appendices, the family system is quite complex, however, it was evident from the interactions with the primary caregivers that they are trying to create a stable nuclear family within what could be considered a chaotic wider family system. This was illustrated by the fact that even though the boy's sister was not present at either of the meetings observed, she was included whenever the family situation was discussed and it seemed clear that the family did not regard the client as the problem but the illness and how it affected their family as a whole. Systems theory is concerned with looking at the influences of behaviour on individuals and the influence of their reactions on a situation. There are processes within the system that both prevent and promote change known as homeostasis which may be maintained by one family member exhibiting problematic behaviour when the family lack resources to adapt to change. It would be interesting to ask the family to keep a diary of when the problem behaviours occur and to consider whether the child could be consciously or unconsciously trying to maintain homeostasis. It appears that this couple's parenting skills and management of problem behaviours are excellent when they are united and since they both suffer from depression, one parent may at times feel that they are doing more than the other if they were going through a low patch; problem behaviour from the child could trigger them to unite into a strong unit.
Also important when working with children and families is an awareness of developmental theories which can be used to assess a child's observed behaviours to see if they correspond with the appropriate behaviours suggested for a child of that age. There are many developmental theorists although one of the most well known is Erikson (1980) who proposes that an individual will face a number of different conflicts in the process of aging, and that only through the successful resolution of these conflicts will they be able to move on to the next developmental stage without problems. This child is currently moving from Erikson's stage 3, early childhood, where the conflicts that he must resolve are initiative versus guilt in order to progress to Stage 4, where Industry versus inferiority are the conflicts and competency and self confidence are favourable outcomes. His development is proceeding at a rapid pace and he is learning to control impulses and balance eagerness and responsibility. For a successful resolution in stage 3, some independence from parents should begin to emerge. I mentioned earlier that the child is small for his age and also quite young looking; his impulsive behaviours also make his parents slightly more protective of him than perhaps they would be of a 6 year old without ADHD. An illustration of this occurred when talking about his birthday falling on April 1st, Mum twice mentioned that he was not an April fool leading me to question whether this was perhaps something he was teased or ridiculed about at school. It will be interesting to see if the well meaning parental restrictions on the child's initiative have worked successfully as the child moves into the next stage.
An early diagnosis of ADHD is likely to have helped this family and improved the attachment relationships, indeed the very fact that the primary caregiver identified a problem early and sought help is encouraging and shows sensitivity to the way the child responded to her care. Having a reason for problem behaviour has allowed the family to develop ways of coping which do not promote a culture of blame; this is evident in their positive approach to parenting this boy and his sister. The fact that he is small for age and endearing could engender others being quite lenient with his behaviour, indeed this certainly seemed to be the case with Mum who was observed reprimanding him but using the term "darling". Upon reflection, I think that I judged his "cheeky" behaviour in a positive light when in another child I may have considered it irritating. A lack of firm boundaries could lead to problems in later life and will also make the ADHD behaviours more difficult to control (Green 1997); this is one of the areas being addressed in the support sessions. Looking at again at family systems, we could hypothesise about why they were not able to successfully parent the older boy - could the lack of firm boundaries be a pattern that is repeating and resulting in unmanageable behaviour?
Pro-social behaviour is often lacking in children suffering from ADHD due to a short attention-span (Anderson et al 2002) although it was demonstrated through anecdotal evidence and my own observation of the child's play with the nurse. This could also be seen as evidence that the child is confident in initiating new interpersonal relationships and would therefore provide further support for the idea that his early attachment experiences were secure ones. The child appears to have formed some good peer relationships with children his own age and is also doing well at school who have extra resources to help him. The expression of empathy that the child made during the second observation when he asked the nurse if her leg was tired also shows that he has developed sensitivity for the feelings of others, a key skill needed in the formation of successful relationships throughout life. The parents also noted that the child plays well with his sister when at home so although he may be struggling with appropriate levels of cognition for his developmental age, his social skills are developing well which should help enormously with his ability to learn.
During the first meeting, I had been asked to record the main action points identified for the family to work on throughout the course of the clinics. The family and indeed the child may have found the presence of 3 nurses in the room slightly intimidating although every effort was made to help them feel comfortable by clearly pointing out each person's role and re-enforcing the fact that we were all there to help. The lead nurse seemed very aware of trying to bring the child into the meeting - making a point of addressing him first at the start of the interactions - "Hello ******* how are you today, would you like to go to the playroom or do you want to stay here with Mummy and Daddy?" I was conscious of the fact that in my role as a student, I was trying to observe this interaction for the purpose of an academic assignment, and as such was making notes, but trying hard not to make the family feel like subjects. I was therefore very conscious of my body language and sensitive to the pace and content of discussion, making eye contact when a natural pause occurred and nodding encouragingly where I thought it appropriate to do so.
I would hope that the issues that I have highlighted within this family illustrate that ADHD is more than just a chemical imbalance in the brain treatable by medication. By understanding and applying the theories of attachment and development, we can begin to build a fuller picture of other aspects which have impacted a child's psychological health and behaviour. This placement has been one of the first times during my training where I have felt like I was working with a family in a collaborative way. Ultimately, it seems essential to deal with the real and everyday problems for which the family are seeking help, and to work with them to establish ways in which to cope, rather looking for reasons or making them feel that they are to blame. Continued support is essential for this family who have coped really well so far but need reassurance that they are doing a good job. The purpose of interventions by the CAMHS team to date has been to put in as many support structures as possible for them, so that they do not feel that they are alone, they hope to continue to offer this support for as long as the family need it.