This assignment considers legal and ethical issues surrounding the practice of forced medication and covert administration. I have encountered this controversial practice before in elderly care but had not realised how prevalent it was, or that it could be justified with support of professional bodies and the law. I had always believed that deliberately deceiving a client about the treatment they are receiving would be prohibited and therefore wanted to understand more about the legal and ethical issues that are involved in care planning in order to inform my own practice. The main topic of discussion focuses around the justification for the removal of the client's autonomy and considers different philosophical viewpoints concerning this; it also identifies the relevant legislation that must be considered when such a decision is being reached. It attempts to explore how someone can be deemed to lack capacity to make decisions; whether it is possible that mental capacity will fluctuate and whether forced treatment is in breach of a person's human rights. I have used the case of a client I have met in practice to illustrate some of the issues that need to be considered by the medical team to ensure that the best interests of the patient are considered at all times. To protect the client's identity, as required by the local trust policy and NMC guidelines (NMC 2004), he will be referred to as Bill throughout this case study.
Bill is a man in his 80s who has been detained in hospital under Section 3 of the Mental Health Act (DOH 1983), hereafter referred to as MHA. He has a diagnosis of dementia with a possible secondary diagnosis of bi-polar disorder. On first admission to the ward on Section 2 of the Act, Bill had come from a residential home and had been exhibiting violent behavior and refusing to co-operate with the team who wanted to bring him into hospital. There was no previous history of mental illness although a diagnosis of dementia had been made at this time. When the section 2 expired after 28 days, Bill was allowed to become an informal patient since he was co-operating with treatment. Soon after the section lapsed, Bill's condition deteriorated and he refused to take oral medication believing it to be poison, became verbally and physically aggressive and was suffering from distressing delusions. At this point his was placed on Section 3 of the MHA (1983). It states in Bill's care plan that he was placed on section 3 of the MHA (1983) "in view of the lack of family involvement" and to safeguard Bill's own rights. The other option would have been to continue to treat Bill as an informal patient lacking capacity to consent to treatment, in which case he would have far fewer clear rights of appeal. A section gives the patient clear rights whereas a patient who has been informally admitted may be unsure of their rights and see the possibility of being sectioned as a punishment for bad behaviour (Hendrick 2000). Bill was forcibly medicated with an Intra Muscular injection as is allowed under the guidance of the Act which stipulates that the hospital is a place of safety and that staff may enforce treatment. This procedure was distressing for the client, other patients, and the nursing staff. The decision was therefore made to administer medication covertly by placing it into his food at mealtimes. Since Bill has remained on Section 3 for over 3 months, a second opinion has been sought and obtained allowing the team to continue forced treatment if this is felt necessary.
Our system of law and legal frameworks are built on what is commonly held to be right or just and designed to prevent injustice against the individual or society and maintain order. Medical ethics are a combination of what is required by law and the rules that various professional bodies have designed to help practitioners with difficult decisions. There are three main sources of legal rules governing good clinical practice in Mental Health Nursing and these are: common law; developed by decision of judges over the years; Parliamentary law which confers statutory powers and judgements and the European Convention of Human rights (Fennell 2004). Ethics are a greyer area since they consist of both our personal value judgements and what is deemed the appropriate course of action by the professional bodies, which in turn are answerable to the public. In this instance I have used professional guidelines from the Nursing and Midwifery Council and the Royal College of Psychiatrists as a framework for the discussion of issues which were considered in this case. Beauchamp and Childress have drawn on historical ethical works along with their own observations from the healthcare environment to formulate their theory which they call biomedical ethics (Beauchamp and Childress 2001). It has four main principles: Beneficence, the principle of doing good, non-malfeasance, the principle of doing no harm, respect for autonomy and justice. All four of these principles will be discussed in relation to Bill in this case study.
The removal of a person's autonomy is the main ethical consideration when invoking the MHA and administrating covert medication. The autonomous individual is one able to make their own choices in life, although some people would argue that in order to be truly autonomous, one must understand the implications of these choices (Beauchamp and Childress 2001); an argument which is used to justify removal of autonomy when a person lacks capacity to consent and is discussed at length later in the essay. Immanuel Kant valued autonomy above all else and argued that it gives people respect, values and proper motivation (Beauchamp and Childress 2001). His deontological or obligation based theory held that particular kinds of acts are morally wrong because they are inconsistent with the status of a person as a free and rational being, and should not be carried out under any circumstances whatsoever - forced and concealed medication would be one such act. Kant would therefore argue that the doctor's duty to respect the individual's autonomy outweighs his duty to treat the illness since the act of deliberate deceit would be an assault on his personhood. Kant addresses the idea of dignity and this is one area which concerns me about covert medicine administration; it is important to ensure that a client's dignity is maintained as far as possible and in Bill's case I think that at times this was overlooked. Medicine was sometimes concealed in inappropriate food types - sugary syrup in soup for example was certainly not respectful of Bill since it would have spoilt his enjoyment of his food. The issue of dignity is also relevant to continuously testing Bill's capacity since not doing this is treating him inhumanely.
The counter argument to deontology is utilitarianism, the view that a course of action should be determined by the outcome - the means justify the ends. The underlying principle is that the best decision is the one that does the greatest good for the greatest number of people. The physicians have justified the removal of Bill's autonomy with the argument that they are acting beneficently or in his best interests, and also in the best interests of everyone else who may be affected by the violent behaviour. A common criticism of treatment under the MHA which is certainly relevant in this case is that the medics are acting paternalistically by making decisions on the client's behalf. The response to this would generally be that a paternalistic approach is justified since it aims to restore the client's autonomy and allow him to make his own informed decision about treatment.
It is important to consider whether it was appropriate and in his best interests to place Bill on a section of the Mental Health Act - this is usually only necessary if the person is considered to be a risk to themselves or to others. Bill's aggressive behaviour and delusional beliefs could have led to him harming himself or other people. Thomas Szasz (1974) who proposed that mental illness was a myth to allow society to enforce behavioural norms; would say that this is an example of the medical profession judging Bill's behaviour as unacceptable and attempting to make him conform by medicating him. I am satisfied; however, that at the time of placing Bill on section 3 of the MHA (1983), the team had fully explored alternatives and had attempted to treat him as an informal patient without success and this was therefore the only option left available to them. They are also acting in his best interests by giving him a clear appeal process which can be initiated by Bill himself or an advocate.
The decision to covertly administer medication was justified by the identification of the following risks: If Bill were not treated, he would continue to experience hallucinations and his mental health would continue to deteriorate; his physical health would deteriorate if he continued to refuse medication for a heart condition; there was a risk to nursing staff of verbal and physical aggression. There was also a risk of malnutrition and dehydration due to Bill's belief about being poisoned. It was the hope of the team that regular administration of antipsychotic medication would restore Bill's mental capacity enough to allow him to make his own decision about treatment. One could also argue that keeping Bill in hospital and not treating him would be overlooking the nurse's common law duty of care to the client. Article 3 of the Human rights Act 1998 which states:" No one shall be subject to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" would also offer support for this decision because repeated restraint and injections may be more degrading to human life than the covert administration of medications (Royal College of Psychiatrists 2004).
The next discussion point is how Bill's mental capacity was tested, whether he continues to lack the capacity to consent, and whether this capacity is tested on a regular basis and the treatment reviewed accordingly. The Mental capacity Bill (DoH 2005) was passed earlier this year and governs decision-making on behalf of adults who lack mental capacity, both where they lose capacity at some point in their lives (as is the case with Bill), and where the incapacitating condition has been present since birth. Capacity is not well defined but is generally accepted as a person's ability to understand the consequences of an action. All individuals are presumed to have capacity to make a treatment decision unless they are unable to take in and retain the information material to the decision especially as to the likely consequences of having or not having the treatment; or are unable to believe the information; or are unable to weigh the information in the balance as part of a process of arriving at the decision (DoH 2005). In the case of Bill, his delusional beliefs meant that he was unable to believe the information being given to him about the necessity to take his medication.
Bill has been deemed to be lacking competency to make the decision about whether or not to take medication in view of the Bournewood judgement (R v Bournewood Mental Health trust ex part L (1999)). This was a case where the European Court of Human Rights held that a mentally incapable man who was kept in hospital without clear legal authority was unlawfully deprived of his liberty within Article 5 of the European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR'), even though he made no attempt to leave and appeared 'compliant' with the regime in hospital. The British courts had twice found in favour of the Trust but the ECHR deemed that in this case, the decision making process was not properly documented. The guidelines from the Royal College of Psychiatry and the Mental Capacity Bill both agree that any assessment as to an individual's capacity should be made in relation to a particular treatment or admission proposal; in the case of Bill, his medications appear to have changed several times since his admission and it is not clear if this consideration has occurred regarding each different medication. It is also recognized that capacity in an individual with a mental disorder can be variable over time and should be assessed at the time the admission or treatment is proposed; although this is detailed in Bill's care plan, my concern was that nursing staff were not always carrying out an assessment before disguising medication.
A further concern around the treatment of this client is the dual role of the nurse as the patient's advocate and the individual who on a daily basis is deceiving them about their treatment. It is stressed in all of the literature surrounding the issue of covert administration that the decision should be reached by the team although it is the practitioner who delivers the medication on each occasion who is ultimately responsible. This is made clear in all of the professional guidelines and if a practitioner has concerns or doubts about the correct course of action then they are advised to seek advice and to document this thoroughly. In the case of this client, the role of nursing advocacy was demonstrated by the effective monitoring and clear documentation of possible side effects of the medication being administered. Bill had very loose bowels and upon looking up the side effects of his medication, this was found to be one. It was mentioned during a ward round where the doctor's intention was to increase the dose of the medication and resulted in the current dose being maintained whilst the possible gastro-intestinal agitation was monitored.
The decision to deceive someone about their treatment is not one that should be taken lightly and I hope that this case study has illustrated some of the areas that should be considered by the team. Although the Mental Capacity Bill (2005) has made the guidelines about non-consensual treatment clearer, it is highly unlikely that the practice of covert medicine administration will ever be detailed by the letter of the law since this could lead to its abuse. Kant would argue that since his categorical imperative cannot be applied, the practice should not be allowed. Most practitioners though, particularly in the mental health field recognise that there are times when an individual may need an intervention even though they don't want it - legislation such as the MHA (1983) and the Mental Capacity Bill have been put in place and should be used to protect the patient's rights at these times. As practitioners, it is very easy for us to become complacent and stop questioning the necessity of a treatment if it has become the norm - this scenario has illustrated to me how important it is not to do this. Although in this case, the initial care plan was comprehensive, the point that capacity should be tested every time medication was given to this client was not clear and so the practice of automatically concealing medication was adopted by most staff. As Mental Health Nurses deal with a vulnerable client group with whom it is easy to adopt a paternalistic attitude, this must at all times be balanced with a person centred approach to care; continually checking, reflecting on and updating our practice to ensure that client autonomy is respected as much as possible.