This reflective piece uses Johns' model of structured reflection (2004) to examine what influenced my decisions during a care intervention and explores theoretical frameworks on decision making to establish how decisions are reached. The care intervention was carried out whilst I was a student on an Older adult inpatient unit. I had been inspired by a journal article written by a mother who used Prouty's Contact Work (Prouty et al 2002) to improve her relationship with her son who suffered from Schizophrenia (Clarke 2005). I thought that this person centred approach to engagement fitted with Kitwood's (1997) ideas about positive engagement in dementia care which have had a strong influence on the National Service Framework for Older adults (Department of Health 2001). I wanted to see if this new approach would work when delivering personal care to a person suffering from dementia. The work was with a client who, as required by local trust policy and NMC guidelines (NMC 2003) will be known as Peter for the purpose of this case study. Peter suffers from advanced dementia causing him to find verbal communication difficult which leads at times to his becoming frustrated and aggressive. I had observed that the mood he is in throughout the day seems intrinsically linked to the approach taken by staff who assist him with his personal care in the mornings. Peter is a large man and due to his violent outbursts; many staff are tempted to deliver the bare minimum in the way of personal care. Disruptive and destructive behaviour can occur when Peter becomes distressed: he will shred paper and magazines and will refuse to co-operate with staff. He will also neglect his nutrition and hydration needs if he is not prompted.
All too often, the pieces of reflection that I include in my practice portfolio or which I consider at the end of a shift but do not actually commit to paper are negative ones. I have chosen to reflect on this experience because it took me out of my comfort zone but the intervention was ultimately a success and felt good. I also felt that this intervention illustrates the value of reflection and evidence based practice and was the first time that I had really been aware of reflecting in action (Schon 1987). Reflection in action involves thinking about practice whilst doing it (Rolfe et al 2001) and according to Schon is evidence of advanced practice. Evidence of reflective practice is now one of the requirements of the UKCC for all pre-registration nurses; they also note that qualified practitioners should continue to demonstrate this as part of their ongoing portfolio (Kirby et al). Whilst writing this assignment, I have wondered whether properly considered reflective practice could be considered a decision-making process in itself and if this is why there is such an emphasis on teaching the student techniques for accessing it. I have concluded that although it is a good tool to help with decisions, an awareness of other methods is also necessary. Johns' framework is slightly more difficult to access than others such as the Gibbs reflective cycle (Gibbs 1988) since it encourages the practitioner to consider events from many different angles and reflection therefore takes longer. Johns himself notes that his framework is not intended to be prescriptive but should be used as a technique to help practitioners access the depth and breadth of reflection needed for learning through experience. His research has also shown him that the more one reflects, the easier it becomes. In this piece of work I have attempted to address all of his suggested considerations although not necessarily sequentially.
Morning shift; I am not really a morning person and always find it difficult to get up. I was allocated 3 patients, one of whom was Peter who was already up and wandering around the ward. I wondered how the morning would progress - would I be able to help Peter get dressed and washed early with another team member's help or would the intervention result in shouting and aggression from him as was sometimes the case? I decided to have a cup of tea and make one for Peter so that I could chat with him about how he was feeling that morning and ask him if he felt ready to get dressed or have breakfast. Peter accepted his cup of tea although did not want to sit down and was not in the mood to talk and continued to pace around the ward, I did not force the issue but continued to try to make contact with Peter by smiling, holding his hand and talking to him at various intervals as he continued his journey around the ward. The nurse was keen to give him his morning medication and so I made him a bowl of porridge which is his favourite breakfast and guided him to a chair where he sat down to eat. I felt pleased that so far I had not noticed any signs of aggression or frustration and that Peter seemed to be enjoying his food and having a good morning. Medication next, this was sometimes a problem with Peter - he had 2 different types of syrup, one of which he did not like the taste of, however this morning, he took it and just remarked how disgusting it tasted - so far so good! Still in his pyjamas though and there is always the possibility that relatives may visit since Peter's family are very close - should I push the issue of getting washed and dressed? All of the other girls seem busy with their tasks and so I approach Peter and ask him about getting dressed, attempting to lead him by the hand to his bedroom which seemed to annoy him and so I stopped. I sometimes find the issue of personal care tricky with older adults, whilst I recognise the need to make sure that everyone is washed and dressed, I sometimes feel that we are working to our own agendas and time limits rather than respecting the wishes of the individual. Since there was plenty of time left in the morning, I thought it would be best to allow Peter to get on with his own agenda for a while before attempting to assist him to dress. I busied myself helping other members of staff to wash and dress other clients on the ward although I now wonder whether I could have tried harder to engage Peter and succeeded in encouraging him to dress. As it was, I left things for an hour and then accompanied Peter to his room where he keeps stuffed toys on his bed, I am not sure why this is - they possibly remind him of his own pet cats? In any case, he really seems to enjoy stroking the soft fur and they are a useful tool to use to engage him whilst helping him to wash. I gained assistance from another carer and in this way; I was able to wash and dry Peter's lower regions (this is the part of personal care he finds most distressing) and help him to dress whilst she focused on talking to him about his toy cat. I continued to talk to him throughout the procedure, telling him what I was doing and attempting to complete the task as quickly as possible. Peter was then able to wash and dry his face and allowed me to help him put on the rest of his clothes. Although he was not keen on the idea of washing and dressing the procedure was managed without any shouting or gritted teeth from Peter who thanked us once he was finished. He was able to continue throughout the morning in a pleasant mood and after eating lunch, settled in a chair for a couple of hours. It was good for his family to be able to see him so relaxed when they arrived and it looked as though they had a really good visit.
Contact work was developed Garry Prouty (Prouty et al 2002) who has worked for years with people diagnosed with schizophrenia and severe learning disabilities and it has been recognised by NIMHE as a valuable approach which offers older people a framework and structure to enhance communications in a purposeful way and which has the potential to lead to more enlightened personalised care with opportunities for family/carer involvement (Rae 2005). Prouty recognises how communication problems can lead to relational problems and his technique works by using what he calls "contact reflections" to make contact with clients who find communication difficult. The main aim of his work is to encourage the client to make contact with the therapist/family member rather than remaining in social isolation because of their perceptual difficulties. Prouty identifies five types of contact reflection: - Situational reflections; a verbal reflection on the client's current behaviour, for example: "you are holding a cup". Facial reflections, which are observations of client expression; body reflections help the client to understand how their body is connected to their feelings and focus on describing to the client your observation of their posture or gestures/movements e.g. Peter looks stiff. Word for word reflections are a way in which the therapist focuses on the words or sounds that a client uses and repeats them to try to communicate back to them. The final type of reflection that he identifies is what he calls reiterative reflections which is the premise that if a previous reflection worked, repeat the reflection, either in the short or long term.
During the identified intervention, I feel that I made the most use of situational reflection, reminding Peter that he had breakfast in front of him and a spoon in his hand and then later in his bedroom using this same technique to get him to focus on the wash cloth in his hand. This approach is very similar to reality orientation (Stokes 1987) which is now common practice in dementia care. I realise with hindsight that I could also have employed body and facial reflections to communicate to Peter how I knew that he did not want to get dressed at various times during the morning. Peter likes to do things in his own time and becomes agitated if he feels that he is being "forced", demonstrating this agitation through non-verbal communication such as clenched fists and gritted teeth - I could have reflected back to him "Peter is gritting his teeth" - this is something that I will perhaps try in the future. Another aspect of the intervention that I reflected on was whether I applied the technique properly. The fact that we were distracting Peter with the toy was encouraging him to move away from contact with myself and the other carer and engage with the toy. It was using a safety mechanism that we know would work although which could potentially be perceived as encouraging an adult to behave in a childlike and therefore undignified way. It would be interesting to find out exactly what the toy cats symbolise to Peter, possibly from his family, and to ask them if they find their use offensive or inappropriate. An action for the future would also be to talk to the family about the way they delivered personal care before Peter was admitted into hospital to try to gain insight into the best approach to use - this is also something which I will probably try to ask during the admission procedure in the future if families are present and able to talk about this (although I recognise that this is sometimes a distressing time and may not be appropriate).
There are several points during this care intervention where I had an option to choose more that one course of action, I will now attempt to look at these decisions and how they were reached in more detail. Good clinical decisions are a combination of the consideration of available resources, the client's wishes, the cognitive and practical resources possessed by a practitioner (clinical expertise) and support from evidence based knowledge (Thompson & Dowding 2002). In analysing the decision making process, it is useful to consider some models which have been proposed to help explain how it happens. There are many theories, from the idea that information is methodically processed and a decision reached rationally and objectively (Newell & Simon 1972) to the idea that expertise is an unconscious process based on feelings and intuition (Benner et al 1996, Carper 1978). The information processing theory can be practically applied in the form of a decision tree which can be used to help the practitioner to predict the best outcome by allocating values to each decision and calculating the sum of the values to explore a particular course of action which can then be compared with several alternatives. For the kinds of decisions that I was making in this piece of reflection, a decision tree could be used to look in intricate detail at all possible outcomes and may be a useful tool for reflection but is unlikely to be of practical use on a day to day basis to gain predictive knowledge. It is a tool that is probably more useful in triage situations to establish priorities or perhaps even to give support to a lone practitioner unsure of a course of action to take for instance when delivering emergency first aid. Bonner (2001) has suggested how decision trees may be used in a community mental health setting; her focus seems centred around the justification of decisions based on resource allocation versus risk assessment - an increasingly prevalent theme in nursing today. The work, however, is a good illustration of how service users can be involved in relapse planning and provides evidence base for service user involvement as is required by the CPA (DoH 1999).
At the other end of the decision making spectrum is and Benner's novice-expert theory (Benner et al 1996) which works on the premise that expert nurses have intuition which allows them to make the right decision. Intuition is unconscious knowledge or what is sometimes described as "gut feeling" which is the result of years of practice and experience. Although I am able to recognise elements of Benner's theory as being applicable to my own practice; I feel much like a beginner, preferring to follow rules, even if these are of my own making. I feel daunted by the idea that one day I should be an expert and able to arrive at the "right" decision instantaneously. I also feel that there is a certain amount of danger if the individual considers themselves an expert, that they could become complacent or over confident as is one theory in the case of an experienced nurse who over administered large doses of painkillers to patients without physician approval (Jenkins 2005). Benner's theory has been influential in the recognition that there is a two way relationship between practice and theory which underpins today's competency based exit profile (Kirby et al 2004) however; it is recognised that there is a need to explore these "feelings" further in order that nursing can become an evidence-based profession. There still remains a debate about whether nursing interventions are based on logic or intuition although many practitioners now feel that there is probably room for both, my analysis of the intervention focuses on many influencing factors and these are discussed below.
The first decision was to choose that particular shift to attempt to use the contact work with the client. Even though early morning shifts are not my favourite and possibly not the best time to choose a new approach, my mentor and I had successfully worked in this way with the client before and I was keen to see if I could manage an unsupported intervention. The knowledge that I was growing in my own practice, even if the intervention was not successful, made me feel more purposeful that morning; Johns (2004) notes that this "re-kindled commitment" is one of the positive aspects of reflection and reconnects the practitioner with the ideals that brought them to choose a caring profession in the first place. Knowing that it makes a difference to his wife to see Peter properly cared for - dressed, shaved and with clean fingernails was another consideration which I held in mind throughout this intervention. I knew that Peter had a distressing experience in respite care before he came into hospital and his wife had expressed relief on several occasions that she knew that he was being so well cared for in hospital. The Department of Health now stresses the importance of understanding the impact that family can have on a situation and how important it is for clinical staff to support them as well as the client - if Peter's wife had found his physical appearance upsetting, she may not have visited as frequently and this could have resulted in a more rapid deterioration of Peter's mental health. Throughout the intervention, I was also trying to consider what would be in his best interests whilst respecting his autonomy. I was able to back off when I picked up non verbal cues indicating aggression in this instance and did so because the ward was fully staffed that morning and I was supernumery and therefore had plenty of time to reconsider the intervention and work at the client's pace. If the ward had not been properly staffed or had the other patients been more demanding then it is possible that I may have had to consider another approach.
Another factor which I consider to have influenced the situation is my own role as a student nurse. As a carer, my profession before I began the training; I would have been task focused and the main tasks would probably have been to ensure that the person was helped to dress and wash in a timely fashion and that I had attempted to get everyone to eat breakfast. As a third year student I feel more qualified to make a decision based on my own knowledge of priorities; firstly to try to ensure that medication is given (in order that we can evaluate the effectiveness of the treatment) and to do this I know that I need to try to ensure that Peter is willing to accept it which is dependant on his mood - this necessitates a well considered approach to engagement. I do not feel that getting someone dressed is a priority unless it appears that there is a risk attached to not doing this, for example if Peter had been incontinent, the possibility of damage to the skin would outweigh the risk of causing a change in his mood and removing the wet clothes would become a priority.
I have also considered with hindsight whether I was right to "use" the client to further my own learning or to trial a new method of working? Schon (1987) would say that allowing the practitioner to become a researcher in the practice context is true reflection in action and therefore justified. Further research about the way that contact work has been applied has led me to realise that others have successfully employed the technique in working with dementia sufferers (Van Werde & Morton 1999) and that it has much in common with other accepted ways of working with this client group. I also know that if I had felt at any time during the intervention that my application of Contact Therapy was actually causing Peter distress, then I would have abandoned the use of the technique since I would not have been looking after his best interests. I mentioned earlier that there may be the potential for use of facial reflections in an intervention with Peter; before trying this I would like to discuss its use with my mentor since I have a feeling that it might annoy him rather than being therapeutic. On the whole, I believe that my intervention has proved to me that Prouty's work can successfully be applied, at least in part, to older adults and I shall certainly use the technique again when I feel it is appropriate in future.
In conclusion, I would say that completing this piece of work has been a learning experience in itself. Although throughout my training to date, I have dutifully reflected on various clinical situations and considered learning objectives within the practice portfolio; I can not say that I had actually fully taken on the implications of what it is to be a truly reflective practitioner. I chose the identified scenario to reflect on since I thought that it would allow me a simple framework to use as a starting point for discussing in detail some of the decisions that were reached. As I looked at each decision, I began to realise how many seemingly unconscious mechanisms were in play and how I have managed to integrate classroom based theoretical learning, such as the importance of acknowledging family, alongside experiential learning and evidence base to deliver a care intervention. I note that the mechanisms seem unconscious because I believe that reason and logic are lying underneath and these can be accessed through structured reflection.