Much is already known about the detrimental effects that alcohol can have on the body (cirrhosis of the liver and links with high blood pressure); but information about what it does to the brain is not so readily available. Alcohol is a combination of Carbon, Hydrogen and Oxygen (C2H5OH) and is produced by either fermentation or distillation. Because of its relatively simple formula, alcohol - unlike many other drugs - is quickly and readily absorbed by the body and its effects can be almost instantaneous (Royal College of Psychiatrists1979). A psychiatric nurse will regularly encounter alcohol abuse both on the ward and in the community. Statistics have shown the number of alcohol related admissions to psychiatric hospitals in England has risen sharply over the last few years, as has the incidence of alcohol related deaths (Cameron & Plant 2000). It therefore seems that the more informed the practitioner can be about the effects of this substance on the human body and the way it interacts with other drugs, the better professionally equipped they will be. I have chosen to look at alcohol's effects on the brain because many of the drugs used on psychiatric wards influence the brain chemistry and the addition of alcohol can be very dangerous. I will begin by outlining the structure of the brain and some of its functions and will then move on to discuss the way alcohol impairs some of these functions and what the long and short term effects of excessive drinking can be. I will also be considering approaches to treatment of alcohol abuse and how it is dealt with by the psychiatric nurse.
The brain is one of the largest organs in the body. It receives and processes sensory information and instructs the body to act accordingly. It can be roughly divided into five parts: the frontal lobe, the parietal lobe (middle), the occipital lobe, the temporal lobes and the insula, this is a structure buried deep within the lateral sulci covered by portions of the temporal, parietal and frontal lobes. The frontal lobe is the largest and most well developed part of the brain in human beings and it is thought that it is the development of this part of the brain which differentiates us from other mammals (Marieb 1995). Historically, a lot of what we know about the brain has been discovered by post-mortem studies of people with brain damage although modern techniques have allowed us to study living subjects and thus broaden our knowledge about the functions of different brain areas These techniques include Computerized Axial Tomography (CAT) which are x-rays of the brain taken in a series of sections, these are very good for locating tumours and tissue loss (atrophy). Positron Emission Tomography (PET) is a technique which measures gamma-ray activity in the brain by injecting radioactive particles into the blood. This is good for looking at localised brain activity for different tasks The last type of scan that is commonly used is Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Again this measures brain activity similar to PET although no injection is needed since what is being measured is the oxygen levels in haemoglobin (Greenfield 1997). As a practitioner, it is very important to understand the usage and technology behind these techniques since it can be frightening for a patient to think that they have a problem within their brain. The nurse's role is to educate them about the procedure and offer comfort where possible.
Messages within the brain are carried by brain cells called neurons; these neurons carry minute electrical charges over the pre-synaptic gap using substances called neurotransmitters. Alcohol is thought to have various differing effects on these substances. We know that alcohol increases production of the neurotransmitter dopamine (Eaves & Swinson 1978) which gives us a feeling of well-being; it is thought that this feeling is what contributes to the addiction. Drugs for alcoholics are currently being trialled which block the activity of dopamine receptors which in turn inhibits its release (The Dana Foundation 2003). It is also known that consumption of alcohol increases the level of Serotonin and gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the brain and decreases the effects of anaesthetics (Cameron & Plant 2000). The GABA receptors that respond to low levels of alcohol are in cellular areas and brain regions that control the effects of alcohol on behaviour. These areas include: the cerebellum, which controls motor coordination; the hippocampal formation, which affects memory loss; and the thalamus, which is involved with sleep. (Brain research Institute 2004)
The body's reflexes slow due to the delay or interference with the neural paths and this is when accidents happen. In the UK one in seven road deaths is as a result of drink driving. A recent study has shown that drinking alcohol can cause subjects to deliver a quicker pre-emptive response than they would have had they not been drinking (Abroms et al 2003). This fits with the fact that we are often over cautious about activity after a drink. General self harm through accidents is also very common amongst alcoholics (Cameron &, Plant 2000).
The Royal College of Psychiatrists (1986) have called alcohol "our favourite drug." It produces a sense of well being and mild euphoria and is commonly used as a relaxant/stress reliever; unlike many other drugs, it is considered socially acceptable. Alcohol is a very simple molecule which allows it to move around the body via the bloodstream as easily as water and without being digested (Cameron & Plant 2000). Alcohol also lowers our inhibitions which is why some people believe it gives them confidence, it also affects our judgement. Large doses of alcohol can cause the temperature-regulating mechanism in the brain to become depressed and a fall in temperature may become pronounced (Alcohol and Alcoholism report 1979). This is an important point for the psychiatric nurse to use in the education of alcoholics, some of whom could be homeless and using alcohol to warm themselves up. The breakdown of alcohol in the body leads to excessive energy production (1 gram = 7 calories) although it has no nutritional value, this is why many heavy drinkers suffer from malnutrition - they do not feel tired or hungry and so continue to drink. Alcohol also dehydrates the body, firstly because it is a diuretic and therefore encourages us to go to the toilet more regularly; but also because drinking alcohol produces toxins in the liver and it requires more water than usual to flush them out. If water is not provided then the toxins build up (Hangover biology 101 2004). Another common short term effect is the "hangover" that many people suffer after drinking, a main feature of these being a headache. Alcohol may cause headaches by several means. First, it is a direct vasodilator; in some individuals vasodilatation may cause a headache. Secondly, as previously mentioned, ethanol is a natural diuretic; which leads to excretion of salt, vitamins and minerals from the body through the kidneys. Excess consumption of alcohol may also produce dehydration and chemical imbalances in the body. Most alcoholic beverages that drink are not made from pure ethanol; they also contain substances called congeners which are the flavours that give each alcoholic drink its distinctive taste. It is thought that these congeners that are also partly responsible for hangovers, and there have also been investigations into their relationship with alcohol addiction (Clark & Krika 1979). Fructose, the naturally occurring sugar from fruits helps return portions of the body's chemical balance back to normal following ethanol consumption (National headache foundation 2003).
The brain, along with the liver are the two parts of the body which require most blood and since alcohol is very quick to enter the bloodstream, it is hardly surprising that they are the body parts which sustain most damage due to excessive drinking.
Hormones are another factor in the body which alcohol influences. Testicular atrophy which can lead to impotence and the development of breasts in males (Clark & Krika 1979) is thought to be caused by the effect of alcohol on the sex hormone Testosterone.
Clark and Krika (1979) looked at the concentration of alcohol in various body fluids and tissues and found that the ethanol content of the brain relative to that in blood was 0.74 and for the testes 0.97, they compare this to the figure 0.64 for the liver. I found these results particularly interesting, since liver damage is something which we know is directly caused by excessive drinking and, if this damage is caused by a lower concentration than that in the brain and testes, we can only imagine the real extent of damage that the substance causes to the human reproductive mechanisms and cognitive functions. The high levels of concentration in the testes could also be a pre-cursor to paternally caused foetal alcohol syndrome since it has been found that heavy paternal drinking is usually evident in sufferers (Abel 1991). Foetal Alcohol Syndrome occurs when a mother is consuming large amounts (more than 40g per day) of alcohol whilst pregnant and can result in birth defects. The effects on the brain of FAS become most prevalent as the child gets older, they will commonly suffer with speech problems and have a below average level of intelligence (Cooney J 1991).Most medical professionals would now argue that alcohol should be cut out altogether during pregnancy to prevent any damage to the unborn child.
With repeated bouts of intoxication, the body begins to build up a tolerance for alcohol and the effects of a single drink become less severe, forcing the alcoholic to drink more to receive the same effects (Cooney J 1991). Alcohol dependence is commonly regarded as a problem involving many factors including cognitive and behavioural factors, psychosexual and biological factors, as well as mood disorders (Cooney J 1991). There are several commonly recognised symptoms of dependence: a narrowing of the drinking repertoire, an increased tolerance to alcohol, repeated withdrawal symptoms, preoccupation with drinking over other activities, awareness of the compulsion to drink, relief drinking to avoid withdrawal symptoms, harmful recurrence of drinking after abstinence (Manson L & Ritson P 1984, Cameron D & Plant M 2000). A psychiatric nurse should be aware of all of these factors when questioning new patients about their drinking habits since spotting the problem early means that there is a better chance of successful treatment (Kennedy & Faugier 1989). Alcohol also increases levels of aggression (SANE) and this is something that the practitioner should always be aware of when dealing with someone who appears to be intoxicated.
Treatment for alcoholism within Oxfordshire Mental health trust is managed by a community team who also advise ward staff about inpatient treatment as and when this is needed. Treatment can aim to achieve one of two goals - complete abstinence (the aim of the AA organisation) or a sensible, managed approach to drinking, (favoured by behaviouralists who believe in the use of Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) to treat the problem). Which goal is chosen depends largely on the individual (Moos et al 1990). Since the government have put a national alcohol harm reduction strategy high on its list of priorities, it is surprising that there is very little information available about how this is to be implemented within the trust. Within the Trust's policy on illicit substance (Charnok S 2003) it is mentioned that because alcohol is not a controlled substance, it remains the private property of individuals. Urine samples and blood tests are regularly taken from known alcoholics if they leave a ward. I have not been able to find any measures of the severity of a person's alcoholism whilst on my current placement however, Moos et al (1990) cite the addiction severity index and Brief drinker profile as measurement tools which can be used for this purpose. Since alcohol is an addictive substance the treatment of alcohol abuse will almost always begin with a detox programme during which the patient will very often be asked to sign a contract agreeing that s/he will not drink for an agreed period of time whilst undergoing treatment (Kennedy & Faugier 1989). If the detox is taking place within an inpatient environment, the practitioner may wish to prescribe a benzodiazepine to reduce withdrawal symptoms although a strict procedure is usually followed by the nursing staff before the administration of these drugs. In this Trust, we use the "Clinical institute withdrawal assessment for alcohol (Sullican et al 1989) which asks the patient to rate various symptoms on a scale of 1 to 7.
The main drug used to treat alcoholism has historically been disulfiram, also known as Antabuse which causes a severe reaction in the patient when taken with alcohol. It would not be used without a full treatment programme involving Cognitive Behavioural Therapy which would try to identify triggers and patterns of drinking behaviour, and possibly also the use of a support group such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). The drugs are usually used as a tool to prevent drinking beginning again and the patient will experience adverse effects when drinking alcohol for the next 3 days (Kessel & Walton 1989). Mixing alcohol with prescribed drugs can have some very harmful effects and this is particularly relevant in the mental health field where a lot of patients are taking controlled medications. Alcohol is classified as a depressant and strengthens the effects of many central nervous system depressants such as hypnotics and tranquilisers. When combined with tri-cyclic anti-depressants, alcohol will give a sedative effect, and it can also make the effects of anaesthetic less effective (Manson & Ritson 1984). It is also important to mention here that not all alcohol abusers are being treated for the problem of alcohol addiction whilst in hospital and alcohol consumption can interfere with other treatments, for example, ECT can not be given if a person is intoxicated and neither can a mental health act assessment be completed.
There are many damaging outcomes which can result from a long term drinking problem; I have described some of these below. Korsakov syndrome was discovered in 1887. It is caused by a deficiency in vitamin B1 (thiamine) its main feature is the impairment of recent memory. There is no cure for Korsakov syndrome but it is fairly rare and can be prevented from occurring by administering supplements of vitamin B1 to heavy drinkers. Another condition that can sometimes be found is Wernicke's encephalopathy; the patient suffering from this will have great difficulty concentrating, slowness in answering questions, memory loss, confusion, ataxia (body sway) and double vision (diplopia) (Jung 1994, Kessel & Walton1989). This syndrome is thought to be due to a deficiency in B vitamins in particular areas in the base of the brain and is treatable by administration of supplements. Alcoholic Dementia is a diminishing ability to learn and make judgements which happens over a number of years of alcohol abuse, unfortunately the effects of this are irreversible (Kessel & Walton 1989). Cerebellar degeneration occurs when the cerebellum at the back of the brain is damaged. This acts as a feedback centre for the control of muscles and movement, including eye movements and speech. This damage presents itself by the patient's staggering movements and tremors in the hands and feet, movement is no longer co-ordinated and speech becomes irregular or slurred.
Peripheral neuropathy can also develop in cases of long term alcohol abuse; this is tingling or numbness in feet or hands and clumsiness and difficulty in telling where hands or feet are when walking. Arms and legs can become weak and the sufferer may also experience injury to the feet which will go unnoticed due to the nerves which carry pain and touch becoming damaged. The symptoms will subside after a few weeks if the patient eats a healthy diet and takes vitamin supplements (Eaves & Swinson 1978). Delirium Tremens, although a well known feature of the alcoholic, actually occurs in only 10% of established alcoholics (Manson & Ritson 1984). It is a serious condition characterised by increasing tremor, restlessness, mental confusion and sometimes terrifying visual hallucinations. If untreated, it can be fatal. It can be nursed by the administration of tranquilisers such as Benzodiazepines mentioned earlier and will usually pass within around four days.
The psychiatric nurse will encounter alcohol abuse throughout her career and the main ways in which she will be able to help and make a difference are to be able to recognise the signs and to provide education about how to cope with the problem for both the alcoholic and their family. The long term effects of alcohol abuse are frightening and in a lot of cases irreversible so if a nurse is able to spot early warning signs of alcoholism and treat the issue before it becomes a true addiction then s/he may well be saving a person's life. When treating the long term alcoholic, it is necessary to be able to recognise and effectively treat symptoms such as Delirium Tremens and to understand how people can become dependent on alcohol so that a good nurse-patient relationship can be established.