During a recent mental health placement, I worked with several service users with dual diagnosis: a mental health problem with comorbid substance misuse (Holland & Midson 2004). I experienced great difficulty in engaging these clients in services, and in helping them achieve change to improve their life opportunities. I found that debate over the primacy of conditions limited access to certain services, while the poor outcomes repeated in the lives of some clients elicited negative responses from service providers. I was therefore, interested in examining the current body of knowledge concerning dual diagnosis, particularly with regard to the evidence base for effective interventions.
My literature search consisted of electronic searching, on the CareData and Cochrane Library databases and electronic journals; reference searching, of the reference lists in found articles; and hand searching, of relevant articles and books found via the university library. Of the found material, the majority was American, emanated from psychiatry, and used scientific quantitative approaches to research and a medical model of mental health: focusing on aetiology, diagnosis and treatment of mental health problems as disease (Golightley 2005; Colombo 2003). Despite broadening the search terms, I was unable to find any social work based research, but eventually found one qualitative study. I found this search process extremely time consuming, but was able to quickly identify the key debates and primary authors on this subject.
Tyrer and Weaver (2004) acknowledge the predominance of US research on dual diagnosis, and warn that these findings might not be generalisable. The need for systematic UK based research, particularly with regard to the effectiveness of interventions, resounds in the UK literature (Bayneyal. 2002; Grahamal. 2003; Clark & Mueser 2003; Leyal. 2000). However, among British and American studies there appears to be general agreement as to both the high prevalence of dual diagnosis and the association with a number of negative outcomes.
Weaveral. (2003) conducted a cross-sectional survey to measure the prevalence of dual diagnosis among service users of Community Mental Health Teams (CMHTs) and substance misuse agencies, in four urban UK centres. The researchers found that 44% of service users in CMHTs had a past-year substance misuse problem, while 75% of drug service and 85% of alcohol service users had a past-year psychiatric disorder. The results from these inner-city areas may not be representative of all UK urban centres. However, high prevalence of dual diagnosis amongst mental health service users has previously been evidenced in both UK studies (36% in Menezesal. 1996; 24% in Grahamal. 2001) and US studies (29% in Regieral. 1990; range of 15-60% in studies cited in Leyal. 2000).
Adverse outcomes associated with dual diagnosis have also been well documented, these include: disengagement with services (Burns in Burns & Firn 2003); increased psychiatric admission (Huntal. 2002); higher rates of relapse (Swoffordal. 1996); violence (Scottal. 1998); suicidal behaviour (Applebyal. 1999); excess service costs (Hoff & Rosenheck 1999) and poor outcomes in psychiatric (Huntal. 2002) and substance misuse treatment programmes (Carey et al. cited in Weaveral. 2003). Despite widespread recognition of the significance of these problems, there remains much debate over the most effective means of addressing them.
The leading recommendation for intervention stems from American research and advocates the use of integrated treatment programmes: whereby substance misuse and psychiatric treatment are provided together by a single team (Drakeal. 2001). Integrated programmes are considered superior to serial programmes, where one treatment follows another, and parallel programmes, where treatments are simultaneous but provided by separate teams (Leyal. 2000; Tyrer & Weaver 2004). Dr R. E. Drake, a principal supporter of the integrated approach, has been involved in several research studies and the development of integrated treatment models in New Hampshire (USA). In a literature review, Drakeal. (2001) assert that integrated programmes can now be considered evidence-based, and that effective components include; a long-term perspective, comprehensiveness, cultural sensitivity, staged interventions, assertive outreach, motivational interventions, counselling/cognitive behavioural therapy and social support. Although Drakeal. (2001) acknowledge inconsistencies in the quality of the research to which they refer, the concept of the integrated approach has become highly influential (Tyrer & Weaver 2004). However, other researchers dispute the evidence for integrated programmes (Leyal. 2000; Tyrer & Weaver 2004). In a review for the Cochrane Collaboration, Leyal. (2000) examined six US randomised controlled trials comparing interventions for dual diagnosis, and found that no evidence for the superiority of integrated programmes over standard care could be established.
Two service innovations in the UK, both aiming to provide integrated services have also been studied. Bayneyal. (2002) describe the work of MIDAS, a specialist team set up exclusively for dual diagnosis service users in West Hertfordshire. This multidisciplinary team offer a wide range of treatments and employ an assertive outreach approach, similar to models tested in the US. Bayneyal. (2002) studied the case files of the first 80 clients accepted. Grahamal. (2003) similarly describe the COMPASS Programme in North Birmingham: a specialist team set up to provide expertise and training in dual diagnosis to existing mental health and substance misuse services. This service model has been tailored to fit existing service structures in the UK. However, both of these services were in their infancy at the time of writing, and consequently both sets of researchers conclude that ongoing evaluation of these integrated programmes is required.
In choosing articles to examine in more depth, I was interested in pursuing the debate regarding integrated programmes, however I also wished to reflect a range of research methodology. I have therefore selected, the only randomised control trial of integrated programmes to have been completed in the UK, an observational US study that reflects the influence of the integrated concept, and the only qualitative research I encountered on this subject.
Barrowcloughal. (2001) employed a randomised, controlled, single-blind clinical trial, to investigate the benefits of an integrated psychosocial intervention programme for service users with comorbid schizophrenia and substance misuse. The control group received routine psychiatric care, while the experimental group received an integrated programme of motivational interviewing, cognitive behavioural therapy and family/caregiver intervention in addition to routine psychiatric care. Preliminary deskwork involved ensuring all potential participants met the same criteria pertaining to their psychotic disorder, substance misuse, age, contact with mental health services, amount of contact with caregivers and lack of organic brain disease, other medical illness or learning disability. Diagnoses were established through chart review and discussion. Once individuals were deemed eligible for the study, their written informed consent was sought before seeking the written consent of the caregiver. Service user-caregiver dyads were then stratified and randomly assigned, to ensure equal male-female distribution and substance use representation in both groups.
Fieldwork involved measuring outcomes through quantitative interviews and observation to translate into statistical data; the independent assessors were blind to treatment allocation. Outcome measures were; general functioning, positive symptoms, exacerbation of symptoms, number of days abstinence from non-prescribed substances and number of relapses. The assessors used established scales to measure each outcome at baseline, and then every three months until one year after the start of the programme. The results demonstrated significant improvement in general functioning, and improvements in the other outcome measures in the experimental group.
This study reflects the positivist paradigm, which aims to emulate research procedures used in the natural sciences (Blaxteral. 2004). The methods are quantitative, experimental and statistical with the objective of predicting the most effective treatment programme for this group of service-users. The study appears methodologically sound: the control and experimental groups were carefully matched; the demographic characteristics of participants correspond to profiles of this service user group in previous studies, ethical considerations are addressed and extensive information is given throughout so that it could be replicated. Limitations have also been cited for example, the sample size of 36, which limits the generalisability. The researchers also acknowledge that since the percentage of dual diagnosis service users who have contact with family/caregiver is unknown, this sample may not be representative of the wider population, since it only included users who had a minimum of ten hours of contact each week.
There are additional limitations, however, which have not been identified. Firstly, this experiment could only assess interventions with individuals engaging with services: a characteristic unrepresentative of this population (DH 1999): 45% invited to participate in the study refused. This raises uncertainty over how representative this sample was, and how useful longitudinal studies are with this population. Secondly, although a psychosocial programme was employed, the outcome measures were primarily medical, reflecting a medical model of improvement. These measures do not necessarily concur with the service user's view of improvements in quality of life. Thirdly this study only relates to service users with Schizophrenia and may not be generalisable to service users with other diagnoses. Despite the researchers' conclusion that integrated care correlates to improved outcomes, they recognise that causality of outcomes remains ambiguous.
Hensley's (2004) observational study, aimed to evaluate integrated treatment outcomes for a small sample of 31 dual diagnosis participants, based at a mental health agency in St. Louis (USA). This was a quantitative, retrospective study, using secondary data contained in the agency's database and medical charts. The sample had participated in at least one year of psychiatric treatment at the centre, before enrolling in the integrated dual diagnosis programme. Outcome measurements taken after 12 months on the integrated programme were compared with the baseline measurements taken at the time of enrolment. In analysing the outcomes data, paired samples t-tests were performed and a p-value given to indicate whether the difference between outcomes was statistically significant. Hensley found that three of the six outcome measures had statistical significance: general functioning (increase), substance abuse/dual hospitalisations (decrease), and homelessness (decrease). The conclusion was that participation in this integrated treatment programme was associated with some positive change in life outcomes.
Although the paradigm appears to be positivist, Hensley is not objective but acknowledges that she is an employee of the organisation she is researching. In addition she introduces her study from the premise that integrated programmes are more effective than alternative models, citing a review undertaken by the supporters of the integrated approach, Drakeal. No references are made to literature suggesting the opposite conclusion e.g. the Cochrane review by Leyal. 2000. While the analysis of the statistical data appears clear and impartial, the conclusions drawn from these results are illogical, and the outcome measures are flawed.
The outcome of homelessness decreased significantly from 23% at baseline, to 0% after 12 months of the integrated programme. However, this measurement may be misleading, as it only represents two points in time. Since the service user group is characteristically peripatetic (DH 1999), a more valid outcome measure could have been the number of times participants had become homeless and been re-accommodated in both 12-month periods. The outcome of substance abuse/dual hospitalisation was hypothesised to increase following the integrated programme, due to respondents' increased readiness to change and receive rehabilitation treatments. However, when this outcome was shown to decrease, a positive interpretation was still given: that clients no longer needed to escape their situation by seeking admission. Since neither interpretation was verified, this outcome should not be assumed an indication of positive change: the fact that Hensley does so may be an indication of bias towards the integrated model. Considering these factors, the only outcome that indicates positive change is the increase in general functioning.
Hensley recognises the sample size as a limitation to generalisability and asserts that there is only an association, not a causal link, between the integrated programme and positive life changes. However, she does not consider alternative theories, such as improvements being the result of receiving two years of treatment, rather than 12 months of the integrated programme. The validity of this study may have been compromised by the researcher's assumption, based on the disputed evidence of past studies, that integrated programmes are superior and interprets some of her findings to fit this hypothesis. This demonstrates the impact that assumptions can have on research findings and the potential for research to construct a social reality rather than reflect it (May cited in Blaxter 2004).
'Blamed and Ashamed' is a two-year qualitative survey, documenting the experiences of youth with dual diagnosis and their families, across nine American states (FFCMH 2001). The aim of the research was to offer respondents an opportunity to voice their experiences and formulate recommendations for professionals and policy makers to improve services. In this sense the study reflects a critical social paradigm, as it seeks to reveal underlying conflict and oppression and bring about positive change (Blaxteral. 2001). The study was overseen by two family-run organisations, that trained and supported a team of youth researchers, themselves dual diagnosis service users, to carry out the research in focus groups. An independent specialist in participatory evaluation assisted the youth researchers in designing structured interview questions, and provided training in interview and focus group techniques. Advocacy organisations in each state identified participants, convening 15 focus groups of ten participants: 5 of these were parent groups. Each group represented a cross-section of ethnicity and socio-economic status, and the youth ranged from 13-28 years old. The focus group sessions were audio taped and transcribed by the specialist researcher, the youth and adult responses were compiled separately. The youth team felt strongly that the data should not be analysed by an independent person removed from the experience of dual diagnosis, consequently a group of experienced adults and youth met to analyse the data and identify key themes. Too many themes and recommendations were identified to discuss here, however overall the participants reported that they had felt blamed and shamed by service providers and called for increased respect and involvement in planning services. With regards to integrated treatment models, the respondents felt that holistic, comprehensive and integrated programmes were the only effective approach.
Although ethical considerations should be addressed in every research study, participatory approaches and focus groups present researchers with particular challenges. The report details the ethical training and confidentiality procedures the youth researchers were given: including gaining written consent, informing participants how the data would be used and having participants sign confidentiality forms. Although responses were anonymised in the data, sharing sensitive information within the focus groups still carried a psychological risk to the participants and youth researcher. The study acknowledges this risk but emphasises the advantages to this approach: empowering both the participants by giving them a voice, and the youth researchers by giving them a sense of ownership of the study. Although the empowerment may have been beneficial, it is unclear whether any follow-up support was offered to the youth and parents. Follow-up could have ameliorated any negative effects of the process, which may have impinged upon the youths' mental health.
The sensitive nature of the information may also have affected the reliability of the data analysis. The group selected for this process had personal experience of dual diagnosis, and the report records how this group acknowledged their strong emotions associated with the subject. Therefore, the subjective views of the data analysts might have influenced the selection of the key themes from the data.
Despite the research that points to the high prevalence of dual diagnosis and its association with a range of adverse outcomes, the evidence base for interventions is currently limited and inconclusive. While Barrowcloughal. (2001) demonstrate a correlation between integrated programmes and improved outcomes, these results may only be generalisable to service users with family/caregiver contact and a diagnosis of Schizophrenia. Hensley's study (2004) also suggests an association with integrated programmes and significant improvement in general functioning, however the quality of the methodology undermines her conclusion. While the qualitative survey provides a valuable insight into the service user and carer perspective, this study is limited to the youth population and may not be generalisable to the UK.
A number of the limitations identified in the research, reflect the complexity of researching this area. The diverse population, representing a range of mental health diagnoses and different types of substance misuse, limits the generalisability of studies. In addition, each study suggesting a positive association between integrated treatment and improved outcomes uses a different combination of interventions, adding to the variables. This prevents studies from being directly comparable and reduces the evidence base for discrete interventions. Moreover, the difficulty of engaging this population with services may be reflected in the sample selection process, so that samples successfully engaged in research programmes may be unrepresentative of the wider population.
Further limitations of the current body of knowledge (from a UK perspective), is that the majority is American and may be ungeneralisable. It is also unknown how many of these studies may have been influenced by the growing support for the integrated model. The apparent monopoly of psychiatry over this subject also narrows the evidence base, as the methodology used is scientific, quantitative and of a positivist paradigm. Although these studies are of value, a range of different research methods is more likely to produce a better overall picture of the effectiveness of interventions (Parry 1996). Finally, the majority of outcomes in this research have hitherto centred on medical measures of improvement, which may not reflect the service user and carer perspective and experience. A research project that enabled service users and carers to set the outcome measures, may demonstrate alternative priorities and produce different results.
All of these methods are currently needed in the UK to build a robust evidence base for interventions. However, qualitative research could be used to explore the service users' assessment of interventions, and to identify any barriers in service provision that exclude dual diagnosis service users or hinder positive change.