The meaning of the word research means to search again or to examine carefully and to discover new facts (Hawkins, 1991 pg 438). Because nursing is a practical profession the role of research is essential to developing and refining knowledge which can then be used to improve clinical practice. Nurses need scientific knowledge to help improve their decision making and to provide the best possible care to patients and how to implement that care (Burns and Grove, 1995). Evidence based research is critically reviewed to allow the validity of the evidence to be determined, and its clinical acceptability within practice (McCandlish, 2001) I will be using the Critical Skills Appraisal Program (Public Heath Research Unit (2003) (CASP) guidelines to critically analyse the following papers.
This essay examines an article by Chapple, Ziebland and McPherson where the Stigma, shame and blame experienced by patients with lung cancer is examined in a qualitative study via a number of narrative interviews with patients with the condition.
The authors of this research provide a clear statement of aims justifying that there is very little qualitative research on the perceptions of those suffering from lung cancer and the stigma that they face (Coughlan, 2004, Walters, 2004). The negative impact of stigma on those suffering from lung cancer is discussed, and implications of increased stress and contribution towards psychological and social morbidity are also noted as potential side effects of stigma. This may provide information for future stop smoking campaigns to reduce stigma by society for those suffering from smoking related diseases. This is very important when considering the nature of the health education information the public are given at present about self harming activities and the rising percentage of smokers in our society. The opening of the DIPEx website precipitated the study and revealed a spontaneous theme of stigma.
The aim of qualitative research is the viewing of events in the social world through the eyes of other people (Bryman, 2001) and trying to understand the phenomenon from the perspective of those experiencing it (Morse and Field, 1996). The stigma experienced by those suffering from lung cancer or other human emotions can not be accurately recorded with the use of statistical evidence nor gain the depth needed by the use of a questionnaire (Burns and Grove, 1995). The phenomenological research method is appropriate as this is a humanistic approach as this subject is one of a sensitive nature where participant and researcher work together to describe experiences as they are lived by participant (Forchuk and Roberts, 1993). The researcher in this study continually referred to the participants as patients rather than the preferred participants or informants, which suggests they are co-participants of the study and not just there to be studied exposing possible lack of pre existing relationship between researcher and participant (no details are given) which may not be appropriate considering the nature of the research (Streubert and Carpenter, 1995). The use of taped interviews allows the researcher to illuminate the subjective experiences had by the interviewees; the length of the interviews was not restricted allowing full saturation of data to be achieved, using an interview as the method of data collection also allows the opinions of those members of the public who are illiterate to be included.
The chosen method of research design is appropriate for the aims of the study but the reasoning behind the chosen design method is not discussed or justified by the researchers.
This essay examines an article by Walker, Townsend, Oakley, Donovan, Smith, Hurst, Bell and Marshall (2002) titled Health promotion for adolescents in primary care: randomised controlled trial.
The study asks a reasonably focused question that focuses on the discussion of health behaviours at a general practice consultation with teenagers and appropriate follow up care. The measurement of effective change achieved by the intervention taking place is also mentioned. This study was approved by the local ethics committee.