This essay will critically review various evidence based papers that explore the benefits, contradictions and experiences of suturing, or not suturing shallow first and second degree lacerations and tears of the labia, vagina and perineum after childbirth. It is necessary to define a number of terms, the first being evidence based health care, this is the "Conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients" (Sackett, 2000) cited in Greenhalgh (2001 p1). Evidence based research is critically reviewed to allow the validity of the evidence to be determined, and its clinical acceptability within practice (McCandlish, 2001). Midwives have a duty to provide care and advice, based on reliable evidence based research. Qualitative research has indicated that the main factor for women's decisions, when given an option about their care, was the advice received from the midwife (McCandlish, 2001). A first degree tear only involves the skin of the fourchette, a second degree tear involves the skin of the fourchette, the perineum and the perineal body, both the superficial and deep muscle can be involved (Sweet, 2003).
The issue of perineal repair is of particular importance as 70% of vaginal births are associated with some form of perineal trauma (Enkin et al, 2000). There are short and long term consequences associated with perineal repair. These can be physical, psychological and social problems, all of which can affect the woman's life and that of her family BIRTH Although at this time suturing perineal trauma is said to be the norm (McCandlish, 2001, Clement and Reed, 1999) this does not appear to be the case in practice. Although I have no personal experience, personal communication with a registered midwife (03/06/04) suggests that most first and second degree perineal trauma is actually left unsutured, providing it isn't bleeding and the edges come together well. Other hospitals also seem to work on anecdotal evidence that nonsuturing is best (Head, 1993). Relevant articles will be explored to determine the medical evidence, and therefore benefits and contradictions that arise when comparing the effects of suturing, versus nonsuturing, of first degree tears and shallow second degree tears. Only women who sustained the tears having a spontaneous vaginal delivery will be included.
The following data bases were searched in order to collect relevant papers. These included randomised controlled trials and cohort studies, regarding evidence based research of perineal suturing, MeSH terms were used where appropriate. The Cochrane library, British Nursing Index, Cinahl, NMAP, Medline, PUBMED and the Lancet. The following key words were entered to retrieve relevant articles. Perin* (perineal, perinea, perineum); perineum/surgery; stitch; sutur* (suturing, suture); laceration; repair* (repairing); female; childbirth; tear and randomised controlled trials.
A critical analysis was made of the papers listed in the table below, using questions designed by the critical appraisal programme. Not every area of the paper that was critiqued will be discussed, nor all of the evidence based research that was found regarding the issue of perineal suturing. This will allow the main areas of interest, importance and potential conflict to be discussed. The method of suturing will not be compared between trials, although this could be of some significant interest dependent on suture material used, and the suture method that was carried out (Gordon, 1998).
The following articles were retrieved and placed in order of methodology.
All studies and trials in the above table have been approved by the appropriate local ethics comities.
Although the debate over perineal suturing has been a subject of interest for a number of years with one piece of research being conducted in 1992 (Head, 1993), there is still very limited research with respect to suturing versus nonsuturing. The following studies were chosen for a number of different reasons.
Lundquist et al (2000) were the first to conduct a randomised controlled trial comparing suturing with nonsuturing of perineal tears. This type of evidence is thought of a 'gold standard' and therefore one of the most clinically significant. However a critical analysis revealed some aspects of the trial design that make the results less significant. Trial size only included 80 participants (in conclusion it was judged to be too small) a similar randomised controlled trial stated that at least 340 women would be needed to detect a clinically significant difference (Flemming et al 2003). The method of non standardised data collection tools and procedures used to judge wound healing and perceived pain also casts doubt on the reliability of the conclusion that nonsutured wounds heal within the same time frame and with equal discomfort as those which are sutured. Wound healing was judged by the midwives personal opinion of healing, oedema, haematoma, bleeding and infection, it was also not determined if the trauma was assessed by different midwives at different stages suggesting the evidence is less reliable and open to increased bias, this will be discussed further. Although response rate to the questionnaire carried out at 6 months was very good the use of 'most frequent comments' to determine outcomes for pain and sexual activity proved to be dissatisfactory. Only comments on type of pain was recorded where actual pain would have been of more use clinically. It is assumed that both open and closed ended questions were included but very little data was recorded, suggesting not all of the data colleted was taken into account. Although this trial introduces some interesting ideas it is not clinically significant to change practice.
The results from the SUN's trial were contradictory to those of the Lundquist trial, Flemming concluding that perineal trauma does not heal as satisfactorily for those women who were unsutured at six weeks postpartum. Although roughly the same sample size, these results are more reliable due to the use of approved methods of evaluation. This includes the REEDA tool for assessing perineal damage and wound healing and the McGill Pain Questionnaire and visual analogue scale used to determine levels of pain (Lundquist et al, 2000, Gomme et al, 2001). The level of analgesia was also compared between the two groups (no significant difference) suggesting similar levels of pain for both arms of the trial, although this result was unexpected. The use of approved methods of evaluation limited bias occurring when recording data, but it was noted by the researcher that a high percentage of women withdrew from the trial. This suggests the women may have been influenced by the midwives caring for them; this may have influenced results for this trial. Although this trial was well conducted with all data included, the conclusion that suturing should be undertaken for perineal trauma, until another randomised controlled trial has been conducted is unlikely to affect practice. This is due to the very small sample size (340 women were required, only 74 were randomised), the initial number of women recruited and seen as eligible was 1314. A full breakdown was given as to why these women were not included, which highlights some of the problems of gaining a large enough sample size in randomised controlled trials.
Both of the randomised controlled trials acknowledged that it was impossible to blind the midwives making visual assessments, but blinding may be possible at a later stage as no visual assessment is made. This allows the possibility that performance bias may occur with midwives influencing outcomes and results depending on their own personal beliefs on the issue. The possibility for expectation bias is also a possibility with midwives having an expectation of how well a wound will heal depending on the treatment arm post delivery (Cluett and Bluff, 2004). This potential bias is more likely to effect the Lundquist trial that that carried out by Flemming as the REEDA scale was not used. This approved method of data collection depends on photographs as well as a precise measuring tool. Both studies also recognised the implications that age, ethnicity and nutritional status may have on potential healing and determined there were no significant differences between the groups.
The study conducted by Head (1993) compared the experiences of multiparous women who had perineal sutures at least once, many of the women had experienced both being sutured and unsutured. The general outcomes were women preferred not to be sutured and this group found they experienced increased levels of comfort and less pain. The trial size, once again, was not substantial enough to be of clinical significance. The data collected from the 55 women included was minimal, an example of the questions was not included so these results may be due to a very short questionnaire or proportions of the data were not included. The data may also be very biased in its interpretation, with potential for leading questions within the questionnaire as M Head has been working for a small unit that has had a policy of nonsuturing for 15 years that also conducted the research. The reliability of the data is also questioned as there are no explanations of how the 75 multiparous women were selected, or how the levels of pain or levels of comfort were measured. The methods in this study are not rigorous enough to be sure of any of the results and would not influence practice.
Clement and Reed (1999) conducted a study that took account of the long term effects of leaving perineal trauma unsutured up to seven years postnatally. The study was very well designed with a large sample size that was socially and ethnically diverse (Clement and Reed, 1999), with use of approved methods of evaluation. The questionnaire had been piloted before it was used; this may have been reflected in the high response rate. The study included some qualitative research which looks more in depth at women's views and experiences thus giving us an 'emic' viewpoint (Bluff, 1997). The main consensus among the women was that not being stitched was defiantly the right decision and was very easily made when given the choice. Although qualitative research is thought of as not as reliable, the views and experiences of women are needed before evidence based guidelines can be brought into practice (Walsh, 2000). This study, although very well conducted is not comparative, so the experiences and views of women who have been stitched have not been explored. A small comparison about pain was carried out on twenty women within the group who had experienced both being sutured, and unsutured. Mean levels of pain were reported higher in the suture group every time.
The critical review of a number of papers has revealed there is still a lack of clinically significant evidence on the issue of perineal suturing following childbirth. Therefore practice should not be based on these randomised controlled trials and studies until further, more extensive trials have been conducted with larger sample size. Diverse practice has been shown to exist, with decisions made to suture or not depending on personal choice, anecdotal evidence and individual hospital policies (Layton, 2004). It is our duty as midwives to practice autonomy and informed choice for the women under our care (Department of health, 1993), not only looking at the physical but also the psychological aspects of suturing, versus nonsuturing. Until more extensive randomised controlled trials and qualitative trials are conducted I feel this practice will continue.
In conclusion, the review of evidence regarding the benefits and contradictions of suturing, versus non suturing, for shallow first and second degree tears following childbirth is still equivocal, due to a lack of clinically reliable information. Perineal suturing is a procedure that affects about 1000 women a day in the UK (Gordon et al, 1998) and more research is desperately needed. Midwives need reliable clinically significant research, so they can provide care using low technology, or no technology if suturing does not benefit outcomes (McCandlish, 2001). Nonsuturing appears to be more acceptable to the mother (Clement and Reed 1999, Head, 1993,) and breastfeeding is more likely to take place (Lundquist, 2000). In order to change policies more randomised controlled trials need to be conducted, with larger trial groups to increase clinical significance. This would also allow a meta-analysis to be conducted so data from a number of similar trials can be integrated. As well as a larger sample size more data needs to be collected on the long term effects of perineal repair, with data collected as extensively as possible.