The purpose of this essay is to determine the process of team work within a multi-professional culture, using appropriate models and reflective cycles. As a health care professional (HCP), it is necessary to understand the importance of being able to work as part of a multi-professional team. The ability to respect other HCP's knowledge and values, as a member of a team is expressed within the UKCC's midwives rules and code of practice (2002). This also helps to promote transculturally acceptable health care (Papadopoulos, 1998). Reflection is also an integral part of any HCP's practice as a process of self examination and the development of skills, which enables practice to be enhanced (Sweet, 2003). A definition of a good team is a group chosen from members with complimentary capabilities; working together they can achieve a planned purpose (Naylor, 1999). I explored a number of different theoretical models surrounding team work including Bates and Johnson (2001), Bennis and Shepard (1956), Tuckman (2002) and Bion (1996). Each tended to give a variation on a basic four stage model of formation, control, work and ending. I have decided to base my essay around Tuckman's stages of group process (1965) and Gibb's Reflective Cycle (1988) (appendix I).
As our groups were predetermined there were no prior relationships within the team for our assignment, hence the ability of choosing a team with 'complimentary abilities' was taken out of our hands. We carried out an assigned task to discuss 'what we were like in a team' and it became apparent that we all wished to work towards a similar outcome and had roughly the same attitude towards teamwork. This involved everyone taking their fair share of work, commitment to deadlines and to the team. Initially I was quite worried about working within a team, as this was a method of working I had not been exposed to at university in previous terms. I felt quite relieved and enthusiastic once I had discovered members of my group had similar team objectives; however we were all unwilling to express strong opinions at this point. This would appear to conform to Tuckman's theory of forming; this involves people conforming to what they see as acceptable behaviour and providing responses to questions and task allocation to gain approval and acceptance from the group (Tuckman, 1995).
As our team only managed to meet on Friday mornings at first, due to lecture timetables, I found there wasn't enough time to discuss the vignette properly. However this time did allow us to start bonding as a group, and to delegate tasks within the group to be carried out over the following week. I noticed more discussions taking place after the first couple of sessions, and I felt our group was more established as we began to get to grips with what the vignette would entail and felt comfortable with each other. Illness within our group meant a couple of member's did not attempt to complete the tasks assigned, however our group compromised on the situation and agreed to an extension on the work that should have been carried out. This provided some flexibility for certain circumstances and also to maintain group unity. It also meant we had time to appreciate that every member of our group was of equal value and that our team would be more efficient if we all worked together.
As our team settled down into our roles and relationships began to establish within our group, it became easier to increase time efficiency within our meetings. I felt everyone was a lot more relaxed and felt free to express constructive opinions especially about paragraphs written for the essay. I felt we all supported each other and appreciated each others work and commitment, allowing the essay to evolve in a positive direction. Although we were working very efficiently within the team I feel we still did not have defined roles as Tuckman (1995) suggests groups do by the 'norming' stage of group development. Although roles were not defined I do not feel this was a negative aspect within our group as our individual responsibilities were still
clear. I feel it was very positive as it kept the tasks interesting with plenty of new perspective, however I can appreciate that this method of working would not be suitable for a larger group of people or in a professional working environment. This situation may have occurred as I personally felt there was no one person within the group who stood out as a leader. I felt I was the motivator within the group but am not confident enough to delegate tasks all of the time and take control in situations where work has not being completed.
Towards the end of the assignment I felt very strongly that we were 'performing' as a team, as we now had clear goals as the case study began to come together and we all had a clear sense of autonomy. Tuckman (2002) suggests in this stage that roles and responsibilities should change in an almost seamless way, and indeed this did become easier as the weeks progressed. I also felt that we were all becoming more transculturally aware (Papadopoulos et al 1998 appendix II) as we discovered what was involved in providing equitable health care for those patients under our care and how it should affect our vignette.
If I were to take part in another team assignment or have the opportunity in practice I will be more willing to voice my opinions and be more confident about my ability to delegate tasks and take more responsibility. I would like to try working within a group where members were designated specific roles as I found within my group, in the beginning stages, we were all doing the same work and we had no one to answer to if work was not carried out. As this was in the research stages I feel doing the same work benefited our group as more information was made accessible to write the individual paragraphs of the vignette. This also meant we all had some background knowledge and so could discuss the matter more freely also adding our own valid points over which information should be included.
It was difficult to establish if our group truly conformed to Tuckman's theoretical model as I found four different versions within the internet and different books (Tuckman 1995, 1999, 2002). I do feel we grew as individuals and as a team coming to depend on each other to work towards a set goal. Each of Tuckman's models suggest the idea of a specific leader as being an important part of team work; I believe that this would be true in a majority of cases as it lends the group a sense of direction, however as mentioned before, I do not feel anyone was prepared or able to take on this role within my group for this particular assignment.