Jane is 29-year-old and married to James; Jane is a multigravida and is not working at present as she looks after her son David who is 3. Jane attempted to breastfeed David, but only managed for a couple of days. Jane left the hospital bottle feeding David and feeling very disheartened and disappointed with herself. Whilst discussing breastfeeding with Jane at her thirty-four week antenatal visit she expressed a strong desire to attempt breastfeeding again with this pregnancy. Therefore the issue of breastfeeding and effect and outcome with effective health promotion will be examined within this case study. The following issues will be discussed to gain a full understanding of what is involved in providing effective health promotion. Jane's history and perceptions of health promotion in her previous pregnancy, why breastfeeding was unsuccessful with David both from Jane's perspective and my own, the role of the midwife, why breastfeeding is an important health promotion issue, which needs were identified and how these needs were met and which other factors can influence health promotion.
The task of health promotion and education falls under the role of the midwife whilst caring for women antenatally, postnatally and whilst in labour to ensure optimum outcome for both mother and child (UKCC, 2002). This role can also extend as far as offering health education to immediate family if this is seen to be potentially beneficial to the mother and child. Health promotion can cover topics such as domestic violence, smoking, healthy eating and breastfeeding advice.
For the purpose of this case study a number of key terms will be defined. Health promotion helps to prevent ill health and disease, recognising that health can and should be improved for many people, health promotion can occur at many levels from individual responsibility to local, national (NICE, 2004) and world wide policies in raising awareness of health issues and empowerment, making health and social education accessible to all. It is recognised that participation of all those involved within health promotion is necessary for the most beneficial outcome (Crafter, 1997), as is providing information that is passed along in a way that allows women to make informed choices and know that her autonomy is respected, therefore implementing trans-culturally acceptable care (Papadopoulos et al, 1998). It is also important to understand that a person's attitude and beliefs can affect behavior and therefore, can influence health as a result (Condon et al, 2003). To provide effective health education health care professionals must acknowledge these differences in attitudes and beliefs (Sweet, 2003). This will involve listening and responding to women's individual needs and tailoring care accordingly (Crafter, 1997). I will use Gibbs Reflective Cycle (1998) (appendix I) as a basis for reflection within this assignment.
Health professionals have a duty to keep all information obtained from a client confidential and use it only for the purpose for which it was given (UKCC, 2002). The only exceptions are as follows, unless the client consents to the disclosure, are on a 'need to know' basis to in order to provide more effective care, because of statutory obligation, if required by the court or in public best interest. Therefore I will use a fictitious identity for my client and will not disclose any information that would allow her or her family to be identified and breach confidentially (Jenkins, 2003).
My first contact with Jane was at her thirty- four week antenatal appointment when following NICE (2004) guidelines I initiated a discussion regarding infant feeding choices. This revealed that Jane had been unsuccessful at breastfeeding David, her first child, and was keen to try again. Jane's breastfeeding history was discussed in relation to her perception of previous health promotion and education. We also talked about her experiences within delivery suite and the postnatal wards within the John Radcliffe hospital to determine possible reasons why breastfeeding had not been successful in Jane's previous pregnancy both from hers and a midwife's perspective.
Jane had an uncomplicated pregnancy and went into labour spontaneously at forty weeks; David was delivered via a spontaneous vaginal delivery after eight hours of labour with Jane using entonox for pain relief, Jane suffered from a second degree tear which she was advised to have sutured. Jane held David for a limited time before she was told to give him to James, for the procedure to be carried out, in this time he was dried and dressed. No time was made available for breastfeeding advice or for Jane to have a satisfactory first feed (R.C.M, 1991) either before or after the suturing as the midwife had another case to attend to once the procedure was complete. Jane also felt exhausted having been kept awake for roughly forty-eight hours because of her contractions and had no desire to breastfeed. James felt pressured by the staff to give David a bottle of formula at this time so they knew he had been fed.
Discussion with Jane revealed that she felt she received very little preparation or health promotion regarding breastfeeding within the antenatal period as the topic was discussed very briefly, there was no mention of the importance of skin to skin and its relation to successful breastfeeding (UNICEF, 11/11/04). Jane was also unaware that she could write her specific wants and needs in a birth plan which should have been formulated with her midwife (DOH, 1993) this would have made her intention to breastfeed clear. She also had limited help and support in the two days post delivery as she felt the midwives were too busy to help or just attached the baby for her when she asked for help, leaving her tired, frustrated and with very sore nipples. Jane was the first of her peer group to have any children, and although she received emotional and physical support through out the pregnancy and postnatal period she felt this peer group could offer very little in the way of breastfeeding support.
Although there are assumptions that this lack of preparation, health promotion and assistance should not occur within any primary care trust, according to the Breastfeeding Policy (NICE, 2004), personal experience has revealed that it is a very realistic possibility. Many health policies exist but are only effective if they are actually put into action (Peckham and Exworthy, 2003). Although, as midwives, we have regular contact with women under our care, with only thirty minutes available for a booking appointment (in Kidlington) and it not being the ideal time to discuss breastfeeding as there are nearly always other matters that mothers wish to discuss in greater detail that have more relevance to the pregnancy at that particular point, such as various diagnostic tests and healthy eating, I have found there is only time to briefly mention breastfeeding. Due to a shortage of midwives, other antenatal visits are operated on a shared care system with a General Practitioner; I have found the GP's will not usually document discussion regarding health promotion issues. Within the fifteen minutes we have to carry out other antenatal appointments, issues such as breastfeeding are discussed within the time constraints available.
I felt Jane was an excellent candidate for a health promotion case study as it would be interesting to observe the outcome and influence on breastfeeding when health promotion was carried out in an effective manner following local and national policies and guidelines. This would be combined with increased support from various help groups, myself and Jane's peers, as a number of this group have now had successfully breastfed. Although Jane (like many other women (Earie, 2002)) knew all about benefits of breastfeeding both for herself and her baby, I still felt she needed health promotion about how to breastfeed, I hoped this would allow Jane to feel confident in herself and to ask for the help she was entitled to so she could successfully breastfeed. I discussed my assignment with Jane and received consent that she was happy to be followed up outside of her next antenatal visit (which would be with her GP at 36 weeks). I felt more time was needed to discuss fully Jane's perception on the effects of health promotion and provide me with time to pass on extra information regarding help groups and any other resources I had found that are not available within the clinic files.
I feel breastfeeding is an especially important subject when considering health promotion issues. Within the last fifteen years there has been a massive drive to increase the numbers of women within the UK who successfully achieve pain free and effective breastfeeding (Shulver and Shaw- Flach, 2004) with the introduction of the Baby Friendly Initiative in 1989 by World Health Organisation (WHO) and UNICEF (Kong and Lee, 2004) this is not only from a health perspective but also from a political and medical viewpoint to help reduce healthcare costs (Okon, 2004). The WHO (1990) now requires the British Government to recognise various constraints that surround breastfeeding within our culture. Failure is linked to a very western attitude that some women can't breastfeed. The prevalence of women who breastfeed in the UK is linked to ethnicity with those from Black and South Asian groups more likely to initiate and continue with breastfeeding when compared with Caucasian women (Hall, 1997, Condon et al, 2003). UNICEF (1999) have stated that if all babies were exclusively breastfed for at least six months then around 1.3 million children's lives could be saved annually and millions more enhanced. Research has shown that breastfed babies, when compared to artificially fed babies, were less likely to suffer from gastrointestinal illness and respiratory, ear and urinary infections and were less likely to suffer from diabetes and higher blood pressure later in life (Howie et al, 1990, Lucus and Cole, 1990). The benefits of breastfeeding also extend to maternal wellbeing even in industrialised countries. Significant reliable evidence has shown women who breastfeed are at a lower risk of breast and ovarian cancer, hip fractures and lower bone density (UNICEF, 08/11/04). However breastfeeding rates still remain at a low rate within the UK, with only 71% of babies being breastfed initially with this number falling to only 21% at six months (Department of Health, 2002). In response, social policies and campaigns have been introduced in an attempt to make the UK a more empowered culture for breastfeeding women (Dykes, 2003). The introduction of UNICEF's UK Baby Friendly Initiative (1994) and the ten steps towards successful breastfeeding (UNICEF, 08/11/04) and other schemes such as breast is best has led to UK primary care trusts implementing breastfeeding policies and various hospitals and units becoming Baby Friendly since 1996 (Dykes, 2003). The policies aims include that health care professionals will give the same advice to women, stress the importance of thirty minutes of uninterrupted skin to skin and claim women will be given help to breastfeed soon after birth.
Jane had received so little guidance with regards to the art of breastfeeding in her previous pregnancy, my mentor and I felt it was important to discuss initially why breastfeeding hadn't been as successful as Jane had hoped. This process allowed me to unearth any potential problems and worries that had affected Jane's past breastfeeding experiences, allowing us to offer health promotion specifically for Jane's needs. These included more information on how to breastfeed, what to expect from breastfeeding, common problems experienced, various support groups that are available in the surrounding area, what help to expect from midwives' and other health care workers involved in breastfeeding in the postnatal period. The importance of methods such as skin to skin and rooming in were also discussed.
Having discussed Jane's previous experiences, I felt I was better equipped to provide her with more specific information regarding her decision to breastfeed. I have found using the infant feeding checklist implemented by the Baby Friendly Initiative (UNICEF, 2001) is an excellent plan to follow and allows for other areas to be raised and discussed. I have found on my placements that the use of this simple tool is very limited, despite the benefits I have noticed whilst using it. I feel discussing the benefits gained by both mother and baby both in the short and long term, even for those mothers who have not decided to breastfeed, reinforces the positive effects of breastfeeding. Some mothers may not be aware of these benefits if they have not read the information leaflets provided as I have found in a minority of cases. Many women are unaware of the importance of uninterrupted skin to skin contact after the birth of their baby for at least thirty minutes and that it is associated with increased breastfeeding success initially, it also increases the duration of breastfeeding and can be used to help overcome breastfeeding difficulties at any stage (Meyer and Anderson, 1999). Jane was advised that skin to skin contact can still be carried out whilst suturing is carried out as long as she feels well and comfortable and can be carried out for as long as she wishes following delivery (UNICEF, 11/11/04), this was noted in her birth plan.
I felt it was important to discuss common problems associated with the discontinuation of breastfeeding. A number of approved qualitative studies on both prenatal and post natal women (Crafter, 1997, Shaw et al, 2004) revealed that the most common worries and problems associated with breast feeding problems or discontinuation of breastfeeding were issues such as sore nipples or breasts, baby wouldn't suck- attach properly or breastfeeding took longer than expected. In particular women have expressed worries about their ability to produce enough milk to satisfy their baby and ensure constant growth (Dykes, 2002, Williams, 2002). I used a graph (Humenick, 1987) to demonstrate the quantities of milk produced over time to reassure Jane. As these are studies carried out in an approved, significant manner I felt it may be of benefit to women to discuss possible problems antenatally. I hoped that Jane would feel a degree of reassurance that she was not alone and many other women would also feel the same. Sweet (2003) discusses the importance of reassurance both pre and postnatally to instill both confidence and empowerment. This is particularly important with regards to breastfeeding; research was conducted exploring midwives experiences of breastfeeding their own children. Although, in theory, midwives are well practiced at giving breastfeeding advice, a large majority of those questioned still experienced many of the problems mentioned earlier. Having existing knowledge appeared to benefit a majority of the midwives affected, they tended to feel that the problems experienced were more part of the breastfeeding process and that they could be and were resolved with help, encouragement and time (Battersby, 2002).
Breastfeeding is a health promotion issue that is being forced to evolve due to the introduction of new policies and guidelines (WHO, 1990, UNICEF, 2001). Increasing awareness by the public of potential benefits to both mother and baby has led to the introduction of numerous support groups and sources of information. I felt it was important to explore the various options available to women and their partners.
A theme that emerged when considering breastfeeding problems and women's opinions on what needed to be done to enhance the breastfeeding experience was the wish for a point of reference whenever it was needed (Williams, 2002, Kidlington Clinic, 02/11/04). Therefore I advised Jane about the different care options and resources that are available to her. I felt that could be in the form of a midwife, breastfeeding councilor, or breastfeeding manuals that had been tried and tested by women. I advised Jane that the number for her local midwives could be used for this purpose as an experienced member of staff would be available around the clock to answer any questions, not just breastfeeding difficulties. My own experience in practice revealed that many women believe that the number is for use only in an emergency situation. Other members of the primary care trust would also be available for advice and support in the form of health visitors that are attached to each local GP's surgery and can be contacted through the normal number for the GP.
A number of drop in centers and Breastfeeding Cafes are available throughout Oxfordshire where mothers are provided with hands on help from health care professionals experienced in the art of breast feeding. This is also an excellent opportunity to meet other women who have experienced or are experiencing problems, develop a peer support network (Dykes, 2003) and for fathers to learn how they can help as I have found they are always welcome. These centers are largely introduced and driven by new policies (NICE, 2004). A number of Lay Breastfeeding Counsellors for various support groups are available for contact these include local La Leche League, National Childbirth Trust, Association of Breastfeeding Mothers, Breast Intentions and Breastfeeding Network. Other forms of support can include books; however these can often be expensive and may not be an option for those on a budget. A cheaper alternative is an internet access site run by La Leche League which sells specific breastfeeding advice for 0.30 to 4.00; again this may be an unrealistic option for those on a budget, with a lack of internet access or women who do not speak/read English (Baby friendly, 10/11/04). A popular option in Kidlington is borrowing breastfeeding videos that show optimum attachment, various methods of attachment for breastfeeding and how to hand express and use the pumps (we do reassure the women that this will be demonstrated once they have had the baby).
Having discussed previous problems experienced with breastfeeding and provided Jane with all of the above information, I felt it was important to discover if Jane felt her needs had been met and her opinions on health promotion. At this particular stage of her pregnancy Jane felt she was given relevant information on how to breastfeed she could understand, this left her better informed about help and support that is available, what to expect when breastfeeding, and maybe most importantly talking about worries and concerns she may have. Therefore I feel Jane's plan of care was successful at this point, as she felt empowered and increasingly confident about her ability to breastfeed. The success of health promotion in this case could not be properly monitored without follow up visits being carried out ideally up to six months after the birth of her baby as this is the minimum recommended time to breastfeed children (UNICEF, 1999).
Health promotion can be very easily influenced if those providing care and those receiving it are both willing and able to carry out advice that is offered. I found Jane to be intelligent, enthusiastic and made it clear that she wanted to breastfeed. She responded very positively to all health promotion that was offered as well as researching information by herself, health promotion was easier to carry out on this occasion as it is often dependent on public participation (Ashton and Seymour 1998). Research by Oxby (1994) suggests that many women have often made up their minds about how they will feed their babies before pregnancy. This implies that health professionals will be unsuccessful in promoting breastfeeding amongst this group; I disagree with this opinion as I have found many women who have decided to bottle-feed are willing to discuss breastfeeding. This often raises underlying issues and worries as well as raising awareness of health benefits for both mother and baby. A number of women within my clinic have responded very positively and decided to attempt breastfeeding following discussion. Hoddinott and Pill (1999) suggest that personal relationships with professionals, as well as experiences are major influences contributing towards the decision making process. I feel this enhances the importance of responding to each woman as an individual so they feel their needs are taken into consideration, understanding once a decision has been made over method of feeding she will be fully supported (UNICEF, 2001).
In conclusion I have found, whilst looking at health promotion services for breastfeeding, many options are an excellent source of support for women like Jane, who are slightly older and well educated and will be more likely to "fit in" with the clientele likely to attend the clinics and support groups, in my experience. This group is also more likely to be able to access appropriate transport to access the clinics, which are spread over Oxford. There is limited access to suitable help for women from lower social classes who are increasingly likely to come from a manual working class and left full time education before the age of eighteen. This group is also less likely to initiate breastfeeding when compared to those from higher social classes (91% for social class I compared to 56% for social class V) (Bailey et al, 2004), this group would benefit more for the inanition and continuation of breastfeeding. There are baby caf's designed specifically for younger mothers where they can met women of their own age; these may be a more popular option for this group. I have yet to come across breastfeeding centers catering for specific ethnic groups.
I have come to realise the importance of listening to women's needs, and to tailor health promotion to each individual's specific requirements, offering support and advice whichever the preferred method of infant feeding having discussing briefly the benefits of breastfeeding, with the mothers consent. It is important to understand the various factors that can influence health promotion such as past experiences, cultural issues, support, peer group influences, partner's perception and social class. Although I may have met Jane's needs on this occasion other women receiving the same care may have felt dissatisfied. There is limited help available for certain groups but the introduction of policies and increasing demand by the government behind breastfeeding issues should make health promotion easier as long as health care professionals take note of the policies and try to implement them into everyday practice.