Explanatory research question: Which is the most effective treatment method for someone with rheumatoid arthritis of the hand when trying to increase or maintain range of movement and muscle strength? Exercises on their own, or exercises with the use of a resting splint.
This is a fixed experimental design i.e. it is theory driven with the variables and procedures to be followed specified in advance. The purpose of the enquiry is explanatory; seeking to identify relationships between aspects of phenomena (Robson, 2002).
Null hypothesis: when treating rheumatoid arthritis of the hand to maintain or increase range of movement and muscle strength there is no difference in the effectiveness of exercises on their own or exercises with the use of a resting splint.
Alternate hypothesis: when treating rheumatoid arthritis of the hand to maintain or increase range of movement and muscle strength there is a difference in the effectiveness of exercises on their own or exercises with the use of a resting splint.
Using the strategy of grounded theory, this study aims to generate a theory from data that is collected during the study relating to the research focus (Robson, 2002). There is no general principle or truth regarding the subject of the study at present, the aim of this research is to search for and identify general rules or patterns by linking specific findings from the data collected; this is inductive reasoning (Depoy & Gitlin, 1998).
Due to the nature of the research study a qualitative design is considered to be the most appropriate, the purpose of the research is the discovery of social theory rather than the testing of it (Denscombe, 2002). A qualitative procedure allows assessment of unquantifiable facts about the people that the researchers talk to (Berg, 2001). The questions are designed to be exploratory as they are seeking to find out new insights and what is happening in the area of treatment of rheumatoid arthritis of the hand (Robson, 2002).
Research focus: this research aims to examine the behaviour of people following an exercise and splinting regime for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis of the hand.
From this general focus 2 research questions have been defined as:
Research questions:
Why is it that some people follow the regime provided by their therapist whilst others do not?
Why is it that some people always attend their appointments whilst others do not?
The first question aims to collect information regarding any changes that could be made to the program that would increase compliance. The second question aims to collect information regarding the accessibility of appointments and how this could be increased.