This essay would touch on the background of endosymbiotic theory, including when it was first proposed. This would be followed by the basic structure and function of the organelles, or the symbionts; mitochondrion, chloroplast and hydrogenosomes and the comparisons to prokaryotes would also be included. The evidence supporting the endosymbiotic theory, as well as the controversies involved shall be included, as well as related hypotheses. Sufficient examples, supporting statements would be incorporated into the essay, whenever possible. Finally, the summary would conclude the entire essay, supporting the endosymbiotic theory.
As we study the cells of the prokaryotes and eukaryotes, we have observed many differences, such as size, complexity and internal compartments. Unlike their larger relatives, prokaryotes have few morphological features and only recently with the availability of DNA sequencing, it has become possible to explore and determine the relationships between the diverse prokaryotic groups. With this advanced technology, a similarity was drawn between prokaryotic cells and some of eukaryotic organelles. In the late 1960 7, a former Boston University Biologist, Lynn Margulis proposed a hypothesis that mitochondria and chloroplasts originated as bacteria-like organisms and were swallowed up and entered into a symbiotic relationship with a nucleus-containing eukaryotic cell, and this theory is known as the serial endosymbiotic theory 4. The term "serial" is included because the symbioses were established serially, one before the other: first spirochetes as undulipodia, then aerobic bacteria became mitochondria, and finally cyanobacteria became chloroplasts 13. Even though the theory was ridiculed initially, over time this hypothesis became widely accepted due to the large amount of evidence supporting the hypothesis over the last few decades
According to Dr Margulis's theory 7:
Figure 2 shows the possible evolutionary pathway for the endocytosis of mitochondria by an anaerobic eukaryote. Endosymbiosis was presumed to have occurred about 1.5 billion years ago when oxygen entered the atmosphere 1, 9 and anaerobic organisms had to find ways to obtain energy. As some of these organisms burrowed deeper underground to anaerobic environments, others engulfed aerobic organisms to provide energy for them (Figure 3). It was believed that as long as the bacteria and the host cell are in a mutually beneficial relationship, they would continue their association; the ingested aerobic bacteria (mitochondria or chloroplast) would generate energy for the anaerobic bacteria (host cell) and the host cell would provide a safe environment for the ingested bacteria 7.
Among the symbionts, both mitochondria and hydrogenosomes are respiratory organelles of eukaryotic cells. However, mitochondria only generate energy in aerobic conditions, while the latter is found in obligate or aerotolerant anaerobes, such as Trichomonas. Chloroplast is an oxygenic phototroph 1.
Mitochondria (Figure 4) is rod-shaped organelle without a nucleus (like prokaryotes) and has a similar size to that of a prokaryote (0.5 m to 1 m)9. The membrane of mitochondrion has no sterols, unlike the cytoplasmic membrane of eukaryotic cells. Therefore, it is less rigid with considerable plasticity, resulting in various shapes of mitochondrion being observed. It is a double-membrane organelle, with a more permeable outer membrane due to the presence of minute channels, which facilitate in transporting ATP (Adenosine Triphosphate) out of the mitochondria to the cytoplasm of the host cell 1. Within the mitochondria, the DNA directs the ribosomes to produce proteins, many of which function as enzymes, or biological catalysts, in ATP production 1. Mitochondrion creates energy for cellular activity via aerobic respiration, from glucose. During aerobic respiration, glucose is broken down to form pyruvate, which is transported to mitochondria and the complete oxidation of pyruvate (via the citric acid cycle) in the mitochondrion produces 30 molecules of ATP 9 (Figure 3). Therefore, without mitochondria, glycolysis would only release a small fraction of the total free energy available in the glucose.
Chloroplast (Figure 4) has a similar mechanism to the mitochondrion; mitochondrion synthesises ATP via electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation 4 whereas, chloroplast synthesises ATP by harnessing the light energy through photosynthesis 9. The chloroplast has three membranes: inner, outer and thylakoid 9. The smooth outer membrane is freely permeable to molecules so that ATP and glucose from photosynthesis can easily diffuse out into the cytoplasm 1. The inner membrane contains many transporters, such as the integral membrane proteins that regulate the passage of small molecules and proteins, synthesised in the cytoplasm of the cell for the chloroplast, in and out of the chloroplast 11. Unlike the mitochondrion, the inner membrane of the chloroplast is not folded but its electron transport chain, the photosynthetic light-absorbing system and the ATP synthase are found in the thylakoids 9 (Figure 4), which have a highly impermeable membrane to create the proton motive force for the ATP synthesis 1 (Figure 3). The chloroplast has three compartments: stroma, thylakoid space, and inter-membrane space. These compartments and the membranes that separate them serve to isolate different aspects of photosynthesis. Evidence suggests that chloroplasts are the descendants of oxygen-producing photosynthetic bacteria (cyanobacteria)1 that were engulfed by eukaryotic cells 9 and these factors supporting this theory would be reviewed in the next section.
Hydrogenosomes are similar to mitochondria but unlike the latter, they are only present in obligate or aerotolerant anaerobes. They are fermentative respiratory organelles, lacking cristae and enzymes required in the citric acid cycle. Therefore, they cannot oxidise acetate from pyruvate oxidation and the acetate produced from fermentation is excreted into the host cytoplasm 1.
Mitochondria, chloroplast and hydrogenosomes contain own DNA1 (deoxyribonucleic acid)
Mitochondria and chloroplasts possess circular naked DNA without any histones 12, similar to that in prokaryotes, which synthesise certain proteins in the respiratory chain. DNA in the cell nucleus does not code for the construction of mitochondria, as a result, mitochondria and chloroplasts cannot be formed in a cell that lacks them because nuclear genes only code for some of the proteins of which they are made. Both mitochondria and chloroplasts have their own protein-synthesizing machinery. Furthermore, mitochondria and chloroplasts seem to divide independently of the rest of the eukaryotic cell. Even though the eukaryotic cells divide by mitosis, both chloroplast and mitochondria replicate through binary fission 7.
The eukaryotic nucleus contain bacterially derived genes1
Even though most of the gene encoding the present-day mitochondria and chloroplast proteins are found in the nuclear DNA, mitochondria and chloroplasts have own genome within the organelle coding for a few proteins, such as those required for organelle biogenesis and function  4. Although, it can be argued as one of the factors opposing the endosymbiotic theory, it was suggested that there was an extensive gene transfer from the engulfed bacteria to the nuclear DNA during evolution 9. There is further evidence, that nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins bear more resemblance to bacterial genes than to the host eukaryotic genes encoding for similar proteins in the cytosol 9. These evidence include similarities in patterns of gene organisation, which is the operon arrangement, gene expression, which consists of promoter, RNA polymerase and ribosome structure; nature and function of protein synthesis factors; use of N-formylmethionyl-tRNA as initiator in translation; antibiotic sensitivity in transcription and translation (which will be explored further) and gene structure which comprises of rRNA, tRNA and protein 4.
Mitochondria and chloroplasts contain own ribosomes1
Both mitochondria and chloroplasts have prokaryotic type and size ribosomal structures and ribosomal RNA (rRNA). The typical size of cytoplasmic ribosome in eukaryotes is 80s but prokaryotic ribosomes are of a much smaller 70s, which is the same as that in mitochondria and chloroplasts. The unit for ribosome: "s" is the Sevedberg unit, which is the rate of sedimentation of a particle in the ultracentrifuge is expressed as an indirect measurement of size and molecular weight 12.
Antibiotic specificity of symbionts1
Several antibiotics, such as streptomycin kill Bacteria by specifically interfering in transcription and translation of their ribosomes 1. These antibiotics affect both mitochondria and chloroplasts in the same way by impairing their ribosomal functions to synthesise proteins but they do not interfere with protein synthesis in the cytoplasm of eukaryotes 11. Another example is rifampicin, an antibiotic, which inhibits RNA polymerase in bacteria, as well as the RNA polymerase inside mitochondria but having no effect on the RNA polymerase within the eukaryotic nucleus 11. On the other hand, diphtheria toxin, which inhibits protein synthesis in eukaryotic ribosomes, has no affect on the protein synthesis in bacterial or that in mitochondria and chloroplasts.
Molecular phylogeny1
Due to advanced technology, an increasing number of complete sequences of chloroplast genomes are available for phylogenetically systematic studies. The rRNA sequencings of chloroplasts and mitochondria have revealed that they are more closely related to Bacteria than to the host rRNA sequences 1. The DNA sequence analysis and the phylogenetic tree developed suggest that nuclear DNA contains genes that probably came from the chloroplast, supporting the lateral gene transfer ability of eukaryotes and prokaryotes, which was mentioned above 5. Furthermore, it was observed that mitochondria DNA is monophyletic and that some prokaryotic sequences fit into that group 11. In addition, these sequences have also suggested that modern eukaryotes have evolved from an association of two organisms, and thus two genetic systems, which brings us to the next point.
Double membranes of mitochondria and chloroplasts
Both are double-membrane bound organelle 1, 7. The inner lipid bilayer would have been the bacterial cell's plasma membrane, and the outer lipid bilayer would come from the cell that engulfed it 7. The inner membrane lipids of mitochondria and chloroplasts are similar to their prokaryotic counterparts. The plasma membrane in prokaryotes is involved in energy metabolism, similar to the inner membrane in mitochondrion, which has all the electron transport enzymes required to maintain a large H+ gradient across the membrane for ATP synthesis The plasma membrane in eukaryotic cells is able to control ion permeability, which is similar to the outer membrane of mitochondria, which is used to transport ATP produced out of the mitochondria into the cytoplasm 9.
As the nucleus is also a double-membrane organelle, the Endokaryotic Hypothesis suggests that it has also been captured by an engulfing bacterium 5. This theory was not supported until 1994 when Gupta et al demonstrated its possibility on the basis of the sequences of the 70kDa heat shock protein 5 (HSP70).
The amoeba Pelomyxa palustris, an eukaryote, lacks mitochondria but it carries out oxidative metabolism by harbouring aerobic bacteria in its cytoplasm in a permanent symbiotic relationship 9. In 1987, Professor Jeon noticed that his collections of amoeba were developing a large number of dots. These large numbers of dots turned out to be bacteria, which were killing off most of the amoeba. However, Jeon noted the least sick ones and began keeping records of their progress. The least sick ones were assumed to be more resistant to the bacteria since they survived and returned to their normal modes. Nevertheless, as many as 40 000 of the invading bacteria were still present within each of the surviving amoebas. Through transplating experimentation, Jeon found that the nucleus of the amoebas now could not live without the once pathogenic bacteria. This accidental discovery demonstrates that it is possible for an organism to become dependent on a functional part of invading organisms and proves that it is more efficient to eliminate competition itself on the basis of symbiotic relationships, rather than eliminating competitors 6.
Part of the endosymbiotic theory states that the eukaryotic undulipodia, which is the eukaryotic motility organelles: flagella and cilia may have arisen from endosymbiotic spirochete bacteria 9. Both cilia and flagella are made of microtubules and they are involved in mobility of the cells, for example in sperms or in moving fluid past the cells: ciliated epithelial cells that line our air passages and move a film of mucus towards the throat 9. The basal bodies from which eukaryotic cilia and flagella develop would have been able to create the mitotic spindle, is therefore involved in mitosis. Cilia have many short microtubules and flagella have very long microtubules. Their movement is created as the microtubules slide past one another and the energy for this movement comes from ATP 9.
These undulipodia are made up of a cylindrical array of 9 evenly spaced microtubules, with motor molecules of dynein linking the adjacent microtubules together. The microtubules consist of several closely related proteins called tubulins 9, which are far larger and more complex than bacterial flagella, which are made of flagellin proteins. As these whip-like undulipodia are common in eukaryotes but are not found in prokaryotes they are thought to have derived from still another group of free-living bacteria, the modern spirochetes 8. This is, however the most controversial and most argued past of the endosymbiotic theory.
According to Margulis, the undulipodia may be derived from bacteria through motility symbioses and this suggestion was referred to as the exogenous hypothesis. Even though the details of the argument are complicated the evidence supporting this hypothesis lies in the biology of the organelles themselves, their distribution, and the occurrence of related and analogous structures. On the other hand, another suggestion proposed that undulipodia originated internally as an extension of the microtubules, which are involved in mitosis, in a hypothesis referred as direct filiation or endogenous hypothesis, which is the non-symbiotic view of evolution that emphasises the role of various types of mutations in the evolutionary separation of eukaryotic cells from prokaryotic cells 8.
Chronology is the cause for the disagreement between the endogenous and exogenous hypotheses for the origin of undulipodia. Supporters of the endogenous hypothesis claim that microtubules preceded the origin of undulipodia, which eventually arose endogenously. Furthermore, the undulipodia lack DNA, which is one of the characteristic deciding factors in mitochondria and chloroplasts. Alternatively, the exogenous hypothesis states that motility symbioses gave rise to cells with undulipodia, and this acquisition subsequently led to the internal structures involved in 8. Although the symbiotic origin of undulipodia is gaining support, the controversy is yet to be solved, as there is insufficient evidence to prove either direct filiation or the symbiotic hypothesis is the reason for the origin of undulipodia.
Even though there is much debate still going on, an important aspect of endosymbiotic theory lies in the overall chronology of endocytosis of symbionts in the origin of the eukaryotic cell. The endosymbiotic theory can be divided roughly into a number of stages, which happened over a long period of time. Firstly, the fusion of archaeal and eubacterial cells resulted in the evolution of eukaryotes 8. The archaeal cell provided the cytoplasm and the eubacterial, or a spirochete, enabled mobility and thus mitosis. Later on, some of these anaerobic cells incorporated, or engulfed oxygen-respiring eubacteria to become mitochondria-containing aerobes from which most protoctists, animals, and fungi evolved 8. If some of these aerobes went on to incorporate photosynthesising cyanobacteria, they became chloroplast-containing algae and plants.
The endosymbiotic theory is advantageous to both the endocytosed bacteria and the host eukaryotic cell as the eukaryotic cell receives specialised energy production partners and the symbionts receive a stable and supportive growth environment 1. Eukaryotes were rather good at endocytosis as it relieved them of the need to evolve beyond the simple forms of glycolysis for energy generation 2. As a result, there was a need to improve their endocytosis ability, which was helped by their complex cytoplasmic membrane and cytoskeletal systems. This enhancement in endocytosis aided the engulfing of prokaryotes and thus, assisted the evolution of modern eukaryotes 2.
The evidence above strongly suggests that organelles were arisen from the endosymbiotic uptake of free-living bacteria by eukaryotic host cells. As the host eukaryotic cell and symbionts developed a mutually beneficial existence, both entities lost their ability to function without the other, which would explain why neither mitochondria nor chloroplasts have been shown to be able to live on their own when isolated from the eukaryotic cell 3. As Margulis and Sagan said one of their books, "Life did not take over the globe by combat, but by networking." 8