It was once quoted that psychology has a long past but a short history. (Ebbinghaus, as quoted in Fancher, 1996.) The two psychologists I will compare represent psychology's long past and it's short history. Franz Joseph Gall (1758-1828) was an anatomist in the era before psychology became its own science. Before 'modern psychology' began, psychology was mixture of elements of other disciplines such as philosophy and physiology. Although Gall is most famous for work on 'crainoscopy' (later called phrenology) which has now been discredited, his extensive work on the brain produced some fundamental findings for psychology. A man who pioneered the change to psychology as its own science, and thus began psychology's "short history", was William James (1842-1910) of the United States. James is known as one of the very first true psychologists, because he was one of the first people to think that the time had come for psychology itself to become a science (Fancher, 1996). He spent only 12 years focused on psychology on its own, during which he wrote his most famous book: Principles of Psychology (1890). This term was only relatively brief, but it influenced psychology a great deal, and earned him the title 'The Founder of Psychology' (Gleitman, 2004 p.12).
I will be drawing similarities and differences in Gall's and James' methods, theories and contributions. By 'methods', I mean the ways each scientist was inspired to create their hypotheses from their own past experiences, the ways these hypotheses were tested, and the ways the ideas and findings were presented. By 'theories' I mean ideas and hypotheses investigated by each psychologist. By 'contributions' I mean contributions to the general public and psychological research, and the impact the work of each scientist had on students of the next generation.
Both psychologists had childhood experiences which inspired them and affected their methods. James suffered from depression which he overcame using a technique of will (Fancher, 1996). James has written about will in Principles of Psychology. As a schoolboy, Gall was annoyed by two fellow students who could out perform him on exams although they were supposedly less intelligent, simply because they could memorise things better than Gall. Gall noticed both these boys had large, protuberant eyes, so became fixed with the idea that the "organs of verbal memory" lay in the region of the frontal lobes of the brain behind the eyes, and, in the two rival schoolboys, they would be well developed, exert pressure on the area behind the eyes and cause them to protrude. This led to investigation of other 'organs of the brain' (Fancher, 1996). Basing studies on such personal memories is a subjective and unreliable method.
Since Gall and James began as physiologists, they both used techniques such as dissection. For phrenological work, Gall felt human patients' skulls and took detailed measurements of them, looking for differences in the shape of the skull. His approach was scientific to the extent that he used empirical observation. James called his approach pragmatic, whereby he evaluated how useful his ideas were within specified and limited contexts. James also used the technique of introspection. Introspection is subjective and often written off as a scientific method of observation.
James presented his theories by writing books and journal articles, teaching them as a lecturer, and giving a series of 'Talks to Teachers'. He is known for trying to derive practical lessons from his theorising; for example, he believed his students still had enough youthful flexibility (neural plasticity) left to break old, bad habits and take up better ones, so he told them so (Rosenzweig, 2004). Gall presented his methods to a lesser extent because phrenology was seen by established scientists "a curious mixture combining a few astute observations with some fanciful logic." (Fancher, 1996) This will have been because Gall had to rely on feeling a skull with his hands. Gall therefore had to make assumptions about 'organs of the brain'. This method is subjective. When Gall's work was criticised, he would explain away discrepant observations in terms of other faculties of the brain, or by saying certain organs of the brain were simply affected by disease (Fancher, 1996). These explanations did not convince fellow scientists. Unlike Gall, James was generally well respected, he accepted presidency of the American Psychological Association twice in fact, but, like Gall, his methods were criticised as being less than scientific. Another pioneering psychologist, Wilhelm Wundt, described James' style as being too personal and informal. Wundt described Principles of Psychology as beautiful literature, but not psychology (Fancher,1996). The government disapproved of Gall. His lectures offended religious leaders and were banned in 1802 by the Austrian government as 'contrary to religion'. Gall was forced to leave Austria in 1805.
Gall was famous for one main theory: phrenology, although he had many. His technique of feeling the shape of the skull relied on the theory that the shape of the skull directly linked to the shape of the brain underneath it. This has been proved incorrect. Gall's main achievement was highlighting the importance of the brain in higher human functions, confirming previous work on this theory, mainly from 1800 onwards. Other than localisation of function, Gall did much other work on the brain which is crucial to our understanding of it, namely identifying grey matter in the brain as active tissue and white matter as conducting tissue. Gall also showed that white stalks of matter, known as commissures, connect the two halves of the brain, and smaller tracts of white fibres connect with opposite sides of the spinal cord by crossing over from each side of the brain. This aided the explanation of how damage to one side of the brain could result in disability in the opposite side of the body (Fancher, 1996). James calls on work such as this; examples of "brain-physiology" can be found in Principles of Psychology. Gall claimed that brain size correlates with 'intelligence'. This has been confirmed between species, but is not always true within a species such as a human adult population. James was praised more for his attitude towards psychology than for his individual theories. The James-Lange Theory said that emotion is in fact the consequence of the bodily changes associated with its expression, rather than the cause. This was based on James' own introspection (Green, 1999 p.121). James' psychology was described as "neither a finished system nor a provider of absolutely certain conclusions, but a collection of vivid and informed personal reflections on all the major areas of the emerging new science." (Fancher, 1996). Gall on the other hand completed a phrenological map of the brain. (See Figure 1.)
Gall and James's theories contained aspects which overlapped. Gall listed 27 faculties of the brain. Although only two of these are accepted now (those concerning memory and language), some were of interest to James; there is a chapter in Principles of Psychology named Memory, for example.
James and Gall were both popular with the public. James made psychology a living subject for anyone who would read or listen to him. (Fancher, 1996) James' book Principles of Psychology touches on all aspects of psychology of the time, so is a useful contribution which is still read for interest today. Books are an important contribution because they not only release new material near its time of investigation, but can also be used as resources for future psychologists. By appealing to the general public Gall's work became very popular despite its scientific flaws which made him unpopular with fellow scientists.
James is seen as being responsible for taking psychology to America. He instigated the first American psychology laboratory and claimed that he opened the first psychology laboratory in the world, however this was contested by Wilhelm Wundt. Gall's contributions were not so glorious. He was, as I said, forced to leave Austria.
Gall provided important groundwork for scientists. French surgeon P. Broca confirmed Gall's theory of localised function when he showed that a speech centre exists in the brain (1961). J. B. Bouillard (1796-1881) did not accept most of Gall's theory of phrenology but worked on the notion that there was a 'language centre' in the frontal region of the cortex. P. Flourens (1794 - 1867), studied Gall's work on phrenology using techniques of ablation on animals to investigate brain regions associated by Gall to particular faculties. Flourens provided evidence against many of Gall's hypotheses. (Fancher,1996). James' work was not directly continued because he encouraged students to have their own individual style and thoughts about psychology. He did aid some students in an influential way; M. W. Calkins took her introduction to psychology from Principles of Psychology, and was one of the first women to seek a career in the subject. She was discriminated against but sought guidance from James and became President of the American Psychological Association. James is also said to have inspired E. L. Thorndike, who replaced James after his death as the best known psychologist in America (Fancher, 1996).
James and Gall were both pioneers of the field of psychology and made huge impressions on society of the time and the scientific community. Gall's empirical observations made him a well-known scientist, whereas James' attitude to psychology and the way it should be treated as a science helped earn him his great reputation. Both psychologists provided important groundwork for the field of psychology, particularly neurophysiological understanding. Each psychologist left contributions which inspired a new generation to continue the study of the mind until it eventually got the international recognition as a science it deserved. I wonder if, if Gall had been appreciated for his work like James was, what other valuable contributions he may have been inspired to achieve.