Sue 48 years old is single and lives alone in a bed-sit. First diagnosed with schizophrenia when 23, she was admitted to hospital numerous times but has been maintained on antipsychotic medication in recent years.
Schizophrenia is a splitting of the normal links in the mind between perception, thinking, mood, behaviour and contact with reality. Antipsychotic medication is used to control the positive symptoms of schizophrenia; the psychotic behaviour defined as thought delusions and hallucinations generally in the form of voices but not always. This medication can induce negative symptoms, consequently known as secondary negative symptoms.
Sue has negative symptoms of schizophrenia, these can be summarised as:
Symptoms such as these often persist long after the positive symptoms have ceased, and lead to social withdrawal and isolation (Creek, 2002).
Currently Sue attends a day centre 3 days a week where she participates in crochet, bingo and has lunch, on the other 2 days she has lunch at the MIND club. She often sits in the library to read newspapers or wanders the streets. Socially isolated, Sue has had no contact with her family since she was 30, she has few friends and recently split up with her boyfriend Terry (who also attends the day centre).
In Sues' view her medication makes her tired and fat, often she does not have the motivation to cook meals or change her clothes for bed; this shows the impact her illness has had on her functioning and self esteem.
Sues main occupational needs are to maintain self care routines and productive activity; this will lead to Sue feeling better about life in general.
Long term aim: to independently attend a voluntary work placement 2 days a week and interact with co-workers.
Short term goals:
To ensure ADL and IADL activities are maintained everyday with the use of prepared task check lists within one week.
To participate in a befriending scheme one afternoon a week within two weeks.
To independently take books out of the library, read them and discuss these at the day centre within threes weeks.
To independently attend interviews for voluntary part time work within five weeks.
Each goal can be achieved by:
Activities will be analysed and broken down into smaller steps, working with Sue to aid her in structuring tasks that need to be completed on a day-to-day or weekly basis. For example: preparing meals - a list of what to cook for each day of the week can be prepared in advance to reduce the amount planning that needs to take place each day: cleaning the kitchen - complex tasks can be broken down into smaller steps such as wash the dishes, wipe the surfaces, clean the cooker top. By crossing off these smaller steps it should give a sense of achievement and aid the structuring long tasks that seem unreachable at first.
A meeting will be arranged so Sue and the volunteer can meet on mutual grounds. Sue will be met for the first time and accompanied by the OT. When she feels at ease on her own she will be left to independently arrange a meeting time and activity with the volunteer to be kept to each week. Correspondence will be maintained to continually access the outcome of the meetings.
A visit to the library can be carried out to choose books that interest Sue with the aim of her reading them in her spare time and continuing this activity independently, they can be discussed with either staff or other attendees at the day centre.
Role plays of interviews will be practiced to prepare Sue for the types of questions that may be asked, this will also help to improve her conversational skills by discussing what went well and what didn't go so well, giving corrective feedback (Alan, 1997).