The aim of this research piece is to attempt to highlight the differences amongst those who visit bars and clubs by looking at life cycle as a traditional paradigm.
The objective of this research piece is to look at four stages of the life cycle. The four stages that will be referred to throughout the statistical analysis are: pre-family/no family (those that are aged under 45 who are not parents), family (those that are of any age with a least one child under the age of 16 still living at home), third age (those that are aged 45-64 with no children aged under 16) and retired (aged over 65 with no children aged under 16) (Mintel, 2004b).
In academic literature Rapoport and Rapoport (1975) broke the life cycle down into four different stages: adolescence (search for personal identity), young adulthood (search for social identity), establishment (creating life investments) and retirement (searching for the meaning of life).
Unfortunately the stages that Rapoport and Rapoport refer to are unable to support statistical research that has been carried out. The main discretion between market analysers and Rapoport and Rapoport is that of adolescence.
Nevertheless, it could be argued that due to the nature of the research being carried out market analysers refrained from including adolescents within their research, as it is illegal for those under 18 to drink alcohol within the U.K.
Although this doesn't mean that those under the age of 18 don't drink research that might be carried out amongst adolescents is highly likely to prove to be insufficient and inaccurate. This is due to the possibility of adolescents claiming that they drink when they don't due to peer pressure or the possibility that those that do drink don't tell the truth in fear of being reprimanded.
In terms of the leisure sector that has been chosen pubs will be the main area concentrated on however themed pubs and bars and nightclubs will also be considered within the statistical analysis. Unfortunately there is limited data available on alcohol outlets outside of the traditional pub therefore resulting in less in-depth data analysis.
Over the last 100 years acceptance in pubs has changed. The pub used to be very much a workingman's place where they could go and socialise together after a day of backbreaking work. The woman was never seen there, they were expected be at home cooking for when her husband comes home and looking after their children. Over time this slowly changed. At first women were not allowed in alone but were allowed in relying they were accompanied by a member of the male sex, mainly their husband. However time has progressed rapidly and the woman has become more dominant and with the introduction of feminism, pubs are no longer just for the man but for woman too, no matter what life stage they may be in.
It is important to look at life cycle and bars and clubs in order to be able to gain a look at how times will change throughout our lives. In general people's situation and circumstances change on a quick and constant basis between 20 and 35 years old. Many pubs are often seen as a younger persons place and those who are settled in the later stages of the life cycle are often thought to be at home, due to family and less available expenditure. As Mintel (2002) suggests, "among the family-building age groups, drinking is -more of a home-centred leisure activity" (Market Drivers, Demographics). By studying the statistical data available and using the life stages it will be possible to obtain a clearer picture as to the changes that have occurred over the past couple of years and how this may evolve into the future.
Within the leisure industry there are numerous paradigms that can be looked at in order to help understand why people choose the leisure activities that they select. Gender and social class are the main two paradigms that had been looked at over time in order to asses leisure activities. However, family life cycle is just an important factor when it comes to leisure although is often overlooked. There is limited academic written knowledge on this particular paradigm however Rapoport and Rapoport (1975) have studied the life cycle in depth and they feel that class and gender are less important paradigms when researching within the leisure sector.
However when looking at market analysis it is often found that the statistics that are produced for leisure activities are often defined by age rather than by the stage as to which a person is in within the life cycle. Academic writers more often refer to the life cycle of people rather than their age and this provides a much deeper insight into their lives. It allows more variables to be assessed such as space, time and money which are significant factors when discussing leisure.
Rapoport and Rapoport (1975) have argued that there are three dimensions (work, family and leisure) that interrelate together in order for social life to be fully understood. They believe that it is in the way in which these three factors interact together and the importance that each part has on the next that influences our leisure choices and that during our life cycle these factors will change over time.
Nevertheless one of the most popular leisure activities for adults is to visit a pub or bar of some sort. The reason that most decide to visit is because it is an opportunity to have a break from their every day life and a social place to meet up with their partners and friends in an evening. In 2002 it was estimated that 20.69 billion would be spent on beer/cider, wine and spirits outside of the home (Mintel, 2003a). In 2003 it was found that 48% of all leisure expenditure is spent on drinks within pubs (Mintel, 2003c).
Mintel (2002) reported that,
A survey carried out in November-December in 2001 based on 1,189 adults, aged 18 upwards showed that 92% of adults drink in a pub or a club, whether it be with friends, family, during the day or during the evening. Out of that 92% it was then found that 75% of those that drink in the pub with their friends were in the pre-family stage of the life cycle (Mintel, 2002). The life cycle stage that appeared to produce the lowest percentage of drinking in pubs with friends are those that have retired although appeared to have the highest result for those that drank at home with friends.
In a survey carried out by Mintel in 2003(b) looking at four different types of alcoholic beverages served in a pub (white wine, red wine, lager and bitter/ale) produced a varied result as to which life-stage drank what. It was found that majority of those who drank red wine were of the family and third age life stage. White wine produced a similar result throughout all the life stages however the third age had the highest percentage. In terms of lager the highest threshold was those that were pre-family or no family and there was a significant drop amount the third age and retired life stage. The bitter/ale market produced a not so surprising result in that the highest stages to drink this was those of the third age and those that are retired, as this is seen more commonly as an older mans drink. The results from the survey though neglected a very important drinks category that may have produced significant results; spirits. Overall though the result totals were of a similar nature apart from those that are of the retired life stage.
Traditional pubs are not the only available outlets of alcohol available any longer. Mintel (2003d) state that,
Although themed pubs in 2000 only took 1.7% of the total spending within pubs it was estimated to be worth 382 million. This is still a significantly large amount of money for approximately 425 themed pubs to accumulate throughout the year (Mintel, 2003d). However majority of those that visit a themed pub are those aged between 18-24, the pre-family life stage. This is largely due to the fact that themed pubs market themselves towards this life stage as it is seen that they are more willing and likely to visit in order to try something new and different (Mintel, 2003d).
It appears that visiting a nightclub is a less popular choice from those that wish to drink then visiting a pub. In an interview carried out by Mintel (2003c) it was found that only 32% of those questioned had visited a nightclub within the previous 12 months, the leisure sector resulting in the lowest percentage. As previously mentioned it was ascertained that 48% of leisure spending in 2003 was spent on drinks within the pub where as only 28% of leisure spending was spent on an array of entertainment and sporting activities that included nightclubs within it's sector.
Mintel (2005) compared expenditure between pubs and nightclubs in 2004. It showed how 23.4 billion was spent within pubs and that only 1, 798 million was spent within the nightclub market. This was a decrease in nearly a third since 1999 and Mintel (2005) stated,
Mintel (2004a) report that 67% of those in the pre/no family life stage attend nightclubs on a regular basis (at least once a month). If was found that only 28% of those who are parents aged under 35 go clubbing and then that was only on an occasional basis.
Mintel (2004a) found that only 74% of those in the pre/no family life stage visit late night bars with 52% of them visiting at least once a month. Mintel also found that late night bars are more popular than nightclubs amongst all life stages.
Although the general theory in what Rapoport and Rapoport say is still valid in today's day and age there are room for improvements in modern day society. Unfortunately nowadays families do not stay together as they once did. Divorce is frequent (in 2000 over half the marriages ended in divorce (Benson, 2003)) and remarriage occurs often (41% of marriages in 2000 were re-marriages (Benson, 2003)). Single parent families are on the increase whether the result is through divorce or through death (the death rate for males aged between 40-59 is rapidly increasing (National Statistics, 2005). Fifty years ago it was common for men and women to marry at an early age and have children whilst in their mid-20s. However as time has progressed society has changed and those in the pre-family/no family life stage no longer feel the pressure to settle down until later on in their lives. It is now common for people to spend their 20s and possibly their early 30s travelling and living a single life within groups of friends.
Those who are in older age groups no longer feel unaccepted in a younger environment and through mass media it has allowed them to be accepted into the young market. Postmodernism suggests that drinking is increasing in social approval and it allows for the opportunity to network amongst others and to allow alcohol to act as a confidence booster.
The wide range of drinks that are found in pubs nowadays allow for older people to feel young. With the introduction of 'alcohpops' into the drinks market it is a recognisable trendy and young persons drink. Therefore those who are not within the 18-24 year old age group and who drink the 'alcohpops' may feel that they are creating that bond with those who are younger through the drink that they have. The older person looks and feels young in themselves and therefore have created an illusion that fails to meet the expectations of Rapoport and Rapoport's theory.
With the added opportunities that television programmes also create this allows for both young and older people to connect with each other. There are television programmes that all generations may watch and it is highly likely that there may be an alcohol related type of sponsorship (e.g. Sex and the City and Baileys, Friends and Jacobs Creek, Channel 4 films and Stella Artois). Through mass media this may therefore create an added bond between those in different life stages when in the pub through the sponsored drink.
Postmodernism and mass media have led to a less distinctive gap between those in different life stages when drinking in a pub. There are few distinctions in the type of drinks that all life stages consume and the gaps between the frequencies of visits to a pub are becoming smaller and less noticeable.
The life stages suggest that those who are in the pre/no family life stage and possibly those that are in the third age should be the life stages that visit the pub more frequently. It is clear to agree that those in the pre/no family life stage are undoubtedly the largest market for pubs it does not mean that the other life stages can be ruled out. Increasing numbers of those in the family life stage are visiting the pub and this may be due to the increased expenditure that people have nowadays. Different pubs do appear to attract different markets (e.g. themed pubs and nightclubs) but overall the boundaries at the traditional pub are narrowing greatly each year.
As time has progressed and continues to develop the life stages will need to be developed into more groups in order to be able to incorporate all backgrounds, periods and people and not just those that are the typical characteristics from fifty years ago.