There is a large variety of literature based on mega events situated around the world as to how beneficial these events have been to their respective host cities. Mega events in general cover a large range of different activities spanning from cultural events such as concerts, to large international business conferences to major sporting events. The main topic of this essay shall be to look at those sporting events that take place on a regular basis but within a different host city each time, for example the Olympics and the Rugby World Cup. These events have been chosen because although in time terms they are every four years etc. each time the sporting occasion arises it is held within a different city as compared to an event such as Wimbledon that is held on a yearly basis in London. By holding the Olympics in a different host city each time the event occurs, it creates a large amount of pressure on the host city as compared to Wimbledon that is held in London year after year and therefore London recognises the pressure and effort that is to be expected and can adapt for what is required.
Mega events can have many different types of impacts on host cities that are both positive and negative and they involve effects such as economic and social factors, which this essay will try to determine as to whether the mega event is socially and economically beneficial to these host cities.
Mega events can place stress upon the amenities within the host city and can cause overcrowding, congestion and disruption of lifestyles for the residents (Olds, 1998). Shapcott (1998 (as cited in Jones, 2001)) also notes how the negative impacts that occur during a mega event impose upon the small businesses situated within the cities and can therefore result in a financial lose leading to uneconomical benefits for the area. If the residents of the city feel unwelcome and infuriated with the inconveniences that are being caused then this decreases the social benefits. Faulkner and Fredline (1998) believe that acceptance amongst the local people of an event is highly important as it can seriously influence the perception of how the negative impacts may be distributed and Williams et al (1995) says that social conflicts may arise between the visitors to the host city and the residents and if this occurs it is a harmful effect for the mega event, once again decreasing social impacts.
Jones' (2001) research on evaluating the true worth of the Rugby World Cup, held in 1999, showed that for Wales this mega event was not economically benefit to the city. The Rugby World Cup Ltd. (1999 (as cited in Jones, 2001)) estimated that the event was to gross $1.3 billion (78 million) worldwide. However, 48 million of the 78 million was retained by the Rugby World Cup Ltd. and the remainder of the money was split evenly between the five partaking nations leaving Wales with 6 million. There were costly implications for Wales and the city was left with no profit from the event due to the external factors from the building of the new stadium (Cardiff's Millennium Stadium) to expenses such as having to cover the accommodation charges of all the teams participating within the event.
In terms of social benefits to Wales the Rugby World Cup didn't entirely fail although the outcome of this effect was lower than originally expected. Ouillon (1999 (as cited in Jones (2001)) believed that over 90% of the residents in Cardiff were in favour of hosting the Rugby World Cup and that the residents saw the opportunity as a benefit to international acknowledgment, increasing tourism in the future and enhancing Cardiff's reputation. However, Jones (2001) goes on to list the problems the residents failed to take into consideration when they approved the proceeding of the bidding for such an event. Those that lived near and adjacent to where the Millennium Stadium was being built faced road closures, construction noise and dust as well as 24 hours a day work being carried out. Other residents faced the proposed creating of a provisional red-light district in their area in order to reduce prostitution in a large amount of residential areas (namely those areas situated within a close proximity to the Millennium Stadium). The local residents of Cardiff and the residents of Wales in general found it increasingly difficult to obtain tickets for the rugby match as 50% of the tickets were dispersed outside of the U.K. to international tour operators and to the corporate sponsors. This therefore created a lack of enthusiasm amongst the Welsh residents and reduced their social benefits. However, not everything in Cardiff was negative for the residents. Through the development of the Millennium Stadium it lead to further expansion within the city centre. The train and bus stations were redeveloped as well as pedestrian improvements to the city centre and redevelopment of the river walk areas that are situated next to the Millennium Stadium. Although there were notable disadvantages socially to the residents' of Cardiff, majority of these were all short-term effects and the advantages that Cardiff has received with its redevelopment are all factors that are more beneficial to Cardiff than being able to obtain tickets for the rugby match therefore leaving the city with long-term beneficial social results.
The Millennium Stadium that Cardiff has gained can hold a larger capacity than the original. The facilities that are now situated within the stadium are of a greater standard than the previous. Higham (1999) brought up the subject as to how beneficial new developments will be in the future and as to whether the buildings in the long term will receive enough utilisation to make the construction of the facilities worthwhile and economically beneficial. When the Millennium Stadium was constructed the designers developed and created as many useful outlets for the stadium as possible. It can now be used not only for sporting events but also for concerts and corporate events (Jones, 2001) resulting in a fully utilisable development, which greatly enhances the previous facilities available.
In 1984 the Olympics that were held in Los Angeles wasn't seen so much as a sporting event but more as an opportunity to optimise profits and maximise recognition to the area (Crockett, 1994). It was a chance for the local governments to draw more tourists into the area and to increase spend within the vicinity. The commercial sponsors and TV companies also saw the prospect that the Olympics was going to bring in as well as the host economy (Crockett, 1994). Nevertheless Los Angeles was successful in their attempt to optimise profits and consequently made a considerable profit making the Olympic Games an economically beneficial event within California. However, not all the Olympic Games are successful. It was noted by Gratton and Dobson (1999 (as cited in Jones, 2001)) how the two previous Olympic Games held on Montreal and Munich were less successful and their losses totalled nearly $1 billion (Montreal at 692 million and Munich 178 million (Gratton et al, 2000)). Although the evidential facts as to why Montreal and Munich failed to make any profit are not apparent it would suggest that the success of the Olympic Games may be due the reaction of the host city and as to how well they prepare themselves for such an event both financially and with physical attributes. Other events that have made significant financial losses include the World Student games where Roche (1994) notes how Sheffield resulted in a 400 million capital debt due to the failure of the event, much of it brought on by the building of new infrastructure that was required in order to be able to hold the games.
However, the money spent within mega events is often distributed in different ways. In many mega events that take place a large amount of spend may go on staffing costs. In a large event this could cost hundreds of thousands of pounds. However, certain events such as the 2000 Olympics held in Sydney, Australia cut down their economical costs by looking for volunteers to work at the games instead. In an event that is as high profile as the Olympic Games are volunteers will be easily accessible and costs are reduced (the event generated an excess of A$1.3 billion (Westerbeek, 2002)) although it is important to ascertain as to whether the volunteers will be able to cope with the standards that are expected and required (Kemp, 2002). The Lillehammer, Norway, Winter Olympic Games in 1994 also recruited volunteers to work. However, unlike the Sydney games were events were held for only 16 days the Winter games went on for three months. In terms of social benefits the volunteers benefited from this greatly. Kemp (2002) found that the student volunteers in Lillehammer were given the opportunity to intensify their social skills by being able to expand personal networks and learn more about themselves and those from other countries due to all the volunteers residing within the Olympic Village.
The evidence that has been presented within this essay would be to say that mega events in general are not economically beneficial to its host city. There are far more negative accounts of debt and loss (e.g. Cardiff, Montreal, Munich, Sheffield) than there are of positive accounts where a surplus of profits have been obtained (e.g. Los Angeles, Sydney). It appears that one of the main reasons for a loss of financial earnings during a mega event starts out with the construction of infrastructure within the city (before the event even takes place) that cannot really be afforded. The division of profits within an event such as the Rugby World Cup also influences the host city as the area has had to put forward large amounts of money for others to take away profits for having only partaken in the sport and not in the key role of hosting.
However, on a more positive view in terms of economic benefits, Mules and Faulkner (1996) discovered that although the host city may not benefit economically from the staging of the event, they might benefit within the city itself, as there may be additional spending by those visiting therefore increasing tourism profits. Mazitelli (no date (as cited in Hall, 1987)) uncovered that the impact of sporting events in Australia between 1985-1987 generated 20,000 to 25,000 inbound tourists per year. This is a vast enhancement of tourists to the country no doubtly increasing the visitor spend in Australia by a great figure relishing in the evidence that mega events can create economical benefits to a city/country, not within the event itself but within other aspects and areas.
In terms of social benefits these are quite mixed within host cities. There appears to be significant negative feelings from residents within the host cities but at the same time these residents in the end gain from the hosting whether or not it's financially but maybe in transportation links and improvements, which is something that majority of towns and cities (especially within the U.K.) require. It is difficult to assess the social benefits as each person can interpret different attributes as positive or negative but in general terms at the end of day each host city benefits in some way socially.
Nevertheless every potential host city must feel that they can gain some benefits from hosting such mega events otherwise ultimately no city would ever take part in the hosting and therefore mega events would be no longer. Westerbeek et al (2002) believes that cities are attempting to bid for such large mega events based on the commercial, media and consumer attention that the event shall bring to their city. The results of Emery's (2002) survey found that the main purpose for countries wanting to host mega events comes down to sport promotion and economic development. This could possibly be enhanced by the positive accounts such as Los Angeles that must be an inspiration to these cities in order for them to want to try and do their best and become successful with their hosting and possibly reap hundreds of thousands of pounds. Every time a city is successful in succeeding with their mega event they will possibly strive to host more where achievable therefore reducing the pressure on other cities around the world to host such events.