When addressing to what extent taste is socially constructed, it is important to remember that 'from ancient days to the modern world, food taste preferences have been closely linked to cultural development' (Wright et al, 2001). Initially the primary influence of taste was through the emergence of the working and middle classes due to mass industrialisation. The way the industry developed affected culinary tastes and this social divide has been the basis of much dispute about differing tastes.
'In a world described by Bourdieu there could be only a minimal role for 'choice' (Warde, 1997. p.10). His belief that 'culinary taste is socially constructed through habitus.' (Seymour, 2004 p.8) cited in (Sloan, 2004) leads to the perception that:
He provides little insight into how tastes change and develop in society over time as his work is, 'strongly influenced by the school of thought known as 'structuralism' (Mennell, 1996. p.6). This comprises of the idea 'that 'taste' is culturally shaped and socially controlled' (Mennell, 1996. p.6).
Research has shown that a person's culinary taste is influenced by various factors. One underlying and imperative issue that needs consideration is that of social class.
'Taste in food reflects in part the consumer's social and cultural origins, social ambitions and the cultural capital acquired, either as part of their upbringing or more deliberately' (Wright et al, 2001). Until fairly recently it was widely accepted that 'classes could be identified by their consumption patterns' (Warde 1997, p.9) but Bauman believes that 'traditional social hierarchies do not now greatly influence the construction of self' (Sloan, 2004. p.31) and as Storey (1999, p.135) cited in (Sloan, 2004) notes, ' identity formation is less about 'roots' and more about 'routes'.
The French sociologist Bourdieu (1984) has argued that 'a person's taste and consumption behaviour is an expression of social class'. As he famously noted: 'taste classifies and it classifies the classifier' (cited in Wright et al, 2001). Evaluation of evidence from a survey conducted by Cox during 1984 and 1985 has led Tomlinson (1998) to believe that, 'although tastes and habits are changing, the occupational class of the individual remains a powerful predictor of food choice (as do other factors such as age and gender).'
As Featherstone (1991) suggests 'in a postmodern society our tastes, preferences and consumer choices are now, more than ever before, influenced by aesthetic considerations.' Postmodernists believe that we are now free to make our own choices and choose our own tastes without the restriction of social class. 'No longer are people placed in society by way of their lineage, caste or class, but each must invent and consciously create a personal identity' (Warde, 1997 p.10). This is a theory implied and developed by Bauman who believes that, when faced with consumer choice a person has an individual responsibility to himself or herself and this enables the creation and sustaining of a 'self identity'. (Warde, 1997)
The work of Bourdieu (1984) highlights the issue that 'the cultural setting and history of the consumer going back to childhood is thought to have a significant bearing on taste preferences.' Postmodernists would argue that the idea of this is no longer relevant and that the old social order that is highlighted throughout Bourdieus work is in fact diminishing. Sloan (2004, p.40) states that, 'the main tenet of postmodernism is that traditional, class-based social structures, which had the power to influence social conventions, are being deconstructed.' However, as Wright et al (2000) have noted, 'it is not so obvious that the social order is disintegrating.' There is still the opinion that a class divide is still very much evident where food tastes are concerned. This issue may now not be as prevalent as it once was, but is still notable even when looking at other social factors involvement in the social construction of taste.
This may well be the case however, other contemporary influences may also play a part in the social construction of taste such as fashion, media, tourism etc and these also need consideration. As Finkelstein, (2004) notes, 'Of further influence has been the popularity of the restaurant and the rise of the hospitality industries and tourism' (cited in Sloan, 2004).
Today, the media have a huge effect on people and a stigma often becomes attached to certain restaurants that are portrayed as being 'trendy' due to the celebrities who dine at them or as a result of press coverage. Due to this media coverage, these places then become perceived as fashionable eateries. It has been noted by Randall (2000) in recent years in the UK, there has been a growth in the medias interest of culinary taste and dining. Wright et al (2001) state, 'food taste preferences are now inextricably linked to artistic design and media manipulation.' This highlights the medias involvement in the construction of taste.
Restaurants have created new social experiences and provided different food to meet people's individual tastes. It is believed by Finklestein, (2004) cited in Sloan, (2004 p.64) that 'the restaurant has played a primary role in the processes that change and cultivate new food desires, and as such, it can be thought of as a social laboratory with the capacity to commodify foods and change consumer tastes.'
The Ivy restaurant in London is one such establishment known by many famously, as much for its celebrity clientele, than for the high quality food it serves. Britain is a country dominated heavily by the press and many people want to then dine out at restaurants that they feel will give them a sense of status. 'Status differences are linked to social structure and social dynamics' (Wessener & Schiefenhovel, 1996 p. 193). Status gives people a feeling of prestige or higher social ranking and this is something which many people strive to achieve, so therefore they want to be seen eating at places where they feel they will get this desired feeling of status.
Bourdieu (1997 p.171-83) has also addressed the idea of status expressing the view that prestige is 'symbolic capital' which can be converted back into economic capital if needs arise, meaning this status is one which is achieved through monetary means rather than social class.
The rise of the restaurant industry has enabled it to become an arena in which, 'class divisions have been safely breached' (Finklestein, 2004) cited in Sloan, (2004 p.73). In the case of the Ivy and other such talked about restaurants, it enables the diner to pretend to be 'rich, urbane and powerful' (Finklestein, 2004) cited in Sloan, (2004 p.74). However, Gillespie (1994) still believes that, 'the transmission of gastronomic culture has, to a large extent, been confined to, associated with and fostered by a small but socially prominent elite who have banded together to promote eating as a social activity which cultivates refined taste in the pleasure of the table'
The media though have had a positive influence on the publics' interest in food. According to Gillespie (2001) 'food journalism, food writing, food and beverage photography and food and beverage television have blossomed.' In turn it is believed that this has made people eat out more often too. Television has played a huge role in the way food/cooking is now perceived. Randall (2000) believes, 'audiences are seduced into consuming the shared rhetoric of the programme, even though it may be directly criticizing a lifestyle or taste that is in reality the viewers' own' (Cited in Sloan, 2004). The rise of celebrity chefs has developed people interests further and people may be swayed to try different dishes by looking up to these individuals as their role models. This could also be seen as a viable reason for changing tastes. As noted by Gillespie (1994) 'today's premier chef gastrosophers, have recognized the importance of fashionability by establishing their own marketing niche within contemporary culinary culture.'
The Mintel report, 'Impact of Celebrity Chefs on Cooking Habits-UK-July 2002' concluded that over a quarter of respondents said they enjoyed watching Jamie Oliver on television. His recent television series has seen him trying to change the types of food being produced by catering companies for school children. It became apparent that many of the children ate similar foods at home and therefore were not keen to try the new healthier dishes created by Oliver. This could be seen as related to Bourdieus point that the tastes experienced in the home as children, have a considerable bearing on the foods they prefer to consume. Fieldhouse (1995 p.4) suggested the similar point that, ' children have to learn to like what is prescribed by the culinary culture in which they are raised; they have little choice in the matter other than through the refusal to eat at all.'
There is a belief that foreign holidays are influencing our tastes in food and as we travel further a field our tastes will undoubtedly become even more diverse (BBC Website, 2002). This then is being reflected in the food being produced in restaurants and the consumer being able to select from a much wider repertoire of foods than in the past. Recent evidence is suggesting that foreign foods are even growing in popularity with the over 50 year olds which contradicts Boudieus stance that childhood has significant bearings on taste preferences, as many of the people in this age group would not of been consuming foreign foods during their own childhoods. A recent survey commissioned by Saga holidays found that Chinese and Italian foods are now the most popular foods with this age group (BBC Website, 2002).
Despite contemporary influences now having a very prominent affect on the social construction of taste, the underlying arguments put forward by Bordieu and also the postmodernists still play a part. There is still somewhat of a class divide apparent where tastes are concerned highlighting Bordieus view that the working classes tend to prefer sweet or fatty foods compared to the middle or upper classes tastes and this theory still appears to have relevance today.
Tomlinson's (1998) analysis of the British Health and Lifestyles Survey 1992 proved this by showing that blue collar workers have tastes for junk food compared to white collar workers whose preference is for fruit, salad and white meat. However, the postmodernists view that Bordieus ideas are outdated, not to mention unrepresentative (as his study only focuses on France) also has relevance. Despite the postmodernists believing that a society is emerging in which 'individuals' face insecurity and potential isolation as they are operating outwith the familiarity of reasoned conditions and boundaries' (Sloan, 2004 p.26.), they do maintain that inequalities are still present although these are not just based on social class.
It is notable that the medias focus on food and restaurants has helped in the development of changing tastes, as has culinary tourism and both the slow food movement and the issue of McDonaldisation, which are not covered in this essay. The social construction of taste will continue to develop and change as people travel more, as different foods are promoted and if 'the restaurant keeps abreast of shifting styles in tastes and behaviour' (Finkelstein, 2004) cited in (Sloan, 2004).
It is clear to see that the development of taste is clearly socially constructed and to get the clearest picture all views need to be considered, as one alone is not sufficient. It is also apparent to note that over time, issues that were not once relevant to the construction of taste such as the television have now encouraged there to be less emphasis on social class as the reason for a persons culinary taste although this can be still noted as a reason.