This essay will attempt to evaluate the extent to which traditional models of social class are still relevant when looking at International Travel as a leisure form and to what extent, if at all, inequalities exist. Statistical evidence will also be incorporated to enable a better understanding and help in gaining a wider knowledge of the present situation.
International Tourism was once viewed as a leisure activity only enjoyed by the wealthy and higher classes. As Clarke and Critcher (1985 p.174) have noted, 'for the mass of the population, holidays away from home are a relatively recent innovation.' In the eighteenth century, the Grand Tour saw the aristocracy journeying from Britain to cover France, Italy, Switzerland and Germany. As Baum (1996) writes,
It was not uncommon that the wealthy traveled with servants during this period and it is based on this that Baum (1996) has argued, that 'the fundamental principle of social distance between tourists and those providing service was established through early tourist travel of this nature and then widely adopted in the mass expansion of international travel.'
However, tourism has now become a highly accessible form of leisure for many to enjoy from all social classes and it is often a common occurrence that people's holidays are spent abroad. 2005 saw a 4% increase in the total number of UK residents' visits overseas compared with 2004 (national statistics 2005). Although it is unclear as to which social classes this included, Parker (1976 p.31) has however noted, 'people in a different social strata (class or economic positions) enjoy roughly the same kind of leisure opportunities and experiences.'
However, it is important to note that whilst the opportunity to travel may well be there, whether the financial backing to do so is available is another issue. Despite an increase in the amount of disposable income people have had since the 1960's it is unlikely everyone is fortunate enough to be able to holiday abroad, although Hickman (2005) suggests otherwise due to the emergence of a 'chav' class. He comments that due to the fact that many of these people are staying at home longer, 'they've greater freedoms than ever before and more disposable income to spend on travel...and, of course, they have fewer responsibilities and don't fear for their jobs.'
Over the 2005 Easter period, a record 2.2 million left the UK and headed overseas (ABTA news 2005). This helps in showing the popularity of travelling nowadays and how it is no longer only the just the upper classes travelling abroad. As Critcher et al (1995) have noted, 'tourism is the second main growth area in out-of-home recreation. Overseas holidays have become more common, with Greece and Spain as the most popular destinations'.
The introduction of low cost airlines could certainly be seen as a possible reason for this. With flights to Europe being so cheap, frequent and readily available, it has allowed people that once could not afford to travel abroad previously the chance too. As noted from the BBC news website (2005) 'low cost carriers like Easyjet and Ryanair offer flights to the sun for less than their competitors and they allow customers the opportunity to travel when they want'.
The increase in interest in International Tourism has meant that 'the leisure industries have responded by providing a range of holiday possibilities, differing in location, cost and appeal' (Clarke and Critcher 1985 p.174). It is also believed by Baum (1996) that 'this drive for change comes from a continuation of fashion, economic, lifestyle and technological factors which work together to provide tourism opportunities to an increasingly large proportion of the population.'
These days there is the sense that people are becoming 'travel agents in their own home' (BBC 2005), using the Internet in order to find the best deals available and this has helped in enabling people to tailor make their own holidays to suit their needs. In 1986, The UK tourist industry was worth over 11 billion pounds, half of which was spent on the 10.5 million overseas inclusive tour holidays taken and 7 million on independently organised overseas visits (Critcher et al 1995 p.169). The increase in demand for travel has meant that holiday companies are in tough competition with one another, which has resulted in new deals and cheaper flights and as a result of this, more people can afford to holiday abroad.
Despite this, The Mintel report, 'Round the World Travel-UK-2004' showed that Socio- economic groups still play a key role with 29% of C1s having taken a trip compared with 10% of the E respondents. However, this report only accounts for those having travelled around the world and doesn't include one off holidays and therefore may not be very representative.
As has been discussed, in the past International Travel was a leisure activity only undertaken by the upper classes. 'The popularisation of travel came, not surprisingly, with industrialization and the growth of increasingly leisured middle classes.' (Baum 1996). The shortening of the working week has meant that people have more time available for leisure activities and as places become more easily accessible, it has resulted in the trend to travel increasing. However, ironically 'tourism exhibits its own class structure, first class, tourist class and economy class, to which even 'classless' societies subordinate themselves.' (MacCannell 1976 p.177).
However, for some of the Middle Class, the fact that the lower classes are travelling abroad so frequently these days has meant a change in their own holiday destinations in an attempt to avoid them. Hickman (2005) writes of the emergence of a generation of 'chavs' and comments that 'the "chaveller" has become such a common figure abroad that the middle classes are opting for some of the most far-flung locations in the world to avoid them.' This suggests there is still a class divide where travel is concerned, and that an element of snobbery still remains. 'For the middle classes, going somewhere such as Chile, Libya or Mozambique has real bragging appeal and sets them apart from the crowd' (Hickman 2005).
Relating to this is Plog's (1972, 1979,1991) view cited in Horna (1994 p.188) who writes that perception is based on a ' polar continuum consisting of those who differ from the normal values of society and follow independent vacation desires, and those who conform to society's norms and values and thus become part of the mass market of tourism.' Today it appears that the choices people make when they are deciding on a holiday destination may be related to class.
According to Clarke and Critcher (1985 p.174) 'In 1979, 40 percent of the British population took no holiday away from home.' Within the last 25 years, this has changed dramatically. As noted by the Travel Trends 2002 survey, 'The number of holiday visits by UK residents abroad almost trebled from 14.2 million visits in 1982 to 39.9 million in 2002.' As Kelly & Godbey, (1992) cited in Horna, (1994 p.188) note, 'tourism has become an identifiable, form of leisure that is often viewed as a part of popular culture'. However, Bourdieu has suggested that 'leisure is an important transmission belt for registering distinctions in lifestyle' (Rojek 1989 p.102). This too illustrates that there is still division between social classes where leisure time is concerned.
The impact social class is said to have on society is one, which has decreased over the years. Traditionally Class played a large role in how leisure time was spent and despite that in the 1990's older frameworks of social constraints were largely rejected by new thinkers, Marshall (1997) cited in Rojek (2000 p.64) comments that 'class is a central category in the organisation of contemporary societies'.
Roberts (1970 p.28) believes that, 'as far as the distribution of leisure time is concerned, Britain can be aptly called a democratic society.... it is no longer the case that a wealthy, predatory leisure class lives off the fruits of the labour of a class of work-ridden producers.' Parker (1976 p.11) similarly notes that 'Britain is a Country in which time available for leisure is reasonably equally distributed'. However, he holds some similar views to Bordieu in suggesting that 'opportunities for enjoying leisure retain in large measure a class divided character.' This view is also held by Clarke and Critcher, (1985 p.176) 'Leisure has not expelled class from its influence. Superficially similar leisure activities are given differences of form, meaning and context which are class-based'.
One reason for this could be price. As noted by Clarke and Critcher (1985 p.174) 'some resorts are reserved for the affluent (skiing in St Moritz). Other holidays, in guest house or chalet, cater for those who can just afford the whole enterprise.' However, the BBC (2005) note, 'as disposable incomes went up and charter flights and discount packages kept costs down, mass tourism abroad came of age. By the late 1970s, some 2.5 million Britons went on package holidays a year; that had swelled to 10m by 1986.'
Craib (1997) believes that, 'even though class struggle has not developed in the way that Marx predicted, the class structure has become more, not less, complicated, and even though the state cannot be understood in terms as simple as Marx proposed, we can still talk about class and the state as a site for class conflict and class rule.' Postmodernists have rejected the views of Marx, believing them to be no longer relevant in society as they suppose, social order to be dwindling, In a postmodern world, grand theoretical accounts such as Marxism and functionalism is obsolete' (Marsh 2000 p.123).
It has been recognised on numerous occasions that the 'number of overseas holidays taken by UK residents continues to rise and includes a wider variety of leisure travel' (Urry 1990) cited in (Horna 1994 p.190). According to the BBC Website (2005) since 1970, 'each subsequent decade has seen an increase of about 100% in the number of trips taken abroad - from 17.5m in 1980, to 31m in 1990 and 56.8m in 2000.'
An article, 'Telegraph Travel Awards 2004: Your Favourite place on earth' noted that 'we routinely spend more than 500 per person on a single holiday. Moreover, only 34 per cent of us have a budget and stick to it on trips, and even fewer - just 30 per cent - save during the year for holidays' (Behan 2004). However, the readers that voted in this survey were from social classes A and B and had been on at least two foreign holidays in the past 12 months which is obviously disproportionate to the majority of the nation who appear tot take cheap package holidays to Europe predominantly.
In conclusion, it is clear that the development of International Tourism has certainly seen a dramatic reduction in an obvious class divide, although it still seems to be an underlying feature in connection to destination choice, if not however openly discussed. Whilst traditional theories are useful in explaining past patterns of International travel, showing the divisions between how different classes spent there free leisure time, it is questionable as to how relevant these ideas are today. Despite this, recent theoretical perspectives may suggest there is still an element of social division within destination choice. Bearing this in mind, in gaining a clear understanding of social class and travel, traditional paradigms do still have some relevance. Although ideas that were once not important, now also contribute largely to explaining current trends and therefore also need to be taken into account.