The White Horse is located at, 1 London Road, Headington, Oxford and is part of the Greene King chain of pubs but is managed by Mike and Chris Conroy. It is a 'traditional style pub with sports and lounge bar' (pub-explorer.com), It is situated on a busy main road which is one of the main roads into the city. It is also surrounded by a large community including students and is very close to the main campus of Oxford Brookes University. This bodes well for the pub, as students are their main target market. However, Lashley and Lincoln (2003) have noted, 'It's not so much where your pub or bar is located, but what goes on inside it- in particular, how the landlord and staff deal with customers.'
The White Horse has its own large car park (see fig 1.1) and outside seating area. It can seat 120 people inside at any one time but has a capacity of 300. Food is served daily between 12 and 9pm and the menu is reasonably varied and value for money. There is easy access for the disabled and facilities available include pool tables, fruit machines, cigarette machine and darts. However, there are no high chairs available or baby changing facilities. There is only a small non-smoking section at present, which is not particularly noticeable.
The pub is has several sections: the bar area, the restaurant area and then the sports bar area where the pool tables, dart board and wide screen television for the sports matches to be watched on are. The pub itself is clean and tidy.
A PESTE analysis is looking at the macro- environmental factors which effect businesses, including the political, economic, socio-cultural, technological and environmental forces. 'These changes affect consumers, drive market demand, and influence the competitive environment.' (Bowie & Buttle 2004 p.16).
In order for the White Horse to improve its business strategy and develop, it is imperative that the management are aware of external factors, which could impact on the business. (For references see Appendix B)
'The primary goal of business should be to be better than the competition in critical product and service attributes' (Reich 1997 p. 161). Currently, The White Horse is not hugely different than their competition where this is concerned from a customer's perspective.
The White Horse is a larger establishment than the Britannia and The Royal Standard and despite the Britannia's menu not being as large as the White Horse's it appeared to be slightly more up market. Despite this, the service delivery was much slower than either other pub, especially as it was not overly busy either.
All establishments have an 'order at the bar approach' and despite The Royal Standard also being part of the Greene King chain the menu was slightly different and more expensive than The White Horse .
As Kotler et al (1999 p.681) have noted, 'true competitive advantages are factors that are recognised by guests and influence their purchase decisions'. Despite the White Horse being voted 'best pub in the Headington area' (Stennings 2005) there is an unnoticeable difference in the food quality and service over the other two pubs. However, the atmosphere at the White Horse is good and the staff are friendly and helpful.
Also, The White Horse's car parking facilities and the event evenings they hold are better than both other pubs.
Having conducted a SWOT analysis on The White Horse, it is now possible to use this information in order to provide recommendations for the business so that it can make the most of its strengths, overcome its weaknesses, take advantage of the external opportunities and minimise the impact of threats. These recommendations will provide ways of improving the quality / service being offered and in turn result in increasing the profitability. In order to clearly identify recommendations, all seven elements of the extended marketing mix need to be looked into, as 'The marketing mix is a core concept in marketing' (Bowie & Buttle, 2004 pg.26).
Product:
According to Stennings (2005), The White Horse has been voted the best pub in the Headington area. This is a very good achievement and should therefore be publicised to the community. For example, this could be stated boldly on the website and the pub itself could put a striking, eye-catching sign outside the establishment stating this fact. Not only does this reinforce the pubs good reputation, it will also attract people who are new to the area and are looking for somewhere to eat, such as parents visiting students at Oxford Brookes University. This recommendation is not very easily measurable but the business could investigate whether the revenue has increased in a few months time by looking through the accounts. There is not likely to be a significant increase from this but this could contribute towards making the business more successful.
Although the pub provides a menu with a wide selection of food, catering for many different tastes, it is lacks providing catering for children, as a children's menu does not exist. This is an extremely negative factor as the business is losing out on a lot of potential business from families who may well be reluctant to go somewhere that does not cater well for all the family. Introducing a children's menu would attract more families to the pub and is likely to largely contribute to maximising revenue. Of course, not only is a menu important but highchairs also need to be provided for very young children to make families feel welcome and be well provided for. A survey could be undertaken to see how many families with young children go to the White Horse now and then this could be compared with the amount in six months time once the menu and highchairs have been introduced for a while.
Due to the growth in consumer demand for health and safety produce, such as Fair-trade, The White Horse needs to take advantage of the opportunity to use this produce in hope of attracting a larger market. It is important for the business to keep up with the times and provide customers with what they want not only to hold onto existing customers but also to attract new ones. The pub should strongly consider using Fair-trade produce to give it a competitive edge against the other pubs close by and maintain its title of the best pub in the Headington area (Stennings, 2005). To find out whether introducing products such as Fair-trade would attract people to the pub, questionnaires could be given to customers to see whether this is an issue that customers see as being important. Obviously the revenue could be compared before the introduction of Fair-trade and about six months after the introduction to find out whether revenue has increased.
Price: (see appendix F)
Price is the element, which generates the income and is the clearest part of the marketing mix, which can be altered anytime unlike other marketing mix elements. The product served by the pub is basically good value for money and the pricing system does not need to be changed at present as the pricing strategy is proving to be a success. If prices were to go up, this would have huge implications on the business as students would be reluctant to go there and also customers would have much higher expectations of the produce and service received. Therefore, the only recommendation would be to maintain the current pricing strategy.
Place:
Due to its location, The White Horse is very convenient for students and the local community as it is so close and easily accessible. Stennings (2005) claims that customers from outside the local area purposely come to The White Horse so it attracts more than just the local community. There are other pubs nearby in the area such as The Britannia and The Royal Standard, which are the main competitors to The White Horse. It is important for The White Horse to keep a close eye on the competition and what their standards and procedures are so not to fall behind the competitors and to keep a competitive edge against them so that existing customers are happy and satisfied and new customers are attracted to the establishment, resulting in more profitability.
Promotion:
As already mentioned, the pub is in an excellent location surrounded by student accommodation so the business needs to take advantage of this factor. At present, the business does not do any advertising and relies on word-of-mouth (Stennings, 2005) but there is a huge opportunity to expand on the main target market. For example, promotional leaflets / flyers could be posted through the surrounding student houses and halls of residence, the business could advertise in the student newspaper 'OBScene', promotional posters could be put up inside the university itself. This would increase awareness of the pub amongst students and they would become informed of all the theme nights such as quiz and karaoke night and also special offers, such as two for one on certain drinks and so on. The business should consider advertising on a stall at Oxford Brookes University's Freshers fair each September so that students new to the area are informed about The White Horse straight away and may well be inclined to try it out. As the pub's main target market is students, the business needs to make more of an effort to make students aware of the business in order to maximise income from this market sector and the implications of this advertising would be obvious to analyse, as the profit made from these promotional nights would be significantly increased if the promotion was to be a success.
Another way of benefiting from students is to promote to parents of students when it comes to graduation time, as families look for somewhere to have lunch on graduation days. This could be by putting a sign outside or again promoting in the last issue of OBScene of the previous semester in an effort to advertise to the graduating students. The success of this recommendation could be measured by looking at the number of meals served on previous graduation days and see if there is an increase.
Not only does The White Horse need to improve on promoting to students, it should also consider expanding on its customer base by appealing more to other markets. This is important, as students have long holiday periods where the profit of the business decreases substantially. Therefore flyers could be posted through doors of houses in the local area (not just student accommodation but family houses too). It is important that all of the local community is aware of the products the pub offers in order to make the most of its potential and existing customers in the area. Promotions such as of the Christmas dinners (mentioned in the marketing communications plan) need to be enforced, especially as this is a popular time for students to return home so the pub needs all the business it can get so that there is not such a major decrease in profit when students go home. In order to see whether promoting the Christmas menu has been a success, the number of bookings taken could be compared to the number in previous years and then evaluated by the business.
People:
At present there are no reward schemes or targets set for members of staff, which could obviously provide a lack of motivation amongst the workforce and could potentially be a reason for there turnover levels being high. Therefore the business needs to reward staff for when they do a good job or handle awkward customers well and in a correct manner. The business should consider giving pay rises to staff members who are have worked there a long time and are loyal and reliable and introduce a free meal policy for staff when working a double shift. This will encourage staff to stay, which will result in saving time having to train new staff members up. Also if the staff are rewarded for good work, this will motivate them to do a good job and provide good customer service, which will be reflected on the customers. If customers are pleased with the service they receive they will be far more inclined to return again so this would provide repeat business, again increasing revenue. If customers were given feedback questionnaires on their service received before and after the introduction of longer / more frequent breaks, then it would be clear to the business whether this strategy would be beneficial or not.
Due to the new late licensing laws, which have just come into play, staff are now having to work longer hours so will be working until early hours of the morning, which may not best please them. The business should therefore consider giving their staff longer breaks or more frequent breaks so that they do not get too tired and bored. This would provide an incentive for them and prevent them from getting bothered by working later for longer periods of time.
Physical Evidence:
The White Horse is a fairly large pub, which is light due to there being lots of windows. It is also spacious, as seating areas are not cluttered. The non-smoking section is only in a small cornered section of the establishment. There are plans to expand on this (Stennings, 2005) and this should be seriously considered, especially due to the no-smoking laws and promotion of smoking meaning ill health. The business needs to consider making the majority of the establishment non-smoking to keep up-to-date with the times and people today. Obviously the pub needs to provide a small smoking section as to not lose out on the business of smokers. There is a huge trend in stopping smoking now so the business would benefit more from adjusting to this factor. The business needs to analyse the number of people visiting the pub before and after the extension of the non-smoking section to hopefully reinforce that this change would beneficial to the business.
Process:
At present there is no reservations system in place at The White Horse except for Christmas meals. This may put the business at a disadvantage as many customers like to make bookings to guarantee a table and may not want to risk being turned away. The business should consider providing a reservations system during busy times of the week such as weekends. They could consider taking reservations for tables of five or more so that if these customers do not turn up, then there is a reasonable amount of spare seats to be saved for walk-ins. If customers can be guaranteed a table and are eager to book, then the business would be contributing to maximising its revenue by providing this service. Accounts need to be assessed before and after the introduction of a booking system to prove whether this idea is a successful one that increases revenue or not.
There is not a very good system in place as far as customer feedback goes. There are feedback questionnaires in a small container by the till but this is the only system in place. The White Horse could attain more customer feedback from time to time, such as by giving out questionnaires to customers at the end of their meals. This operation could take place consistently for each customer for a two-week period once every six months in order to keep up with customers' needs and wants. If customers are satisfied and their expectations are exceeded this will again increase revenue resulting in a more successful business.
Having investigated The White Horse as a business and taking into consideration all the internal and external factors affecting the business, it has been possible to identify some key recommendations. In order to make these recommendations, much background research into the business has taken place, such as the SWOT and PESTE analysis's and carrying out a competitive analysis, comparing it to two other pubs in the same area. These recommendations are measurable and management can ensure that they are a success by simply evaluating them all on a frequent basis. Recommendations such as providing a menu and highchairs for children, introducing Fair-trade products, promoting at Oxford Brookes University and setting staff targets, to mention a few, would each largely contribute to improving the business, by bringing in more customers and therefore increasing profit / revenue income. The marketing communications plan provides a basis for improving the business over a twelve-month period and management can evaluate the effectiveness of this plan by evaluating the accounts a year after the plan has been introduced.
The White Horse clearly has various options to choose from in order to improve the business so there is much potential for future development and the business will in turn gain from added recognition and a higher revenue income.