This essay will look at how empowering, empowerment within the hospitality and tourism Industries really is for workers by examining both sides of the argument.
'Employee empowerment is considered by many organisational theorists and practitioners to be one of the most important and popular management concepts of our time' (Potterfield, 1999 p6). However, the term empowerment is one that is ambiguous and difficult to define. Bowen & Lawler (1992) cited in (Lashley, 2001 p6) suggest 'empowerment covers management strategies for sharing decision making.' Empowerment incubuses the idea of pushing down authority to those employees lower down in the hierarchy, changing the role of managers to be of a coaching nature rather than controlling. As Gilbert & Nelson (1991 p14) have illustrated 'empowering organisations are characterised by having less hierarchical and more flexible work designs.'
However, Lashley (2001) has noted that an underlining point about empowerment is that the empowerer is still in a more powerful position.
It is also important to understand what is meant by the term 'power' when talking about empowerment. As defined in the Collins English Dictionary, power is the 'ability to do something' or 'a person or group that has control, influence or authority.
This suggests that by being empowered, employees will have authority although in reality it is felt that empowerment results in employees 'having to do more for less' (Caulkin, 1996 p8) cited in (Lashley 2001 p270) and is merely a system 'designed by management and intended to generate commitment and enhance employee contributions to the organisation' (Wilkinson 1997).
Literature has continuously suggested that many people working within the hospitality and tourism industries view their work as being a job rather than a career. Often these industries have large numbers of transient workers which results in high turnover levels and low commitment that is often a problem for many businesses and a reason why many companies do not implement high quality training schemes as it could be seen as a waste of time and money. Mullen (2004) noted that staff turnover levels within the hospitality industry are more than 35% a year. Bearing this in mind, to what extent empowerment practices within these industries need to be implemented is a hard question to answer. Despite this, people claim to like interacting with people and therefore, empowerment seems to be a suitable scheme to implement. As Wilkinson (1997) has stated, 'workers are an untapped resource with knowledge and experience and an interest in becoming involved'. By giving employees the chance to participate in decision-making it can help lead to job satisfaction and better quality decisions for the business. 'Empowerment represents an attempt to establish moral involvement' (Lashley 2001 p.5). It is also believed by Lashley (2001 p14) that 'empowerment of employees has particular attractions for service organisations, because employee commitment and customer service quality are seen as interwoven'.
As argued by Potterfield (1999 p.46) companies must devolve certain kinds of decision making power, shifting it away from the top management down to low-level employees. The idea that workers could be self-motivated to carry out work without close supervision is one argued by Rose (1997) cited in (Wilkinson, 1997). Overall Lashley (2001 p270) believes 'empowerment can deliver genuine improvements in the workplace experience of employees.' It has been observed that high levels of job satisfaction as well as better quality decisions can be gained from empowering employees. Not only do the workforce benefit but also the organisation due to increased levels of efficiency. (Wilkinson 1997).
As Bowie & Buttle (2004 p.75) note, 'though many companies talk about empowering employees, few have genuinely developed the organizational strategies and culture to support empowered employees'. However, it is believed by Poole (1986) cited in (Wilkinson 1997) that, the power given to employees can assist employees to change decisions and also it help to 'provide effective resistance to management decisions'.
Despite this, 'there are still some significant limits on the power of the empowered' (Lashley, 2001 p7). 'Some forms of empowerment aim to involve employees in aspects of service operations without necessarily sharing decision making power with them' (Lashley 1999). For empowerment to be effective employees need to have a belief in their own efficiency and play a key role in making the service encountered by customers a success.
Whilst for some employees they find empowerment rewarding giving them a 'sense of personal power together with the freedom to use that power' (Conger 1989) cited in (Lashley 2001) for others, it can be an unwelcome development for some people as previously noted, they may purely want to just work to earn their money without any added responsibilities.
The idea of increasing downward communication to employees is in an effort to make them more aware of reasoning behind business decisions and as a result, it is hoped the will become more committed to the organisation. (Wilkinson 1997). Bowen & Lawler (1992) cited in (Potterfield 1999 p54) belive that for empowerment to work, four organisational ingredients need to be shared with employees, information regarding performance, rewards based on performance, knowledge that enables employees to understand and contribute to performance and power to make decisions that influence performance.
One problem relating to empowerment can be highlighted when looking at an organisation that has a chain of establishments. Whilst many of these large companies such as Mariott try to put into operation empowerment, it is important that a certain standard is maintained throughout the hotel chain. This could be seen as a reason as to why 'for lower level employees, empowerment in organisations with more flexible specialised processes, which rely on employee skill, discretion and organisational capabilities, is more likely to be associated with more influence over decisions than in organisations where there are rountinised and standardised processes that are capable of being tightly controlled from above and where there is a tradition of such control' (Wilkinson, 1997) i.e., Marriott.
In conclusion, whilst to what extent empowerment actually gives employees power is still very much a contested subject, it is believed that 'empowerment can deliver genuine improvements in the workplace experience of employees' (Lashley, 2001 p270) and that it helps to 'increase the freedom and autonomy of workers by giving them greater influence over their own working lives and futures' (Potterfield, 1999 p7). It would appear that the proposal, that empowerment enables a 'win win' situation for both the employee and employer can however be criticised as the 'degree of participation offered by empowerment is strictly within an agenda set by management and it tends not to extend to significant power sharing or participation in higher level strategic decisions' (Wilkinson 1997). Despite this, empowerment is believed to be a necessary element to the management of organisations in modern internationally competitive environments. Overall, empowerment practices for workers within the tourism and hospitality industries are often empowering to an extent but a certain level of power still needs to be held by managers as otherwise without boundaries being set, businesses could end up loosing money rather than making it. 'Empowerment may not in practice dilute overall management control: rather it can reconstitute the nature of such control' (Wilkinson 1997).