There are many trends and challenges facing the tourism industry today. This essay will look at the trends and challenges facing one particular business within a sector and sub-sector of the tourism industry. The company focused upon will be British Airways (BA), which is within the transport sector and the sub-sector, airlines. First the sector and sub-sectors will be described and analysed, and then how events of the last twelve months have affected the business (this sentence doesn't make sense). Finally, this essay will look at how these trends and challenges might affect the company in the near future and what the response might be, with particular focus on one internal functional area.
There are six main sectors within the tourism industry. They are: accommodation, attractions, transport, destination organisations, travel organisers and catering. This essay will be focusing on the transport sector. The transport industry is a vital sector within the tourism industry. If there was no transportation, it would be almost impossible for tourism to exist in the way it does today. As Lickorish et al. (1997) states, the tourism industry began with the development of the railways in the industrial revolution. Rapid population growth and increasing wealth led to mass travel and with it came development of resorts and tour operators. Transport is the key factor that matches demand with supply; it gets the tourists from their origin to their destination (Pender and Sharpley, 2005). The graphs below show the number of visitors coming into the UK and the number of UK residents going abroad for the last five years.
These two graphs show that the number of people travelling has been increasing in the last five years. There has been a greater increase in the number of visitors coming to the UK than the number of UK residents going abroad. These statistics are important for the transport industry because people who travel into or out of the UK have to use some form of transportation to do so. The statistics show that the tourism industry is very seasonal. There are far more people travelling in and out of the UK in the summer months than in the winter months. The transport industry needs to take this into account because there will obviously be more people needing transport in the summer.
Within the transport sector there are several sub-sectors. These are businesses directly involved with tourist transportation, such as airlines, airports, coaches, railways, car hire, taxis, cruise ships and ferries (Richardson and Fluker, 2004). This essay will be looking at airlines. As Pender and Sharpley (2005) say, air transport is an essential part of the tourism industry. In many cases, the destination choice means that air travel is the only feasible option because of the distance to the destination or the location. Below are two graphs which show the importance of air travel to the tourism industry.
These two graphs indicate that air travel is by far the most used form of transportation for people visiting the UK and UK residents visiting other countries.
A problem which has affected the whole transport industry, airlines in particular, is the rise in oil prices. The following graph shows the price of oil for the last twelve months.
NB: The y axis of the graph is showing price per barrel of oil in US$.
The main reason for the huge rise in oil prices in August was Hurricane Katrina, which shut down 90% of the Gulf's oil output and several refineries and increased fears regarding the future supply of oil (Oil hits new high, 2005). World Economy (2005), written in October, states that although the impact on oil from Hurricane Katrina is starting to fade, oil prices still remain $20 per barrel higher than at the start of the year. This is obviously a huge issue to the airline industry because oil is one of their main expenditures. The chart below shows the amount of money BA spends on different operating costs between September 2004 and September 2005.
This graph clearly shows that fuel costs are a major expense for the airline, second only to staff costs. The graph below shows how the fuel costs for BA have changed between September 2004 and September 2005.
This graph shows that although fuel costs dropped around March, generally they have been increasing. This is clearly a problem for the airline, and will continue to be until prices go down. Fuel costs are the second biggest expenditure. Mr Walsh, CEO of BA, speaking after the airline announced a 22% drop in second-quarter pre-tax profit to 241 million, said that the fuel component of the airline's costs was about 20% (Klinger, 2005). In order to combat this problem, BA, like many other airlines has had to impose fuel surcharges on its passengers. In June, BA increased the surcharge it puts on tickets for the second time this year. Each long-haul return ticket now has a surcharge of 48, increased from 32, and on short haul flights the surcharge has increased from 10 to 16 (Fuel surcharge, 2005). There is a limit to how much more passengers are prepared to pay, so if fuel prices continue to rise and the surcharges increase, BA are likely to lose business.
Another major challenge facing British Airways were the strikes involving Gate Gourmet, BA's sole caterer, in August. BA ground staff went on an unofficial strike in support of the 670 Gate Gourmet staff, who were sacked in a dispute over working practices (James, 2005). The strike involved about 1,000 baggage handlers, bus drivers and cargo workers (Paton, 2005) and the sacked Gate Gourmet employees were mainly Asian women (Hope, 2005). Airline analysts predict that the total cost of the strikes to BA will be up to 40 million, 30% of its 2005 first-quarter, pre-tax profit (James, 2005). As Greenberg (2005) points out, the strikes cost BA in four days what they were trying to save on food cost cuts over two years. It is clear that these strikes dealt a major blow to BA. But it's not just the loss of money, BA's reputation has been also been affected. James (2005) quoted Monarch Scheduled managing director Tim Jeans as saying 'I wouldn't wish this [crisis] on any airline. There are many people who, if offered an alternative to flying BA next summer, will take it.' (p 4). This is hardly surprising as the crisis led to the cancellation of over 700 flights, leaving 110,000 passengers stranded across the world (Done, 2005).
The most recent crisis affecting BA is the problems with their pensions fund. According to Living longer (2005), the 1 billion deficit in the New Airways Pension Scheme (NAPS) first emerged between late 2000 and early 2003. Over this time, the stock market lost half its value. Since then, BA has increased its contributions to the scheme to 225 million each year and is paying a deficit payment of 115 million each year over ten years. However, the deficit is still increasing because people are living longer and interest rates have fallen so the money invested in NAPS is not getting as big return.
British Airways' problems are mainly revolved around money. Rising fuel prices mean that they are forced to put surcharges onto their tickets, the August strikes cost them around 40 million and the pensions crisis is due to a deficit of 1 billion in their pension's fund. They therefore need to be looking to cut costs in other areas of the business to make up for these losses. Klinger (2005) reported that Mr Walsh, BA's new CEO, said he believed 80% of the airline's cost base could be trimmed down to meet the airline's profit targets. Obviously the rising fuel prices are beyond his control, but he claims the fuel costs, accounting for about 20% of the airline's costs, are the only area beyond his reach (Klinger, 2005).
Cost cutting measures mainly concern the operations department because they will be implementing the changes. British Airways' Profile, taken from:
states that the Customer Service and Operations department is made up of four departments. Their responsibility is to ensure a cost effective and punctual operation is run to provide high customer service to passengers and deliver superior operational performance. The four departments are:
Heathrow Ground Services - provides effective customer service management and runs terminal operations at Heathrow.
Inflight Service - deals with the worldwide catering, inflight service development and the management of the 14,000 UK and International cabin crew.
Worldwide Customer Service - manages the worldwide customer service airport operations including UK mainline airports.
Operations - deals with schedule planning, planning of crew and ground staff, airport planning and infrastructure. Has worldwide operational control of the day to day running of the airline.
There are several ways Mr Walsh has stated he is going to cut costs. He is looking to improve efficiency and increase the role of technology within the business, especially where it reduces human activity, so that BA can cut back on employee costs, which account for 30% of total costs (Wheatcroft, 2005). Osborne and Seawright (2005) report that 'British Airways' 414 senior managers have been told to reapply for their own jobs' (p 83). The number of senior managers will be halved and there will be a total job cut of 597 senior and middle managers, which is expected to result in cost cuts of 50 million per year (Boxell and Done, 2005). British Airways has said that 35% of management positions will be cut by 2008 (Shelley, 2005). Staff cuts are an operational issue because with less staff, things will have to be run differently. However, staff cuts are also a HRM issue because this is the department concerned with the welfare and management of employees. The Internet is becoming increasingly important in BA. Around 22% of passengers already book their tickets online, and in a few years this percentage could reach half (Wheatcroft, 2005). The transfer of the airline to Terminal Five at Heathrow will also bring cost cuts. Wheatcroft (2005) suggests that by the time the airline transfers, around 80% of passengers will check in either online before they come to the airport, or using the self-service terminals within the terminal building. These measures are designed to cut employee costs, because if passengers are checking themselves in, less check in staff will be required. These changes involving new technology are also operational issues because they are again changing the way things are run within the business. The new check-in systems involving the internet and self-service check-in will require changes in the airport ground services and the staff cuts mean crew planning will need to be revised. These cost cutting measures also involve the finance department because they will be looking to increase profits and therefore reduce operating costs.
As well as trying to cut costs, Mr Walsh is also encouraging passengers to upgrade to First and Business Class seats to increase revenue (Wheatcroft, 2005). Fuel charge (2005) claims that this has already happened and earnings rose to 36% in the first quarter. This issue would also involve the marketing department because BA needs to market its premium services to passengers to encourage them to use them. The flatbeds in Club World (Business Class) are especially important because now customers don't need to pay for First Class to have a flat bed seat.
In conclusion, this essay has looked at the sectors and sub-sectors of the tourism industry and how British Airways fits into them as a company. It has discussed the problems that BA has faced over the last twelve months and the effects that these have had on the airline. Finally, it has looked at what BA is currently doing and is planning to do to rectify these problems to continue to grow and develop as a successful international airline.