Virgin Blue is a unique low-cost carrier. It appeared in the Australian aviation market in 2000, its early performance was spectacular and its strategy intriguing. It makes an interesting case study, differing in many ways from European low-cost airlines.
It is worth noting that since May 2004 there are two national low-cost carriers in Australia - Virgin Blue and Jetstar, a Qantas venture - but due to the newness of Jetstar there is very little operations information or statistics available, making a comparison between the two carriers extremely difficult. In this review Jetstar is therefore considered in terms of its effect on Virgin Blue and its relationship with Qantas.
For years the Australian airline industry was dominated by just two carriers: Qantas and Ansett. At various times there have been attempts to set up low-cost alternatives to challenge the 'comfy duopoly' (Four Corners, 2001), but up until 2000 all such attempts ended in failure, partially as a result of a lack of protection in Australian law against Qantas' anti-competitive 'predatory behaviour' (ibid.). Virgin Blue, launched by Sir Richard Branson and CEO Brett Godfrey shortly after low-cost rival Impulse Airlines, set out to revolutionise aviation in Australia through a unique differentiation strategy.
The collapse of Ansett in 2001/02 provided Virgin Blue with a perfect opportunity for expansion, picking up new routes, slots and increasing its share on key routes as well as later moving into Sydney and Melbourne's previously Ansett terminal buildings.
In November 2001 Qantas purchased Impulse and began operating its routes under the QantasLink brand as a wholly-owned subsidiary (Qantas, 2004), reducing the number of national domestic carriers once again to two, but for the first time one was a large full-service flag-carrier and the other a relatively small, low-cost alternative.
As of 31 March 2004, Virgin Blue's fleet consisted of 44 Boeing Next Generation 737-700/800 flying 43 routes (Virgin Blue, 2004a). Passenger numbers, revenue and profits have all consistently increased year-on-year, the company was successfully floated on the Australian Stock Exchange in December 2003 and has extensive expansion plans. To date, the launch in May 2004 of Qantas' low-cost Jetstar venture does not seem to have reduced Virgin's market share which has grown to around 33% (Knibb, 2004) and 2004 financial year preliminary results show continued strong performance (Virgin Blue, 2004b; c; d; e; f).
While principally operating in Australia, in 2004 Virgin Blue expanded to trans-Tasman flights under the name Pacific Blue and has future plans for expansion throughout the Pacific region (Virgin Blue, 2003a). Despite the low-cost tag, Virgin Blue has always focussed on high-levels of customer service and as such has introduced some elements more typical of full-service carriers (See Management and operations, paragraph 4). Another example of how Virgin Blue does not follow exactly the model of the most successful European low-cost carriers is that it has a small freight operation, although it is remains primarily concerned with passenger traffic; leisure travel and capturing a share of the lucrative business market, especially in the so-called 'Golden Triangle' (Sydney-Melbourne-Brisbane), which includes the third busiest air route in the world Sydney-Melbourne (Four Corners, 2001). In Virgin Blue's short lifetime, other airlines have failed to survive (Impulse, acquired by Qantas; Ansett, in administration) leaving just Qantas and Jetstar as Virgin Blue's competitors.
In the financial year 2003/04 Virgin Blue showed continued strong growth carrying over 10million passengers, raised revenue of over AUS$1,000million and flew more than 11,500million RPKs, all for the first time, but these figures all fell marginally below estimates. Despite this, the company still recorded after-tax profits of AUD$158,519,000, 5.68% above forecasts (Virgin Blue, 2003b; 2004a):
Such impressive year-on-year profit growth has been matched by increases in passenger numbers and route expansion resulting in fast growing RPKs (See appendix i). Rapid passenger number growth and demand for new routes demonstrates that there was a large, untapped market who could be tempted into the air if the price was right. Even before Ansett ceased all flights in March 2002, Virgin Blue was growing in size and value almost as rapidly as it did post-Ansett, though it is fair to say that Virgin Blue benefited from the disappearance of one major competitor in terms of 'picking up' better slots, greater market share and some passengers. Even so, a market share of over 30% in just four years is still impressive, but Virgin Blue hasn't 'stolen' over 10million passengers from Qantas - It established a new market and only recently began targeting Qantas' business travellers. The establishment of Jetstar can therefore be seen as both a protectionist move to prevent Virgin Blue getting too-strong-a-foothold in the Australian leisure travel market, to offset any loss should Virgin Blue make progress in gaining a sizeable share of the business market, and a recognition on Qantas' part of Virgin Blue's success and a desire to 'get a piece of the action' for themselves. Some analysts suggest a 25% share within 3 years should be Jetstar's target (Myer, 2004), but even Jetstar CEO Allan Joyce acknowledges that such growth will come from 'luring non-flyers on to planes with low prices' on key holiday routes (ibid.) rather than winning customers from Virgin Blue.
With such strong results year after year and in recognition of the focus on high-quality customer service Virgin Blue has won several awards for various aspects of their business:
Such awards are clearly not just the result of growth and profitability. They also indicate the success of Virgin Blue's 'unique [corporate] culture' (emphasised strongly in all company documentation; see for example Virgin Blue, 2003b: 3, 14, 17, 22, 53, 70, 109) and management strategy in all company operations, details of which are given below:
As of March 2004 Virgin Blue operated 43 routes (Virgin Blue, 2004a) serving all major Australian cities, and Wellington and Christchurch in New Zealand (See appendix ii). It works primarily on a point-to-point system to speed turnarounds, reduce costs and limit the need for passenger transfers:
However, the fact that the airline has its base in Brisbane and the high demand for point-to-point services from Sydney and Melbourne means that these airports have become somewhat hub-like in their functions, though this is a natural evolution of any point-to-point network and not a Virgin Blue strategy. Unlike Europe, Australia does not have the volume of air-traffic to necessitate use of secondary airports and the ever expanding Virgin Blue network diminishes the role of these hub-like centres. Both factors are attractive for potential passengers.
Virgin Blue's ticketing differs from many low-cost carriers in that as well as via internet and telephone, customers can book through travel agents and while around 90% of bookings are made via internet (Virgin Blue, 2004a), travel agent bookings 'represents a significant proportion of Virgin Blue's revenue' (Virgin Blue, 2003b). This flexible approach gives consumers more choice and facilitates bookings from people unfamiliar or uncomfortable with internet. Agents also have choice, using either the 'Travel Agent' link on  or phoning the Guest Contact Centre. Commission depends on the method used (internet is cheaper for Virgin Blue, so higher agent commission) and the revenue they raise. The 'user-pays' concept (See Management and operations, paragraph 3) extends so that fares vary for each method in order to cover the additional incurred costs, higher fares reflecting the cost of using agents or selling through Global Distributions Systems (ibid.). Offering greater choice is also the reason behind Virgin Blue offering four ticket types (Blue Saver, Fair Fare, Flexi-Saver, Fully-Flexible) with fewer restrictions the higher the price (Virgin Blue, 2004g), generating a broader customer base.
Internet distribution and not printing tickets helps to keep costs down, therefore maintains fares low, but having compared the cheapest available Virgin Blue, Jetstar and Qantas fares on the key Sydney-Melbourne route, there is clearly work to be done if Virgin Blue is to retain its reputation as Australia's premier low-cost airline:
When thinking of any company operating under the Virgin brand the first obvious name is Sir Richard Branson and in the setting up of Virgin Blue he had a significant part to play in marketing the new venture. However, apart from the initial investment and public appearances to raise the company's profile, his role has been relatively small. In fact, 6 th November 2003 he resigned as Non-Executive Director from the Virgin Blue board (Virgin Blue, 2004a). On an operating level the personality driving Virgin Blue is Brett Godfrey, Managing Director and CEO since the company's foundation. He takes a prominent position at the head of the company making the kind of public appearances and bold statements that we might more associate with Branson. Certainly he seems confident and energetic both in his running of the company and in rebuffing the Qantas/Jetstar threat, often taking time to speak to the press personally; Of all documents read, only two feature his Head of Communication or other spokesperson (See Thomas, 2003; Anon., 2004a).
Godfrey's vigorous cost-cutting strategy follows the lead of previous low-cost carriers: fewer staff on lower wages, fast turn-arounds, no 'free' in-flight food, point-to-point network, no designated seating, favourable contracts with ground services and negotiating aircraft purchases at times when it is a 'buyers market'. Less common cost-cutting measures include flight attendants cleaning the cabin and restocking snacks between flights rather than contracting out cleaning or catering (limited though it is) to a third party, the establishment of a training facility in Brisbane (saving the cost of sending crew abroad and providing a source of revenue if used by other airlines) (Thomas, 2003), and cross-training groundstaff to perform a various tasks, including even acting as replacement cabin crew (Virgin Blue, 2004a), giving greater flexibility to the whole operation. This should help to deliver low prices, but the fare comparison shows this is not always the case. It may be innovative, but the customer is not seeing any real benefit.
While sticking to the basic principal, Virgin Blue differentiates itself from competitors and innovates in both cost-cutting measures and service enhancements, pushing the boundaries of the low-cost model. As mentioned earlier, Virgin Blue has introduced a variety of self-financing initiatives on a 'user-pays' basis:
Initiatives such as 'Blue Zones' (extra leg room in front- or emergency exit rows) and 'Blue Rooms' (airport lounges at Melbourne and Sydney with an entrance charge and paid-for services inside) are clear examples of Virgin Blue's intention to appeal to a broader customer base, including corporate travellers who do not mind a little extra cost for significantly more comfort.
Virgin Blue proves that 'low-cost' and 'no-frills' are not entirely synonymous. Rather than categorizing Virgin Blue as a low-cost airline, it may be more accurate to describe it as a high-value carrier: Passengers have the option to add services if they deem them to be offered at a good price, but the true low-cost option is always available. It is however a dangerous tactic; Debonair failed precisely because it tried to be low-cost-with-frills.
Marketing Virgin Blue originally depended heavily upon the Virgin brand, but now the company is established in its own right and has built the 'Blue' brand. Press campaigns using the slogan 'Keeping the Air Fair' focus on the low-cost image, while emphasising high-quality service, thus differentiating Virgin Blue from Jetstar with its total no-frills approach.
Given the size of Australia there will always be a demand for inter-city air services, as well as cheap Trans-Tasman flights, for leisure and business tourism.
The low-cost market in Australia still has great potential for growth and while there are only two low-cost operators it might be argued that there is little to be worried about since there is clearly room for more than two domestic operators. However, a lack of protection against anti-competitive behaviour does present a real danger for Virgin Blue as Qantas expands Jetstar.
There are certainly some issues which threaten to damage its low-fare reputation and urgently need addressing. Firstly, although there is no all-out fare war, Jetstar undercuts Virgin Blue on numerous highly competitive routes. Secondly, rising fuel costs forced Virgin Blue to add a fuel surcharge to ticket prices but on October 20 th 2004 management decided not to increase the surcharge but to review pricing on a route-by-route basis, minimising impact on key routes and identifying routes more able to absorb higher prices (Anon., 2004a). However, some analysts have commented 'there is a real risk that the average consumer may take the price hike as being opportunistic and permanent in nature, rather than a clearly defined surcharge like the ones Qantas and Jetstar have implemented' (Anon., 2004b), which would challenge Virgin Blue's status as top low-fare airline.
Virgin Blue's service enhancements, although a great marketing tool, could become an issue. Despite reassurances that all initiatives are self-funding, if for whatever reason the cost of providing those services rose, would Virgin Blue raise their cost (potentially lowering guest usage of such facilities and making the projects unprofitable) or simply withdraw them (potentially losing lucrative business passengers)? As CEO Brett Godfrey said, "I don't believe you can be in the middle. You can either be one or the other in this market" (Knibb, 2002). It remains unclear if Virgin Blue's approach would be flexible enough to cope with the loss of this differentiating factor, given that the low-fares marketing angle is already being eroded.
Qantas aggression, either direct or through Jetstar, poses problems. Were Jetstar to lower prices further, Virgin would surely have to follow suit but while Jetstar, subsidised by Qantas, could survive only delivering tiny margins, Virgin Blue could not and may find itself squeezed out of the market, or facing the decision to convert to a full-service carrier and take on the Qantas monopoly (not viable, I would argue) or sell out and integrate into the Qantas group.
In conclusion, Virgin Blue has made excellent progress in just four years, but whether that is sustainable given competition from Qantas, with its history of beating smaller operators out of the market, remains to be seen. The Virgin Blue approach to low-cost is certainly unique, but there is a real danger it might find itself caught in-between full-service and no-frills just as CEO Godfrey warned against.