Nocturnal primates of the family Galagidae have recently been under great taxonomic revision due to new discoveries concerning their behavior and morphology. New species are appearing at such a rapid rate that the important process of scientifically identifying and naming species has been put on the backburner. Effective conservation work is dependent on an updated taxonomy in order to acknowledge the width of the biodiversity one is trying to save (Grubbal. 2003; Groves, 2001). The proposed investigation concerns a taxonomic study of one up to four as yet scientifically unnamed primates of the genus Galagoides and Sciurocheirus. The study's main objective will be to compile sufficient amounts of character data, i.e. behavioral, morphological and genetic data, to enable the endorsement of species status independent of species concept (see Groves, 2001, for overview) applied with the specific aim as to publicly name these species in accordance with the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN, 1999) regulations. The data collected will also create the body of a comprehensive database over the known information of the family Galagidae.
The research will be carried out in several steps and with different methodologies appropriate for descriptions of new species (ICZN, 1999):
An exhaustive literature study where previous descriptions of the target taxa will be researched. The information gathered will provide important background information vital for both the choice of scientific name and for the species description. Characters previously used as means for species description for nocturnal, cryptic species such as penile morphology, facial masks and vocal repertoire will be of special interest but general morphological, behavioral and distributional data will also be investigated.
Localize museum specimens (if available) for each species to conduct morphological research. New specimens of primates rarely occur in museums due to export regulations for endangered species (Baillie, 2004), however, the presence of these newly discovered species often exist in museum collections under erroneous names (Bearder, pers. comm.) This means that valuable material is available for descriptive morphometric analysis and historical distribution.
Comparative analysis of recent field data including vocal recordings, behavioral data, distribution, morphology and genetics (i.e. karyotyping). Special emphasis will be put on vocal analysis and karyotyping since these features have been shown to be highly significant as diagnostic tools for species specification within the Galagidae family (Bearderal. 1995; Masters, 1986). Vocal recordings and tissue samples from the targeted species are available for analysis (Bearder, pers. comm., 2005).