In a one day study at Monkey World Ape Rescue Centre, Dorset, U.K, behavioural study techniques, including focal animal sampling and focal instantaneous point sampling (Altmann 1974), was explored on individuals within captive populations of chimpanzees Pan troglodytes and squirrel monkeys Saimiri sciureus. The study population of chimpanzees were an all-male group of 12 individuals, all with more or less traumatic captive backgrounds, and the focus group of this report, the squirrel monkeys, were a group of 7 individuals (demographic data unknown) that had been rescued from a laboratory in Holland. According to the information provided by Monkey World, this group had not been exposed to any experiments during their time at the laboratory and had never been in an outside enclosure before their arrival at Monkey World. Wild squirrel monkeys are found in the primary and secondary moist forests, riverine forests, swamps and mangrove of South America where they live in non-territorial multimale-multifemale groups of 20-40 individuals (Rowe, 1996). Their main diet is composed by animal prey, such as frogs, snails, crabs and insects (Rowe, 1996). The species is one of the most commonly used primates in laboratory studies () and is a very popular zoo animal.
The study aim was to explore the activity budget of two different species using two different study techniques, however, only the results from the squirrel monkey study is presented below.
Focal animal observation (Altmann, 1974) was conducted in the afternoon of 21 October 2005 at Monkey World Ape Rescue Centre, Dorset, U.K. The outdoor temperature was about 12-15 degrees Celsius. The enclosure contained an outdoor and an indoor facility. The indoor facility surface was approximately 9 m with 2.1 meters from floor to ceiling. It was separated in two compartments with a metal wire mesh wall. All animals had access to both compartments during the study. Wooden and metallic branches placed at different heights, cloth hammocks and ropes were part of the indoor enrichments. The outdoor enclosure approximated size was 100 m with a grass and shrub ground substrate and branches and ropes above ground level. The animals had access to both the indoor and outdoor parts of the enclosure during the study.
The indoor enclosure was somewhat obscured by marmoset Callithrix jacchus indoor enclosure making behavioural observations occasionally quite difficult and for short periods impossible. The out-of-sight time was excluded from the analysis and subsequently added at the end of the predetermined observation period to reach the time set for the study (Lehner, 1996). The study individual was chosen at random on site and behaviours recorded according the focal animal sampling technique during a 45 minutes session. Sex and age of the study individual was unknown. All behavioural observations were noted on pre-printed ethogram at the time of occurrence. The ethogram was derived from the modular handbook 3 - P20103, Oxford Brookes University, U.K. No description to the behavioural units is provided though each category is quite descriptive in itself.
The categories used in the ethogram were:
Time of behavioural events was recorded from the clock display of a cell phone, Nokia 3510i.
Descriptive results were derived and analysed using the Microsoft Excel XP software.
The study subject spent all of the study session indoors and most of that time in inactive observation (vigilant) of its surroundings (60.4%; Table 1) from an elevated place (Figure 1), a cloth hammock, in the enclosure. The remaining time was mostly spent on the upper wooden or metallic branches in the cage grooming and/or scratching itself. Notably, the study subject did not engage in any kind of social activity during the 45 minute observation session even though it was approached by other individuals on several occasions. The approaching individuals made no attempt, however, to engage in any social activity nor did the study subject but the approaching individual rather displaced or literally walked over the study subject. Most of the time when the study subject was "active" it tended to move about in the enclosure (i.e. walk, run or climb; Figure 2) either observing the other group members or watch a zoo-keeper that entered midway through the study session.
Since squirrel monkeys move quite rapidly I found that the ethogram could have been constructed differently to enable more effective data collection. Instead of writing down each event with abbreviations a behavioural category tick-box would have been preferred (Sackettal. 1973). One way to reach this insight before the data collection would have been the implementation of a short pilot study beforehand (for the importances of pilot studies to ethogram construction see Nekaris, 2001). If the 10 minutes before data collection had been spent recording instead of merely observing, the shortcomings of the ethogram construction could have been corrected. However, the brief preliminary "get-to-know" observations gave me a good overview of the behaviours I could expect to occur, but did not prepare me for the difficulties in actually recording them while observing.
Since the study aim was to establish an activity budget for one individual over a very short period of time the results obtained are quite general, as they should be. However, from these general results several interesting topics for further behavioural studies were born. Further observations could try to answer questions like: Why is the study individual displaced? What is its social status within the group? Does it engage in any grooming or reciprocity behaviours at all? Is the frequent self-grooming part of a stereotypic behavioural pattern (Mallapur, 2005) and, if it is, why is it showing this behavioural pattern? Is it related to social rank, its rearing history (i.e. was this individual wild-caught or born in captivity) or some illness?
The generality of the study approach became more of a reconnaissance observation session to me, where I approached the study without a specific behavioural hypothesis in mind (Lehner, 1996). However, that just 45 minutes observing one individual can generate so many interesting study topics is utterly fascinating and proves of the inherent power in preliminary or pilot studies with wide approaches.