Nocturnal primates of the family Galagidae have recently been under great taxonomic revision due to new discoveries concerning their behaviour and morphology (Groves 2001; Grubb et al., 2003). New species are appearing at such a rapid rate that the important process of scientifically identifying and naming species has been put on the backburner. Effective conservation work is dependent on an updated taxonomy in order to acknowledge the width of the biodiversity one is trying to save (Groves, 2001; Grubb et al., 2003). The proposed investigation concerns a taxonomic study of one up to four as yet scientifically unnamed primates of the genus Galagoides and Sciurocheirus. The study's main objective will be to compile sufficient amounts of character data, i.e. behavioral, biogeographical, morphological and genetic data, to enable the endorsement of species status independent of species concept applied (see Groves, 2001 for overview) with the specific aim as to publicly name these species in accordance with the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (IUZN, 1999) regulations. The data collected will create the body of a comprehensive database over the known information of the family Galagidae.
Listed below are 50 sources of information that is relevant to my final project with the working title "The naming of new species within the genera Galagoides and Sciurocheirus". The sources are listed under subheadings (with number of sources in brackets next to it) inferring to their relevant area of importance for my project. The subheadings are arbitrarily set and do not set an absolute topic content to the source information. Many sources could, for example, fit under Material and Methods but has ended up under some section in Behavioural Ecology. Each source reference includes the author's affiliation, at publication date, and a short description of the sources content. For some sources, additional information is given as to its relevance to my study. Those sources lacking this information are by no means less important but the relevance of the source is assumed self-evident from the source description. Included as an appendix are further references, in many cases, of equal importance as the annotated, as well as a list of websites and possible and confirmed collaborators to the project.