In Italy, one in five new titles is translated from a foreign language (see table below). The proportion has been slightly declining, but the country is still above average in its openness to books coming from abroad.
Some genres, de facto, depend on the works of foreign authors.
In part, this is due to the readers being used to, and trusting, products which come from specific countries: manga from Japan, ELT textbooks from Britain, thrillers from the States. It's a demand driven bias.
There's also the case of academic publishing: the need to use a lingua franca, among researchers of international level, has led all relevant, and credible, journals to be in English. A supply driven bias, in this case.
In some cases, it can be more convenient to have a book translated than written.
According to Enrico Casadei of Codice Edizioni, a science and nature publishing house, "a typical Italian professor will sign the contract to write on a topic he's an expert in, and show up a year later, exhausted, producing barely one hundred pages. We need more than that to get the book out": therefore, Codice usually buys the rights for books that are ready, wordy, and of a quality they can check before making an agreement.
Being able to assess the potential of a book in depth, in advance, is vital for small niche publishers: it allows them more certainty in their forecast title costing.
In fact in Italy, not only are translated titles quite numerous, compared to other countries: on average they also have higher print-runs, possibly because rights are bought only for those titles for which sales are expected to cover costs, including the translator's fee.
Unfortunately, this doesn't effect translators directly: unlike your French colleagues, you won't be entitled to royalties. Never mind that your translation might have some influence on the sales of the book.
Nevertheless, you should be aware that the size of the market is a crucial factor influencing the decisions of publishers buying translation rights. Sales volumes depend on the type and quality of the book, on the marketing investment, but also on the number of people who can read the language.
Although Italian is far from being an endangered language("In ecological terms, what is important is not the size of the species but the safety of its habitat"), the publishing industry certainly suffers from the small size of the market, and the book publishing business grows at rates of barely 1-2% yearly.
Italy has a population of 60 million, and Italian is spoken by another 4 million scattered around the world. The literacy rate is 99%, and 43% of Italians read at least one book every year.
Say that backwards, and you will understand the common complain about lack of "reading habit" in Italy: 57% of the population reads less than one book every year.
On top of that, according to a recent survey published by the European Commission, Italian as a foreign language ranks only sixth in Europe: it is spoken by only 2% of non-Italian Europeans as a foreign language (see chart below).
Italian is the most spoken foreign language in Malta. Population: slightly under 400.000.
In 2005 the European Commission cut from its budget - weighed down by the enlargement to 25 countries - the Italian translations of its meetings (except those on Wednesdays, when the most important provisions are announced). Although, after the Italian representative's formal protest, Italian returned among the languages in which all meetings are translated, according to some "Italian is losing political importance because Italy and Italian culture are losing political importance. Culture determines how far languages spread. [...] Instead of asking institutions for privileges, Italy should think about becoming Europe's beacon again, perhaps spending more in culture abroad, through the Italian institutes of culture".
At a lower level than that of a European beacon, according to Paola Seghi of the Italian Publishers' Association (AIE) International Department for the Promotion of Italian Publishing Abroad, there actually is a new trend favouring Italian culture in the world, particularly strong in the USA. American college students, apparently, pick up Italian after having studied Spanish as a first foreign language, attracted by the language of fashion, food, Firenze, and sometimes of their forefathers.
Ironically, the Italian language is threatened in Europe - by effect of the EU enlargement to the same countries that have strong immigration towards Italy, and are an opportunity for the Italian publishing industry - while it appeals to readers in a market which is difficult to enter by exporting or selling rights (see "To country" chart on export titles from ICE).
If you know a foreign language well enough that you can translate into it, from Italian, competition is likely to be milder.
Hopefully , that foreign language is not English: in Britain, translations account for a mere 3-5% of books. According to translator Susan Pickford, of the Universit Paris X - Nanterre, this is partly due to the lack of habit of reading a book to get to know a different culture, with translations being systematically downplayed by marketing.
The few translations are mostly from French and German. Accessing the British markets is difficult for Italian publishing houses: in 2003, 286 titles were sold to Poland, but only 71 to the UK (see chart below).
Apart from the size of the market, and the readership's culture, there's also the fact that publishing follows the paths beaten by the general economic relations between countries. While the UK and USA have little interest in investing in Central European Europe, Italy has a strong commercial bond with Poland and Hungary, and it shows in the export of translation rights as well.
Though Italian publishers remain net importers of translation rights, the number of titles sold abroad increased over 30% from 2001 to 2003.
In January 2006 the government distributed 120 million euros in contributions for the publishing industry.
Over half of that sum went to publishing houses for a 10% coverage of paper costs. The rest was geared towards Italian language newspapers and magazines owned by political parties, coops, "moral institutions", publications for the visually impaired, but also - with the aim of divulging the Italian culture abroad - towards periodical publications sold prevalently in foreign countries (the complete list of receivers is available on , with the detail of how much went to each recipient).
With the same aim, and some lobbying by the AIE to make procedures swifter, the Italian government has set aside quite substantial funds for foreign publishers.
At the London Book Fair, a seminar was dedicated to "Getting grants for Italian book translations". The speaker, Piero Attanasio of AIE, opened his presentation stating that its goal was to "help foreign publishers get money for translating Italian books"; there were only about fifteen people in the room.
More worrisome is the lack of awareness in Italy about public funding for translations: with the typical Italian mistrust of everything public, opportunities to make the cost of translating foreign titles more bearable are often overlooked.
According to the AIE, to confront export difficulties and low growth rates in the study of Italian literature and language abroad, "the key point, perhaps more critical than finding necessary resources, is to coordinate initiatives the effectiveness of which is directly proportional to the capacity of building critical mass and therefore involving more subjects, public (Government and Regions) and private."
The Italian Ministry of Foreign Affaires assigns 500 thousand euros per year, in grants usually covering 100% of translation costs, to encourage projects "which show significant historical and cultural relationships or pertain to sectors of Italian culture of particular interest abroad". In fact, when contacting the local Italian Institute of Culture to start the procedure, a foreign publisher might well find that the organisation itself will subsidise the project directly.
In 2005, 187 titles of all genres (see pie chart on slide 7), were financed through this programme. Notably, only about 6% of these grants went to British publishers, while the strongest beneficiaries were new EU countries (11%), Asia (14%), and countries in the Balkans (17%).
There are also four national translation awards worth about 13 thousand euros, assigned annually by the Ministry of Culture, to foreign and Italian publishers and translators. Peculiarly, also translations from and into dialects are eligible.
Finally, the AIE suggests contacting local authorities as well, for one-off funding of publications that are of special regional interest.
Other governments promote their culture granting translation awards and incentives as well: AIE's 2003 document, putting together information about such programmes, amounts to over one hundred pages of opportunities.
For STM publishing, there's the European Secretariat for Scientific Publications (SEPS): a non-profit Italian association with consultative status with the Council of Europe, promoting the circulation of scientific culture by awarding contributions destined to cover translation costs.
The initiatives supporting translations are many also on the international level.
However, they usually give the priority to endangered or minority languages (e.g., the EU's Culture 2000 programme, now due for an update).
The same can be said of private companies and foundations. In a recent press release, POD company Trafford Publishing announced its pledge to "underwrite approximately $1.600.000 in publishing costs over the next ten years. The programme will make available primers for school children, dictionaries and local stories - one book will be published in each of 650 endangered languages.
'When a native language dies out, we've lost forever our chance to learn cultural truths,' says Trafford CEO Bruce Batchelor. 'Philosophy, lifestyle, science, healing - all the nuances are tied up in the grammar, vocabulary and way of speaking. It is a tragedy if a language that encapsulates tens of thousands of years of a group's culture is lost forever. It's like standing by watching the destruction of the ancient library at Alexandria, without trying to put out the fire."
Giving for granted that Harry Potter 7 has already been assigned to a very well-established translator, and recognising that literary fiction, high quality and/or best selling, is the realm of few affirmed professionals, these are the average chances a translator into or from the Italian language currently has, in terms of working ion books belonging to a certain genre.
As you can see, Italian publishers are mostly importers of adult fiction, children's books and non-fiction, and exporters of children's, illustrated, and religious books.
Note that the data of the charts is in percentages, and remember the number of exported titles is still much lower than that of the imported.
Although little-known and scarcely influential, an association of Italian translators (and interpreters) exists.
AITI (Associazione Italiana Traduttori e Interpreti) organises seminars and workshops, and has an online searchable database of its 750 members, who are either translators or interpreters or both, and have had to pass an entry test to attest their skills. However, it doesn't seem to have many connections within the AIE.
Beatrice Verri, a part-time freelance translator for three years, sums up its flaws: "to many restrictions (minimum tariffs, etc.) compared to the guarantees it gives. I don't know anyone who belongs to it."
What some professional translators are campaigning for in Italy, is the creation of an "albo" - similar to those existing for doctors and engineers - which would mean that only people who passed an exam and belonged to the category could work as translators. It would also mean the category as a whole could establish minimum fees, and contrast the negative effect that non-professional competition and the internet have had on translators' finances in the past decade.
Because of the underpayment (a common complain of translators in most countries), it seems advisable to become a professional translator only if you are fluent in a rare language or knowledgeable in a specific subject which have a market.