However there seems to be one paramount factor driving rights sales, which compensates for any loss in cultural and literary value: success in the country of origin.
For any book, there's a level of success which creates a buzz so loud it can be heard internationally; this "pulls" demand invaluably, and at the same time can be used in marketing "push" strategies.
Once "Bonjour Paresse" sold 300.000 copies in France, even South Korea wanted its edition.
"The diary of Bridget Jones" was first a British, and American, and then worldwide hit, although much of the main character's charm lies in her untranslatable use of English and love for Milktray.
The Italian translator of "The Series of Unfortunate Events" confessed not realising until book "The 7th" how all evil characters' names where anagrams of Count Olaf, and had to add a footnote to explain that. The author's trademarks are such clues, play-on-words, building the plot around common expressions in English like "red herring", and exaggerating alliterations or other figures of speech. Some are lost, others substituted, and although the dark tone of the children's stories is not appreciated in Italy like it was in the US, rights for the entire series were sold to Salani since the launch of book "The 2nd". Soon after, the homonymous film was released as well, adding to the buzz.
In this escalation of translations for the sake of international fame, I must end on "Eats, Shoots & Leaves", which has been recently published by Piemme in Italian ("Virgole per caso. Tolleranza zero per gli errori di punteggiarura!") with extensive re-writing, well beyond translation, to fit Italian grammar rules.
Was it worth loosing the original text to import the successful "format" of a fun-to-read grammar book? Sales are nowhere near the UK figures, but the media build-up meant the book had to be made available to Italian readers.
"Eats, Shoots & Leaves" was translated into German as well, but in its marketing footsteps another book, "Der Dativ ist dem Genitiv sein Tod" ("The Dative is the Death of the Genitive"), has sold over 800.000 copies. A case of how international buzz makes translation, transfer, and even cloning, possible.
The content of the book could have been translated and transferred into the Italian market with some effort, but the investment would have had to be justified and supported either by a wider success in the original market, or in a closer European country, or by the prospect of a longer life-cycle for the book.I suspect that the light tone and positive attitude towards work were the worst enemies of "Better than Sex": the Italian market is quite interested in the issue, but seems to prefer scandals and protests about the labour conditions to careerism.
The economics of the book don't work. The cost of the translation is not excessive, but the window of opportunity for sales, given the current-journalistic style and the seasonality in sales of business books, is extremely small. To reach break-even on a print-run that would make production costs low enough to keep the price down, given the light non-academic tone, a disproportionate investment in marketing would have been necessary, throwing the figures off balance.