Perfection Hotels is a small UK-based hospitality company, currently operating 3 hotels in the major UK cities, one in London, Birmingham and Glasgow respectively. All the hotels are operating under the same brand, where they strive to provide "the perfect hospitality experience" to their guests. The hotel group is relatively new in the market, and has decided to grow and become a bigger player in the market through international expansion. However, due to the lack of international experience, the first country in which to expand to could not be very different to the UK. (More information about Perfection Hotels in Appendix 1-Company Profile).
Canada is the second largest country in the world, located north of the United States in North America. With a population of almost 33 million, the country has developed in parallel with the US both technologically and economically (), and is today ranked among the most developed countries in the world (). Canada became self-governing in 1867, but still has close ties to the United Kingdom (). These ties and the high level of development makes the Canadian business environment quite similar to the UK environment, and therefore Canada was pointed out as an appropriate country to enter for Perfection Hotels' expansion plans. (More information about Canada in Appendix 1-Country Profile).)
Perfection Hotels has been very successful in the luxury, 5 star market sector. This market is highly competitive, and the hotels are described in superlative terms and far exceed normal expectations in terms of design, level of luxus, service, elegance and uniqueness (Nebel et al., 1994). Jackson and Haid (in Moore and Birtwistle, 2005) argues that luxury brands have a high status and possess a desirability that extends beyond their function. The target market for Perfection Hotels are both leisure and business travellers, but they emphasizes the business market, both domestic and internationally.
Expanding a hospitality operation internationally can be problematic, and in order to be effective and efficient in the task a company must respond to the opportunities, challenges, risks, and limitations posed by the macro business environment (Costa, in Wu et al., 1998). Evans et al. (2003, p.156) defines the macro environment as "the broad environment outside of an organisation's industry and markets", and Reich (1997) concludes that companies in general has very little control over it.
The business environment in Canada is in many ways similar to the UK. Both countries are political stable, and are ranked in the top in terms of level of democracy, corruption, press freedom and civil/political rights (). They also have
affluent, advanced industrial economies with a farily high level of privatisation, and both Canada and the UK rank among the most developed countries in the world (). The structure of their economies is service-dominated, making them high income countries where people enjoy very high standards of living (). A concern for the Canadian economy, however, is the oil prices. Cold weather and large distances make the energy consumption in Canada double that of the G7 average. Thus, if the oil prices remain high and/or increase in the future, people will be forced to spend more on energy, which again will affect the GDP and the spending in other industries such as hospitality negatively (Tal, 2004).
Religion is not a major influence when conducting business either in Canada or the UK, and both countries can be identified as rather secular than religious (Nations of the World, 2004). Neither will there be any technological issues. Both countries have a well developed Information Communication Technology (ICT ) sector, and the governments are investing equally in ICT in their respective countries (). The infrastructure in Canada and the UK are of a very high level (), meaning that transportation of tourists and potential guests from international as well as domestic destinations will not become an issue. Using media as marketing channels will also be similar in the two countries, but a much higher percentage of Canada's population are connected to the internet (), giving extra opportunities to reach potential customers. (See Appendix 2 for business environment statistics).
In addition to the many similarities between the Canadian and British business environment, there are two major differences which will affect Perfection Hotels when entering Canada. First, Canada is a member of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), an agreement eliminating all tariffs between Canada, US and Mexico. It also provides a phased reduction of non-tariff barriers, making it the largest free trade zone in the world (Taplin, 2003). The UK, on the other hand, is a member of the European Union (EU), who's goal is to strenghten the economy in Europe through an internal free market within the community, with common external trade barriers to the rest of the world (Reilly, 1995). Dealing with NAFTA instead of the EU will have some economic impacts, and Perfection Hotels must also deal with a new trading system.
Second, the ethnic diversity in Canada makes the business environment more complicated than in the UK. Around 400 years ago, when North America was colonised, the British settled on the east coast of the US, while French people settled in Quebec and the Canadian east coast (Sherwood and Hodgkinson, 2005). The following centuries of war and conflicts between the UK and France has lead to a lot of tension between people with French and British origin (Carroll and Little, 2001). Therefore, Canada appears to be two very different countries, with 75% of the population quite like the US in most ways, and 25% with many similarities to France living mainly in Quebec (Jarvis and Thompson, 1995). However, in spite of these two major differences between Canada and the UK, the business environments in the two countries are very similar. Thus, there would be no major barriers in terms of the business environment when Perfection Hotels are establishing a hotel operation in Canada.
Before expanding internationally, Perfection Hotels must establish the demand for their luxury services in the country. Middleton and Clarke (2001) concludes that the underlying factors for travel and tourism demand are the same in all countries, and Kotler et al. (2003) argues that the economic variables are the most important set of factors influencing the volume of demand generated.
Canada is one of the wealthiest countries in the world. In 2004, consumer spending increased by 3,4%, and disposable income by 1,7%, expected to rise again with 2,5% in 2005 (). This shows that the domestic market in Canada is in a good economic position, affecting the demand for hospitality services positively. However, as mentioned earlier, high oil prices in the future will have the opposite effect (Tal, 2004).
Middleton and Clarke (2001) argues that a higher level of education leads to more travel. In terms of government spending on education, Canada ranks second among the G7 countries, and more than 50% of the population are undertaking higher education (), meaning that demand for travel is high. They also state that people in largeer cities have a higher demand than those living in rural areas. This is positive for tourism demand in Canada, where almost 50% of the population are living in the 6 largest cities, Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver, Ottawa, Calgary and Edmonton respectively (). In total, 77% of the Canadians are located in urban areas ().
Demand is also strongly affected by holiday entitlement. Canadian people have only 2 weeks paid vacation plus 12 paid holidays during a year. In the largest international market, the US, paid vacations are not required, and there are 10 paid holidays (Kjeldberg et al., 2005). This means that tourism demand are weakened, and that other international markets could provide a higher demand. However, Goeldner (in Kandampully, 2000) indicates that technology factors will dramatically alter the tourism demand in the future. Demand in Canada and the US is therefore significantly boosted by the strong development of mass media, information technology such as the internet, as well as the excellent infrastructure ().
To establish demand in Canada, Perfection Hotels also developed a tourist area life cycle (TALC), indication which stage Canada as a tourist destination belong to (Appendix 1, Figure 1). Based on this, Canada is on a consolidation stage, where the rate of tourist arrivals are declining. However, it should be noted that this decline most likely is a result of negative events such as 9/11, economic slowdown in the US, conflicts in Afghanitstan and Iraq, and two outbreaks of SARS in Canada (Loverseed, 2003). Also, the decline is in line with the rest of the region, and the Canadian market share has been stable at 15,5% (). This suggest that it is a result of worldwide events, instead of Canada dropping in terms of poularity.
The factors discussed above clearly shows that there in total is a strong demand for travel and tourism in Canada, espescially in the leisure market. Middleton and Clarke (2001) argues that although economic variables is supporting growth for leisure travel in special, developed and strong economies also sustain a large amount of business travel. Thus, demand for domestic business travel in Canada will also be fairly strong.
According to Levitt (1983, p.93), the world has become globalised over the last decades, and "the world's needs and desires have been irrevocably homogenized". This means that the barriers for international travel have decreased, and travel across national borders increased. Canada's largest international market is without doubt the US, with some demand also provided by the UK market (Table 1). These two countries are, like Canada, highly developed in terms of important demand factors such as economy and technology (). When expanding their hospitality business to Canada, Perfection Hotels can therefore, in addition to the strong domestic demand, also expect international demand, from the US in particular.
Operating in the luxury market sector, a strong and growing national economy is a key factor for the demand for Perfection Hotel's services. A high level of education, as well as the geographical situation with the greater part of the population living in urban areas and cities, will also be critical sources for demand.
The level of competition among firms vary widely across industries, and even within different sectors of an industry (David, 1999), therefore Perfection Hotels must analyse their market sector to gain an understanding of the competitive factors influencing their business. Porter (1980) argues that the intensity of competition within an industry depends on the total effect of five forces, the bargaining power of customers, bargaining power of suppliers, threat of new entrants, threat of substitute products, and finally the rivalry among competitive firms. All these factors can be weighted separately and added together to find the total level of competition in the market sector (Appendix 4, Table I).
Jayawardena (2003) argues that Canadian tour operators play an essential role in domestic tourism. This strong role make them quite powerful in the industry, being able to press hotel prices down. The hotel industry is also well developed in Canada, with several players operating in the market (). This gives consumers a great range of choices, increasing their power. The total bargaining power of customers is therefore, with the strong position of tour operators as the most important factor, quite high.
Canada's food and beverage sector has numerous suppliers of food and beverage products (). The competition between the suppliers will push prices down and reduce their power, which is a benefit for the hotel industry. However, the strenght of union in Canada is very high. In a research done by Murray (1993) about union structure, Canada was the only country with an overall increase in union membership and union density from 1970-1989. In addition, Abraham (1997) concludes that Canadian law aid unions in the area of union security. This strongly increases the power of suppliers, making their total bargaining power in the hotel market quite high.
The capital costs, identified as property and dealer network investments, as well as initial promotion expenses by Bowman (1998), of entering the hotel market are clearly quite high (Evans et al., 2003). This also applies to the Canadian market. Also, big players such as Four Seasons, Intercontinental, Starwood and Fairmont to name but a few () are dominating the market through economies of scale, making the threat of entry for other hotels into the market fairly low.
As a result of the many developed information channels such as the internet (), combined with the developed Canadian hotel market in all sectors (), potential hotel guest can easily find substitues for their preferred hotel product. Staying with family and friends is another substitute product, and especially visitors form the UK can choose this option due to the close family ties to Canadians (Sherwood and Hodgkinson, 2005). Substitute products are therefore a serious threat in the hotel industry in Canada.
According to Haywood (2003), the supply of rooms in the Canadian hotel market has increased steadily from 1998 to 2002, and as a result the total occupancy level has dropped (Appendix 4, Table 2). This is a signal of intense competition in the market. The number of hotels operating in all market sectors also indicates a high level of rivalry. For Perfection Hotels, entering the luxury market, the competitive situation will be a big threat. Their main competitors is Starwood (through it's Sheraton brand), Marriott (Renaissance brand), Hyatt, and Fairmont, which is north Americas largest luxury hotel company (). However, the biggest competitor for Perfection Hotels is Four Seasons, which is a Canadian company offering luxury hotels and resorts (). All of these players are large, international companies. A smaller player is Metropolitan Hotels (). With three luxury hotels in the Canadian market only, they are Perfection Hotels' main domestic competitor.
The sum of the business environment, total demand, and competition makes up the total attractiveness of the Canadian hotel market. Their business environment is quite similar to the one in the UK, and Canada is political stable and strongly developed in terms of economy and technology. The country risk in Canada, as Contractor and Kundu (1998) refer to as the degree of environmental (i.e political) uncertainty, is therefore quite low. Cultural factors are also similar, however, the ethnic diversity of the British and the French parts of the population must be taken into consideration.
There is a strong demand for hospitality services in the luxury sector, both in the leisure and the business market. International demand is high, espescially from the US where culture and levels of economic development are similar to the Canadian market (Alexander, 1996). However, in the luxury market there is a high level of competition (Appendix 4, Table 1), with a number of well established brands already operating.
Overall, the attractiveness of the Canadian hospitality market is very high, as we can see from the attractiveness grid (Appendix 5).
Expanding into the Canadian market, Perfection Hotels must choose between the three main market entry modes, full ownership, management contracts or franchising (Gannon and Johnson, 1997). Felstead (in Connell, 1997, p.215) defines franchising as "a business relationship whereby a franchisor permits a franchisee to use their brand name, product, or system of business in a specified and ongoing manner in return for a fee", while management contracts are "an arrangement under which operational control of an enterprise...is vested by contract in a separate enterprise which performs the necessary menegement functions in return for a fee" (Young et al. in Gannon and Johnson, 1997, p.194). An ownership, on the other hand, is when a company invest in- and operate a hotel themselves (Contractor and Kundu, 1998), usually achieved through a combination of acquisition and organic growth (Gannon and Johnson, 1997). Each choice has implications for the speed and cost of entry, as well as risk, flexibility, control, profitability and payback within the target market (Gannon, 1993).
Driscoll and Paliwoda (1997) argues that there are four main factors deciding which modal choice to use, these are control, resource commitment, dissemination and flexibility. Control is the single most important determinant, and a full ownership provides a higher degree of control than management contracts and franschising (Gannon and Johnson, 1997). However, resource commitments are greater in a full ownership, and assets will incur substantial sunk costs if they are being redeployed (Hill in Herrmann and Datta, 2002). On the other hand, management contracts will require medium, and franchising low, resource commitments (Driscoll and Paliwoda, 1997). When it comes to disemmination, both ownership and franchising more or less eliminate it, while management contracts provide a medium-high risk of a business partner being oppurtinistic (Driscoll and Paliwoda, 1997). Gannon and Johnson (1997) argues that of the three entry modes, franchising are offering the highest degree of flexibility, followed by management contracts.
Entering Canada, Perfection Hotels should use either franchise or management contracts, giving them access to a partner's knowledge on markets, competitors, and governmental policies (Herrmann and Datta, 2002) This will be valuable since the hotel group is new to international expansion. According to Erramilli et al. (2002), management contracts are favoured over franchising when a company have capabilities that can not be reproduced by others, when there are qualified local investments in the host market, and when the culture in the host country is similar to home. On the other hand, Dev et al. (2002) argues that franchising should be chosen when there is availability of quality management in the host market, and when the business environment is highly developed.
In the case of Perfection Hotels, management contracts will be their best modal choice, giving more control over their operations and brand standards than franchising. The developed Canadian economy and the cultural similarities backs up this choice, as well as the argument that hospitality companies entering a highly developed country can count on rule of law and fair enforcement of legal contracts (Khanna et al., 2005).
Even though Canada's luxury hotel market is very attractive for Perfection Hotels, a thorough segmentation process of the market must be done, as well as a prioritation of the segments to be targeted, before any business can be conducted. Dibb (1995) argues that targeting is an identification of segments where marketing efforts should be concentrated, and decisions should to be consistent with the needs of the customers in the specific segments, resources available in the company, the competition in the segment, and the overall business environment. After segmenting, each segment has to be assessed in terms of attractiveness (Hlavacek and Reddy, 1986), and finally the target markets are selected, a process which is closely linked to the product planning and development (Corey, 1975). Target market selection is a critical issue, and must be proritised in any company (Simkin and Dibb, 1998).
The domestic demand in Canada is high, and between 60% and 70% of total demand for the tourism industry in Canada comes from this market (Meis, 2005). Tourism Australia () concludes that the desire to travel within Canada is significant, which is backed up by statistics showing that there was a fairly high increase in number of trips, room nights, and expenditure for Canadian travel within Canada from 2003 to 2004 (Appendix 3, Table II). The overall room demand also increased in the same period (Appendix 3, Table I).
The regional demand in Canada is also quite strong, a result of the numerous US visitors, making Canada one of the top ten countries in the world in terms of tourist arrivals, tourist receipts and tourist spenders (Jayawardena, 2003. There is also some demand from the UK market, however, this is not even close to the levels of demand provided by the domestic and US market. Other international markets are insignificant, therefore Perfection Hotels should concentrate on the domestic and the US market.
The primary target market for Perfection Hotel is the domestic business market, attracting meetings and small conferences in particular. Shifflet and Bhatia (1998) argues that business customers give more value, and the domestic business and convention market in Canada increased with 15,7% from 2003 to 2004 (Appendix 3, Table II). This suggest that the potential for profit are good within the segment. Perfection Hotels should also strive to gain positive and long lasting realtionships with the largest Canadian companies, such as the Royal Bank of Canada, BCE Inc., Bank of Nova Scotia, Bell Canada, and George Weston Ltd. ().
Because of the high value of business customers, Perfection Hotels secondary target market is the US business market. US companies are faced with a market where culture and levels of economic development are similar when conducting business in Canada (Alexander, 1996). This, combined with the proximity of large Canadian cities and urban areas to the US border favour future US business. Again, Perfection Hotels should try to secure repeat business and establish realtionships with large, valuable US companies.
The demand for domestic leisure travel is strong in Canada, and the domestic market is a big part of the total market. Perfection Hotels should therefore target domestic leisure travellers as their tertiary target market, with focus is on realtively small households, where the parents' age are from 45-65, living in urban areas. They should also have a high income and spending power since leisure travellers tend to be more price-sensitive than business travellers (Morrisson, 2002.
Before Perfection Hotels are expanding internationally, a decision on which strategic orientation to use also has to be made. Centricity, an approach to international management, is one of the main factors influencing decisions made by an organisation entering a foreign market (Roper et al., 1997). Perlmutter (in Roper and Guerrier, 2001) identifies four levels of centricity, giving Perfection Hotels the choice between an ethnocentric, polycentric, regiocentric, or geocentric approach.
Ethnocentrism is when one's own group is placed in the center and used as a reference for all others, and the symbols and values of that group are regarded as superior (Sumner, in Piron, 2002). Values and symbols that are cultural dissimilar will therefore tend to be rejected (Herche, 1994). Using this approach, a hotel would use employees from the home country in key positions, overlooking the impact of the host country's culture (Go and Pine, 1995). Wind et al. (1973) argues that no systematic research is done within the market to be entered using an ethnocentric approach. The product/services are neither modified to fit the new market, but the major advantage is the low degree of risk and commitment in the host country market.
On the other hand, a polycentric approach is based on the principle that each country is different in terms of culture. Thus, it would not be suitable to use home-country staff or practices when expanding abroad (Roper and Guerrier, 2001). Local people is understood to have a greater understanding and knowledge of their market (Wind et al., 1973), and according to Roper et al. (1997), using a polycentric approach also means that the strategic choices are formed to fit different countries where the company is operating. Such an approach seems to be most suited for larger firms with enough resources to investigate local markets, and appears to be very market oriented (Wind et al., 1973).
Using a regiocentric approach, managers are recruited from the specific region to fill top management positions (Go and Pine, 1995). The whole region is seen as one potential market, ignoring national boundaries, and startegies are developed on a regional basis (Wind et al. , 1973). Go and Pine (1995) argues that a regiocentric policy has the advantage of considering the connections in politics and economy between nations within a region, as well providing more flexibility than a polycentric policy.
The geocentric approach is quite similar to the regiocentric, assuming that cultures and markets around the globe have certain similarities (Roper et al., 1997). The aim is to create a truly international management who can move from country to country without facing any difficulties (Go and Pine, 1995). A company adopt their best practices, either from the home or the host country, and use them on a global base (Roper et al. , 1997), and the products and services tend to be standardised (Wind et al., 1973).
There are no single superior or dominant approach to managing a hotel business internationally, and the approach is likely to vary within a company depending on the different situations and decisions to be made (Roper and Guerrier, 2001). However, for the expansion into the Canadian market, Perfection Hotels should use a regiocentric approach. They have been very successful in the domestic business market in the UK, and the envrionment and culture in Canada is quite similar. Therefore, Perfection Hotels are likely to succeed in the domestic business market in Canada too. The advantages of taking political and economical connections into consideration also backs up this approach. In addition, Wind et al. (1973) argues that both regiocentric and geocentric approaches provide som significant advantages over ethnocentric and polycentric. The main advantage is gained through the identification of regional/global market segments, and the development of standard policies within each segment provide a higher degree of control and coordination. Between regiocentric and geocentric approaches, they argues that the regiocentric generally is viewed as more economical and manageable. And given that Perfection Hotels is a small player with limited resources, a regiocentric approach to managing their international expansion will be most appropriate.
Davis (2000) argues that a brand is an intangible but critical component of what a company stands for, conveying what the company sells, what it does, and what it is. The brand image exist in the consumers' mind, made up by the sum of all the information received about the brand from past experience, word of mouth, advertising, and service, modified by their perceptions, beliefs, and social norms (Randall, 2000).
The added value to the product by the brand is called brand equity (Farquhar, 1989), which is gained through the efforts to create a strong brand (Campbell, 2002). Creating customer-based brand equity is the main purpose of branding, and it is the the prescence of strong, unique and favourable brand associations that make consumers respond different to brand promotion (Keller, in Supphellen, 2000). Aaker (in Campbell, 2002) defines brand equity as brand assets and liabilities related to the brand that add to or subtract from a value provided by a service. Supphellen (2000) argues that managers need a deep understanding of brand equity in order to develop the optimal brand strategies, communicate effectively and compete successfully. The key to a successful brand is to create added value in the minds of consumers, which is building a perceived value beyond the observable value to differentiate the product (Supphellen, 2000). Aaker (in Reardon, 2005) stress that since brand equity can provide a higher market share and increase loyalty, the health of the company are dependent on the brand image. Therefore it must be strongly emphasized by management.
Aaker and Joachimsthaler (2000) outlined the concept of brand architecture, which is an organising structure of the brand portfolio, specifying the roles of the different brands an organisation possess and the relationship between them. They argued that maintaining the relationship between the main brand and sub-brands could be done by using different strategies such as house of brands, endorsed brands, sub-brands, and branded house. However, since Perfection Hotels only has one brand, this is not something that need to be considered at the moment.
A brand can in most instances be seen as a promise to the consumers, who expect to receive the values associated with the brand. However, the nature of the service industry, where the service encounter is a critical part, makes it hard to achieve full consistency in the delivery process (de Chernatony and Segal-Horn, 2001). To illustrate the difference in consistency, Slattery (in Connell, 1992) defined the terms "soft" and "hard" brands. This relates to a company's marketing mix strategy, and whether this is standardised or adapted. A hard brand have a standard and consistent mix, whereas the opposite applies to a soft brand. However, all brands are positioned between the two extremes, and there is no indication that one is better than the other (Connell, 1992).
Perfection Hotels has only one brand. This hard luxury brand has quality of service as the main value, and this is used to differentiate the brand against their competitors. Perfection Hotels are sophisticated, and guests can expect to be pampered when staying there. Another key value is the excellence in providing business facilities, making it "the office outside the office". They also offer beautiful and stylish surroundings/dcor throughout the properties, and emphasize the core product, a good night sleep, through quality beds and spacious rooms. Perfection Hotels are also known for their strategic locations, as well as award-winning restaurants.
Keller (in Hem and Iversen, 2004) argues that logos are used as a mean to indicate brand origin, brand ownership, and to build brand associations and equity. Logos can add value to the brand reputation, and types of logos vary from a company name or trademark that are written in a distinctive form, to abstract logos that are unrelated to the name of the company (Hem and Iversen, 2004). de Chernatony and Riley (1998) goes on saying that a logo is a quality assurance for the consumers, as it identifies and differentiates a brand through a visual identity and a name. Perfection Hotels logo (Appendix 6, Figure 2) is based on the company name. The perfect position and distance between the circles in the background convey the message that Perfect Hotels deliver a quality experience, providing that little extra service. This is also shown in their positioning statement, "the difference between ordinary and extraordinary is that little extra". The colours used is meant to differentiate the brand from other luxury brands, and make potential consumers remember Perfection Hotels.
Kotler (2003, p.202) defines positioning as "an act of designing the company's offering and image to occupy a distinctive place in the target market's mind". There are three main elements in positioning, that is create an image, communicate customer benefits, and differentiate a brand from competitors (Morrison, 2002). Jobber and Fahy (2003) states that a position map is a visual representation of a brand and its competitors using different dimensions that are of importance to potential guests, and it is a useful tool for determining the position of a brand in the marketplace. Perfection Hotels used price and size of the hotels as factors when developing a position map to see how they were positioned in relation to their competitors (Appendix 7, Figure 1). In terms of size, Perfection Hotels obtain a position in the middle with an average of 348 rooms. However, with a standard price of CAD 319 they are positioned in the top three, and only Four Seasons and Hyatt charge their customers a higher price.
When Perfection Hotels move into the Canadian market, the hotel group must deal with a fundamental strategic decision on whether to standardise the marketing mix, or to adjust it to fit the local market (Vrontis and Kitchen, 2005). Marketing standardisation refers to the degree of similarity in marketing strategies between the home and host country (Boddewyn and Grosse, 1995). On the other hand, adaptation is about adjusting the product/sevice to environmental conditions (Webster, in Medina and Duffy, 1998).
Levitt (1983) argues that many of the differences between countries has decreased as a result of the globalisation of markets. According to Roper (2005), his underlying message was that companies operating internationally should offer standardised products that are functional, reliable and low priced. Buzzell (1968) highlighted the benefits of a standardised marketing, arguing that it would provide significant cost savings, more consistency with customers, improved planning and control, as well as an opportunity to exploit good ideas. He defined standardisation in a literal sense as "the offering of identical product lines at identical prices through identical distribution systems, supported by identical promotional programs" (p.103).
On the other hand, advocates of adaptation such as Usunier and Lee (2005) indicate difficulties in using a standardised approach, and argues that cultural differences between nations will be a big obstacle. There are differences in customer needs and preferences, level of competition, and business environment, and the big issue is therefore how to tailor the marketing mix to fit the different markets (Quelch and Hoff, 1986). Most companies do not exclusively standardise or adapt their marketing mix strategy (Vrontis in Usuiner and Lee, 2005), and instead, through the coordination of dispersed activities, they might standardise and adapt at the same time (Porter, 1986). As Usunier and Lee (2005, p. 248) pointed out, the message is; "standardise as much as feasible and customise as much as needed".
Expanding internationally, Perfection Hotels is faced with a business environment quite similar to home. The target market is also the same, therefore most of the marketing mix should standardised, except from the marketing communication element.
To find suitble locations for the first hotel, a population of minimum 750,000 and proximity to a major airport should be used as key selection criteria. Four cities, Toronto, Montreal, Calgary, and Ottawa, meet these specifications. However, Toronto is the most suitable. With a population of 2,5 million, the city is one of the most accessible cities in North America. 5 million people in Canada are in the range of less than one hour drive, and 60% of the US population is less than a 90 minute flight away. Lester B. Pearson International Airport in Toronto is also the main gateway to Canada (). Toronto is located in Ontario, the most visited province among the US population, and also Canadas most populous region with one-third of the total population (Loverseed, 2003). All these factors make Toronto the most suitable location for the first hotel in Perfection Hotels expansion plans. However, with success in Toronto, the brand will also be rolled out to the other cities that reached the specified selection criteria.
The product that Perfection Hotels offer is standardised. Every property has at least two restaurants, as well as banqueting services. Serving the business market in particular, all the hotels also have a number of meeting rooms in different sizes. Wireless, high speed internet, as well as computers, scanners, printers, and audiovisual equipment is also available, as well as limousine services to the financial district. Throughout the stylish decorated hotels the athmosphere is relaxed, and rooms are spacious with quality beds, giving the guests a quality core product.
When it comes to distributing the product to consumers, Perfection Hotels should use internet and their home page as the main channel. However, bookings can also be directed to the hotel reservation centre in London. Global Distribution Systems (GDS's) is another key distribution channel, and in addition Perfection Hotels should strive to establish a good relationship with major business travel agents.
Perfection Hotels pricing strategy should also be standardised, using a cost-plus approach, which is setting prices to cover costs plus a predetermined profit (Harris, 1999). This will make the prices high, but the target markets are willing to pay a little extra the excellent product Perfection Hotels offer. However, competitor prices are also taken into consideration and followed closely, and since the prices has been just below the highest price level in the UK, this should also be the case in Canada.
The only element of the marketing mix that should be adopted to fit the diversion in the Canadian market is marketing communication. As mentioned earlier, 25% of the population are of French origin, most of who are living in Quebec. They tend to be very sensitive to the use of their preferred language, as well as having a slightly different view of advertising and the use of symboles than the people of British origin. They also use TV as an information channel to a higher degree (Jarvis and Thomson, 1995). Thus, Perfection Hotels should adapt the advertising strategy in both the British and French part of the population. This advertising should be delivered through TV-commercials (more emphasized in Quebec), selected magazines, and billboards at major airports in Canada and the US, preferably in business lounges. Perfection Hotels should also use sales promotion in form of frequent guest award to gain relationships with the guests, increasing the opportunity for repeat business. Personal selling is the final part of the promotion mix, and should be used to contact the travel representatives for major Canadian and US corporations, trying to establish long-term relationships and be preferred as the number one choice for their travelling employees.
Based on the different sections in this report, there is no doubt that Perfection Hotels should go through with the plans of expanding their luxury hotel business into the Canadian market. The Canadian business is very much similar to the one prevailing in the UK, providing no major barriers. However, the ethnic diversion betweeen the British and French part of the population must be taken into consideration. There is also an established demand for luxury hotel services in the business and leisure market, both domestic and internationally through the US market. On the other hand, competition is quite fierce, but this applies to the hospitality industry in general, and not only to Canada. All factors taken into consideration, Canada is an attractive market for Perfection Hotels expansion plans, and there is a good potential for making profits.
There are certain limitations in this report. First of all, most of the statistics are collected from various internet sources. These statistics are an essential part of the discussions, and the base for many of the conclusions made throughout the report. There is, however, no guarantee that these sources are accurate or valid. Canadian government web sites can usually be trusted in terms of validity of the content, but since many other internet sources have been used, it must be recognized that some of the statistics in this report, and conclusions based upon the statistics, might not be accurate.
This report is also based upon a number of journal articles and books. It is trusted that most of the conclusions made, as well as the information provided, by the authors are valid. However, some of that information might not be 100% reliable. Also, the conclusions drawn by these authors might have been biased and triggered by their own opinions instead of the facts, which again make them unreliable. However, whereas internet sources are more likely to be unreliable, most journal articles and books are considered as very reliable sources.