Liverpool is the European City of Culture for 2008, its tourism value and volume are expected to increase through the Liverpool and Merseyside regeneration projects. Premier Lodge Hotel, as part of the Premier Travel Inn (a merge company of Premier Lodge and Travel Inn), owned by Whitbread PLC is part of the stakeholder within the Liverpool tourism industry, located in Albert Dock, which is likely to have impacts from this event.
In order to access the role and opportunities for Premier Lodge to develop their activity to take advantage of the opportunities offered by Capital of Culture designation, it is important to analysis their internal resource and capability, and its competitive and external environment, before evaluate their effectiveness of strategic management.
The Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, it define sustainable tourism as "the optimal use of natural and cultural resources for national development on an equitable and self sustaining basis to government, the private sector and communities." and the United Nations of Environment Program, it says: "Sustainability, has three interconnected aspects: environmental, socio-culture and economic"
The context of sustainable tourism business is to concern with the macro/external environment of Premier Lodge. It is important to Premier Lodge as it is not just to contribute with Liverpool local community benefits, but also identify the factors for Premier Lodge to develop substantially and maintain growth beyond 2008.
Strategically, based on the SWOT and five forces analysis, and the concern with sustainable tourism business, it is essential for Premier Lodge to develop a strategy focus on using its resources and capaibilities in order to take the best advantage from the 08 project and become competitive - "the concentration of resources and effect upon those factors capable of providing the greatest competitive leverage" (Brotherton and Shaw, 1996) With the purpose of become successful and competitive, a tactial planning focus on the short-term actions and a strategic planning focus on the long-term objectives are important for Premier Lodge to implement.
Premier Lodge has strong resource and capability to develop its activities, through its human resource and quality management, in order to differentiate and gain competitive advantage from its rivals and therefore minimise the negative impacts.
Develop action plan with continue market research may ensure Premier Lodge grow substantially and maintain its competitive advantage. Specifically, Premier Lodge needs to implement, monitor and control with its tactical and strategic plan, in order to maximise its benefits and minimise its effects.
Sum of all, the critical success factors for Premier Lodge may be:
By achieving the above critical success factors, Premier Lodge is more likely to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the Capital of Culture designation. By relating to sustainable tourism business context, Premier Lodge may minimise the negative impacts arise from the '08' designation.