Oxford and Bath are both international tourist destinations in Britain and have the same tourism concepts. Oxford and Bath are the historical cities with heritages and Georgian architectures. Oxford has hundreds years university history, which is the main attraction to the tourists. Similarly, Bath has hundreds years Roman history, which is very well-known with the 'Roman Bath' concept to the tourists.
As these two tourism destinations have the similar background tourism concepts, the facilities that they have to offer the tourists; their respective markets and the way they are manages as tourism destinations may be more or less the same. This report is going to compare and analysis the above aspects of both tourism destinations.
Sum of all, the main tourists visit Oxford and Bath are overseas visitors, which their respective market would be International rather than domestic. The average length that tourists stay in Bath is 6 days but only 2.5 days in Oxford, however, the value that the tourists spend in Oxford is more than in Bath.
The both tourism destinations have the same sort of facilities offering to the tourists. The main similarities are the coach tour, the historical cities attractions and the range of accommodations providing. However, there are more choices of different cultural restaurants in Bath than in Oxford.
The tourism industry has positive impacts on Oxford and Bath local economy and society, as the local people gain benefits from it. Even though, there are some negative influences on the physical environment, such as too much traffic and over-crowed in the cities. However, the local council of Oxford and Bath did a lot of policies to minimise the harmful impacts of tourism on the local society, such as transport policy to reduce traffic in the cities and promote walking tours to the tourists.
Therefore, Oxford and Bath have the similar management concepts and impact of tourism while they both have the similar tourism background to the tourists. However, the culture of these tourism destinations are difference, as Oxford has the historical university culture concept but Bath has the relaxing Roman culture concept, which are the different attraction points to attract the tourists, so that the effect on tourists expenses in both tourism destinations may be different.