The aims of the experiment are to investigate the distribution of the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase in three subcellular compartments, the nucleus, the cytosol and the mitochondria, isolated from a preparation of cells from rat liver. The enzyme succinate dehydrogenase is found in the mitochondrial membrane, and so was most prevalent in the mitochondrial fraction. The cystolic fraction contained the highest percentage of protein due to the cytoskeletal material usually found in the cystol.
Cells show a high degree of structure and organisation through the localisation of metabolic pathways and the related enzymes into distinct subcellular compartments. By disrupting the plasma membrane of the cell and separating the subcellular compartments it is possible to examine the metabolic pathways. Differential centrifugation is a common method for this separation procedure, which is known as fractionation. Successive centrifugations are carried out at increasing speeds, which pellets the larger particles first and smaller particles last, leaving cytosol as the supernatant. Typically around 90% of each fraction consists of one particular subcellular compartment.
The activity of succinate dehydrogenase acts as a marker for the location of the mitochondrial membrane where it is found. This enzyme catalyses the following reaction from the citric acid cycle.
Finding the subcellular location of any enzyme would have commercial applications as a prelude to purification of the enzyme, as only the fractions containing the highest amount of protein would be used.
The method followed was as described in the laboratory manual. For the determination of protein content of the liver homogenate fractions biorad was used to blank the spectrophotometer.
Figure 1 shows the percentage content of protein and enzyme in each fraction. Fractions N and M contained fairly small percentages of protein. Fraction S however, contained nearly 45% protein. Fractions N and S contained small percentages of enzyme, while fraction M contained around 85% enzyme. Figure 2 shows the specific activity of the protein in each fraction, which is the purity of the enzyme with respect to other proteins. Fraction M has by far the greatest specific activity value of the four fractions. This fact concurs with the fact that fraction M had a high percentage content of enzyme, as a high percentage content in turn means a lower content of other cell parts and so a relatively high purity of the enzyme. Fraction M was the mitochondrial fraction, as such, a high concentration of enzyme was expected in this fraction because in a cell succinate dehydrogenase is located within the inner mitochondrial membrane. Both figures show that fraction M was not entirely enzyme, and that the fractionation left each fraction contaminated with the other fractions. Fraction S was the cytosol fraction, this contained the largest percentage of protein. This is due to the contents of a cell's cytosol being cytoskeletal material such as keratin, actin and spectrin.