Macau - my hometown, this is where I come from. My parents are both Chinese but they used to lived and travelled around Europe before I born, so that I was infused with Western culture since I was a child. What I knew about Western culture when I was young was the way how the Western greet; such as a hug or a kiss, the enthusiasm of Western people and the basis Western table manner. The early age infusion of Western culture and the multicultural feature of Macau made me anxious to come to England for studying since 1998, that was the time of a big change in my life.
I still remember in my first leaving, all my good friends turned up in the airport but none of them was willing to give me a hug before I entered the immigration. Although I knew that they avoided that hug was to protect them not to cry, however, that's a shock for me! I wasn't supposed to be so upset but this refuse made me cried in the whole journey to England. According to Fail (1996), I had built a RAFT before my first leaving with my friends and family. My friends and teachers concerned about my leaving, and farewell parties were organised; I was exciting and curious about the English life and people which I would going to meet; but the avoidance of hug from my friends leaded to my depression when I was just about to leave them and worried to loss them.
As I used to study in a Chinese school since I educated, so that my English was very poor. As from Hofstede (2001) said that "Language is a major cause of cultural clashes", this reflected a huge problem for me to communicate with roommates and school staffs.
I remember one time I was on a job duty on emptying bins in boarding house in a early morning, as I wasn't totally awake so that I didn't smile to a sixth form leader when she talked to me. Then I was called to the office and got told by my housemistress because of my rudeness to the sixth form leader. I didn't explain to my housemistress about the reason, I just kept quiet when my housemistress told me off. This is because of my limited English speaking ability and I thought it's rude to argue with staffs. However, my housemistress got even more anger because of my quiet, this made me even shock and harder to get over my transition and accustomed to the strict boarding house life.
That is a culture difference issue where my errors in response of discourse and nonverbal behaviour (Wolfgang, 1979) leaded to misunderstanding from my housemistress. My low respond of discourse was due to my language problem, and my nonverbal behaviour of what Birdwhistell (1970) defined as 'Kinesics' was because of I assumed that I was respecting to my housemistress but she found it's being rude with no respond. This could link to the cultural value systems and communication problems to Greet Hofstede cultural dimensions of what Hofstede (2003) researched in power distance (PDI) and individualism (IDV).
I chose Hong Kong as my home culture and United Kingdom as my host culture for the comparison of Greet Hofstede cultural dimensions (2003); the reason I chose Hong Kong but not China is because Macau wasn't in the list of Hofstede research and the background and culture of Hong Kong is more similar and relevant to describe Macau.
In fig. 1 it shows the power distance is higher in Hong Kong than in United Kingdom; this confirms the reason why I kept quiet when my housemistress was speaking or telling me off, because respecting to seniors is important in my society. The lower individualism in Hong Kong means people in the society are born into extended families and collectives where everyone takes responsibility for fellow members of their group (Hofstede, 2003). This explains the reason of my passiveness to what I have been told. Whereas English people are more individualism, they take care and respond to themselves in which they may challenge to my housemistress if they were in my incident.
Additionally, I found my learning style was hard to adjust to the academic system, in which I experienced as what Hoff (1979) initiated the 'education shock'. In my opinion, the English classroom was noisy, activities were more than teaching in class, students not disrespect to teachers, etc., these made me feel so hard to learn and fit into the English academic environment. In my hometown, for instances; students are expected to respect and obey to teachers; we have to be quiet while the teacher is teaching and wait until he/she finishes then wave hands to ask questions; learning is very demanding through memorising rather than understanding. These differences leaded to an extend period of culture shock in the 'Acculturation curve' described by Hofstede (2001).
Nevertheless, life got better when I moved to another college for A-levels in which accelerated my 'Acculturation' stage, as I was more involved into the English culture. This is because it's a sixth form college, which I had more freedom and staffs were more like as a friend rather than a teachers or senior. That was the time I really started fitting and adjusting to the English culture, I made a lot of English friends and learned a lot about the English culture. This brought me finally in the 'stable state' (Hofstede, 2001) of being biculturally adapted.
I remember in one of my English friend's birthday party, I gave her a present and she unwrapped it straight away. That's surprised me where I found this was rude to unwrap a present in front of the person who gives it. This is an instance of the 'disconfirmed expectancies' (Helson, 1964), which says that 'any deviation from it is seen as greater than it really is' if thing happens is out of expectation. I expected my friend unwrapped her present after her party but her reaction disconfirmed my expectancy. Yet, I learned that my friend's reaction was to show her appreciation and it's a respect to me in her point of view.
During these 8 years studying in England, I found myself becoming multicultural and marginal, even I am not fully integrated into English culture. However, it is now my last year study in England and I will go back home after my education, this made me struggle and confuse of my identity. This final dilemma I experienced was the 'reentry shock' defined by Paige (1990), and from what Gullahorn and Gullahorn (1962) described in the "W curve"; also Adler (1991) believed "It involves facing previously familiar surroundings after living in a foreign country for a significant period of time", which it is as influential as culture shock
This has been proved during I went home in a holiday; I found myself act and think differently with my friends in my hometown. My best friend complicated about my change and started to find we are thinking in the same way no more. On the other hand, I found myself as a stranger in my hometown, this was really true when I have gone to university life while I needed to take the university bus to campus everyday. As it's the English custom to say 'thanks' to the bus driver when you get off a bus; or when you are waiting in the bus stop, you would smile to the others naturally. However, during the time I was home, I felt myself was silly of doing these. The bus driver might think that I was too-polite and people might think that I was strange. This could link to what Ross (1977) defines about the 'fundamental attribution error' of whom the bus drive or those people assumed me to think and act as they do.
This is not only the problem about marginalisation, but also my language problem to communicate in my hometown. Although the way people speak in my hometown is now a mixture of Chinese and some simple English words, due to the raise of use in English; some formal or traditional Chinese saying made me hard to understand. I felt that I am now stuck in the middle of nowhere, while my English is not expert enough and my Chinese is getting worse. This increases my worries about the concern of my return dilemma, such as re-adjusting to my home culture, the fit of my skills I acquired in UK and my language problem.
From the study of Hogen (1996) found that reentry problems arise such as my feeling, my adjustment towards my home culture, social, linguistic & communication, national and professional. This is which I need to keep update with what happens in my hometown, and to plan and prepare for my reentry ahead before my return; in order to help with my transition of my reentry.
In these years of studying in England, I have not only learnt the academic knowledge but also the cross-culture of England and Macau. I have learnt that although culture difference took place in my encounters, but my personality and the difference of 'terminal values on personal focus' (Barnlund, 1988) were also an issue. For instance, it is important to express myself to communicate with others to increase the interpersonal understanding, in order to prevent misunderstanding. It enables me to understand being active in the society is important, especially in my study on Business management.
Furthermore, I found myself being more critical and analytic thinking in the English education system. This is because the English system is more practical learning rather than just 'sit in the classroom and listen to the teacher' as in my hometown, this enhance my understanding on learning new knowledge. In particular, the way of learning in England is actually understanding and 'learn'; but the way of learning in my hometown was just 'memorising' the answer without actually understanding it. Additionally, due to the lower power distance and higher individualism in England, students have more chance to share and exchange their opinions and experiences to each other, hence develop practical understanding.
Being critically and analytic thinking leads to a greater personal change of my beliefs, values and behavioural norms; this have been shown in the holiday when I was home. The lower power distance of English people means more convenience and hence being friendly to others. My adoption of English culture in this case enabled me to learn the cross-cultural communication skill and a guideline to meet and make friends with new people, in not just different nationalities but also different community groups. For instance, I learnt that a same behaviour might not mean the same in different culture group. In order to communicate cross-culturally, I need to be friendly, appreciate and respect to what people act although our cultures are different. This may reduce disconfirmed expectancies (Helson, 1964) or fundamental attribution error (Ross, 1977). Understanding the background or history of a culture is a path to avoid misunderstanding or culture conflict, which is related to the formation of cultural values (Barnlund, 1988); and to a traditional Chinese saying of "communication requires understanding, also in a reverse way".
'International students participate actively and adapt well but then face a more difficult reentry adjustment process...one aspect of the reentry adjustment phenomenon is coming to grips with the personal changes that have occurred while abroad' (Paige, 1990). The change or learning I have experienced in England made me face another culture shock on my reentry, hence I have to learn from what I have experienced to shorten my future culture shock period. Therefore, I learnt to build a RAFT before I leave England, being flexible to adjust myself back to my own culture, together with my cross-cultural communication skills that I have learnt, and with what Hogan (1996) suggests about the reentry transition skills and knowledge.
Although communication skill is a hard subject to learn, especially in cross-cultural communication while the beliefs, values and languages are different; I believe the more understanding and grips about the background of a culture, the easier we can communicate with the others.