Liverpool's visitor volume is estimated to increase with the status of the winner of European Capital of Culture 2008 and also through the regeneration projects. For this reason, it is fundamental to review Liverpool as a tourist destination with the aim of identifying its opportunities to attract more visitors and meet the demand.
The stakeholders have different perspectives and interactions in the provision of tourism at Liverpool. Also, they have different involvement. As for the local government in Liverpool, it acts as a key player in the tourism industry since the partnerships intend to promote Liverpool to become a well-known city, which leads high interest of the industry's performance.
Besides, the local communities and employees including local people and businesses are the other parties that involve in Liverpool tourism industry. Local businesses need to be kept satisfied because they may also the investors/suppliers or could be employees participating in the tourism industry. Furthermore, investors are also the key player in the industry. They act as the suppliers to provide services or product with the tourist.
In order to increase the volume and value of tourism to Liverpool, stakeholders in Liverpool should set some objectives. For example, Liverpool should be open to other foreign countries because the international tourism market offers a number of opportunities for the city to create the huge benefit. What is more, getting more visitors from overseas, Liverpool is trying to give them special offers such as a wide range of restaurant. It is also effective that reflects placing in attractions have interpretations for other major languages so that they do not have language problems. Moreover, investors of the attractions should provide a wide range of facilities and arrangement to every people such as children, the elders, disabled people and family.
As Liverpool is a winner of European Capital of Culture 2008, it should possess some competences. However, those competences are not necessarily making Liverpool to be succeeded, although European Capital of Culture 2008 has created ideal opportunities for enhancing cooperation among its key stakeholders. In order to analyse the effectiveness of Liverpool model, benchmarking may be a useful tool to compare with Greenwich (because it has a lot of similarities between Liverpool) and identify the opportunities for improvement. Owing to the failure of the Greenwich's plan, Liverpool has to make sure that the benefits of its designation and status are to be maximised. It should have a clear scope for developing a more integrated approach by increasing communication and cooperation.
With the aim of developing a sustainable tourism in Liverpool, changing the image of Liverpool is a really good idea. Stakeholders should make full use of their natural advantages such as the beautiful seaside. Here, there are new projects to create water parks instead of having green public parks followed by floating restaurants, cafe and hotels as Liverpool is a variable marine city.
With the status of the European City of Culture for 2008 and also through the regeneration projects, Liverpool's visitor volume is estimated to increase. Therefore it is essential to review Liverpool as a tourist destination with the aim of identifying its opportunities to attract more visitors and meet the demands.
This report covers the stakeholders and their interactions in Liverpool using theoretical models and also strategic response to problems which Liverpool has been facing based on observations and experience that we had in Liverpool.
The stakeholders map (Appendix 1) shows the stakeholders that involve in Liverpool tourism industry, indicating the relationships and interactions between the stakeholders. In order to identify the effectiveness of Liverpool model, a Power & Matrix Model (Appendix 2) may effectively illustrate the role of the stakeholders undertaken. Appendix 3 shows the Power & Interest Matrix of the stakeholders of Liverpool tourism industry.
There are public-private partnerships cooperating to carry out the regeneration and 'Liverpool 08' project, such as Liverpool Vision, City Focus and Mersey Partnership. These are all the partners of Liverpool local government. Local government acts as a key player in the tourism industry since the partnerships intend to promote Liverpool to become a well-known city, which leads high interest of the industry's performance. Additionally, it has the power to set regulations (such as legal system - disability regulation) and empower other stakeholders to provide services and products with the industry.
Other parties that involve in Liverpool tourism industry are the local communities and employees, which include local people and businesses. Local businesses need to be kept satisfied, because they may also the investors/suppliers or could be employees participating in the tourism industry.
If the number of tourists increases, local people are willing to spend money for starting or investing in a business such as restaurants because they can get more profit from the tourists
As Liverpool is a victor in the contest to be named European Capital of Culture 2008, it should possess some competences. However, those competences are not necessarily making Liverpool to be succeeded, although European Capital of Culture 2008 has created ideal opportunities for enhancing cooperation among its key stakeholders (As stated above). In order to analyse the effectiveness of Liverpool model, benchmarking may be a useful tool to compare with other tourist destinations and identify the opportunities for improvement.
As the other important service division, it is critically identified that Liverpool needs to improve accommodation and restaurant sectors which cover the development of human resource management too.
First of all, the capacity of the accommodation in Liverpool may need to be developed. It is believed that Liverpool could attract extra 1.7 million visitors during the 'Liverpool 08 project' (The Liverpool Culture Company Ltd, 2004c). Nevertheless, The Mersey Partnership shows the full list of accommodation available in Liverpool, but there are only 107 accommodations totally and this figure includes Bed and Breakfasts, hostels, campuses and guest houses. Actual hotel number in Liverpool is 62 (Visit Liverpool, 2004). However, it is not the ideal figure for the city which has potential to be one of the top tourist destinations with 'Liverpool 08' project.
Therefore, Liverpool should be able to increase its capacity to meet the huge demand of customers. It is also critically identified that Liverpool needs to improve accommodation and restaurant sectors and this covers the development of human resource management too.
As regards the service which they offer, the experience from the field trip describes a disaster which is actually happening in Liverpool now. It critically shows the lack of training and development of employees. In order to enhance this situation and succeed 'Liverpool 08' project, the human resource management sector has to put more effort. Employees need to understand working hospitality industry and what is more, practical training should be given. Practical training aims to increase the commitment of teams to rapid action and appropriate decision-making for customer needs. It would ensure that the superior quality of facilities and services and thus earn the loyalty of guests. For this reason, although it has minimal effort to this industry, education system is also important as another stakeholder, because higher education creates skilled employees.
As the important aspect which Liverpool should consider is redevelopment the image of Liverpool to achieve the sustainable tourism. In general, the image of Liverpool is quite negative. It is likely to describe a dangerous and miserable city due to the decline of the sipping industry which Liverpool used to heavily depend on.
However, Liverpool has enough resources to sell the city with a positive image, so it just has to find an effective way to take advantage of those. The Beatles and Albert Dock are all fantastic and great opportunities. Here, there are new projects to create water parks instead of having green public parks followed by floating restaurants, cafe and hotels (Liverpool Vision, 2004) as Liverpool is a variable marine city.
In addition, Liverpool has taken other actions to be friendly to visitors by placing sings and maps on the street which show the direction to major attractions. It is also certain that in order to achieve this, local communities give considerable supports to the city making nice atmosphere.
With the purpose of the sustainable tourism, Liverpool should have long term development plans. According to Liverpool Vision (2004), there is a project of Liverpool city having a large scale conference facility. It is a great opportunity to demonstrate Liverpool as a new image of popular conference destination. It possibly encourages Liverpool's tourism to be sustainable. In other words, this scheme ensures that Liverpool can generate further benefit in long term even after the European City of Culture for 2008.
As the UK's next European Capital of Culture, Liverpool will see its profile rise. It intends to boost the tourism industry by increasing the amount of tourists and adding value of tourism to Liverpool. Since Liverpool was ever one of Britain's poorest cities, the re-imaging is the prior thing to implement. By undertaking the regeneration project, understanding the stakeholders within the tourism industry in Liverpool is the crucial factor need to be considered. The authorities have to put all the stakeholders together and make them cooperate with each other so as to make the industry succeeded. Subsequently, they have to plan for the redevelopment strategically and thoughtfully in each of the sectors in the tourism industry in Liverpool and response to the problems immediately. After putting all into action, the tourism industry in Liverpool must have a great opportunity in European Capital of Culture 2008.