As a result of terrorism, world health scares and war, the air transport industry has been re-shaped almost beyond recognition. Additionally, the impressive achievements of the low-cost airline operators lead some other airline operators suffer from these challenges. "In 2003, international tourism lived through another exceptionally difficult year in which three negative factors came together: the Iraq conflict, SARS and a persistently weak economy," "The Iraq conflict and the high level of uncertainty leading up to it depressed worldwide travel in the first quarter of the year. The unexpected outbreak of SARS brought the steady growth of Asia and the Pacific temporarily to an abrupt halt, causing many destinations in the region to welcome less than half of their usual number of arrivals in April and May." (News Releases, WTO, 27 th January, 2004) Additionally, "China increased its precautions against the twin health threats of Sars and bird flu yesterday as it entered its peak travel period ahead of the Lunar New Year."(Western Mail, Cardiff, 19 th January, 2004)
All these threats leaned to a downturn in the whole world tourism sectors. All the tourism sectors were suffered in 2003, hopefully it will be recovered in 2004. The transport industry seems the most affected tourism sector, this is because lack of consumer confidence on travel because of the world threats.
Due to the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001, the world transport industry faced a sharp sales drop down since then. It is still struggling to recover from the result of the terrorist attacks. Additionally, the train attack in Madrid on the 11 th March 2004 has raised fears for consumers' confidence on travel.
From the international tourist arrivals 2003 graph shown above, Asia and The Pacific had a huge change over 2003, it dropped sharply since February 2003 due to the impact of the unexpected SARS disease. Africa and Middle East were the only regions which had increase number of tourist arrivals and recovered quickly along 2003. Europe had a slightly movement along the 2003, which resulted a zero growth compare to 2002. In Americas, it had been a negative growth over the first two quarters in 2003, but had recovered to slightly percentage changed compare to 2002.
"For tourism these abrupt changes of conditions resulted not so much in a decrease in overall volume but, above all, shifts in demand towards trips to familiar destinations closer to home by car, coach or train instead of plane." (WTO World Tourism Barometer, Vol. 1, 1 st June 2003) From this statement could shows that consumers are still losing confidence on traveling by plane, but instead the other transports. This shows that the air transports industry are still struggles to recover, however leans to the other transportations grow, such as trains, coaches, car hire and ferries.
The world economy and tourism has a direct impact on each other, weak economy means less national income and therefore disposable income from consumers spend on traveling.
From the growth of GDP graph above, it forecasts that the world economy in 2004 will have about 4% growth. This indicates that world economy is starting to recover in 2004. From the business' point of view, economy starts to recover may effect a decrease in unemployment, businesses and invertors carry forward investment and therefore more borrowing, so that rise in demand. Also, interest rate is likely to be rise and therefore affect rise in exchange rate.
As the unemployment level is likely to decrease and businesses or invertors may carry forward their investment, these may lean to a growth in the transport industry due to the businessmen are likely to travel around. On the other hand, a recovery in economy may lean to raise in exchange rate. Exchange rate is also an element for tourists to depend upon whether travel or not. A strong currency makes the own country less attractive in the tourism point of view.
The following graph is the exchange rate of ECU/Euro against US dollar. Since 2002, the Euro has been introduced; the rate of exchange was rising since then. High exchange rate of Euro may result less competitive to the other countries for tourists to travel to the EU. However, strong Euro may encourage tourists travel from the EU to other countries, such as America and Asia. Therefore, this may lean to growth in air transport industry.
For the airline sub-sector of tourism, it is still suffer to recover. This is due to: a) 11 th September, b) consumers are still losing confidence on traveling by air, c) high competitive segment of low-cost airline.
"On the down side, the effects of 11 September 2001 cost the global airline industry more than $3 billion in 2002 collectively. This was due to a reduction of income from the direct loss of traffic as well as the costs of new security measures to try and prevent any repetition of 11 September 2001." And "The long-expected war in Iraq that began in March 2003, almost immediately had a severe effect on world air transport, with the 31-member Association of European Airlines (AEA) reporting immediate overall international passenger traffic losses of 12.3%." (Airlines - UK - June 2003, Mintel Market Report). This shows that consumers are fear from the terrorist attack and effect airline sector directly.
Apart from the political factors, the other factor that directly affects the air transport industry is the social factors of SARS virus in Asia and Canada. This directly affected flights between Canada, China and Hong Kong and cause a serious sales drop between global airline companies.
However, as the economy start to recover, consumers get wealthier and they can afford to travel further and more often. Additionally, due to the high exchange rate of Euro, this leans to "Those making non-EU journeys grew by 19 per cent and passenger numbers on international routes increased by 21.3 per cent." (Birmingham Post, Birmingham (UK): Apr 14, 2004) Even though, according to the ICAO scheduled passenger traffic forecast, the worldwide air travel industry and passengers' confidence should start to be recovered. From this forecast, the Europe seems be the most favorable region. This is possibly due to the "Domestic and European scheduled traffic performed well for the year, up 4.8 per cent and 8.4 per cent respectively, as the boom in low-cost travel continued." (Birmingham Post, Birmingham (UK), 14 th April 2004)
Low-cost airline runs successful over the years in Europe, and now also within the US and Asia Pacific. More passengers now prefer to travel by the low-cost airline rather than other transports, such as coach or train. This is possibly due to the cheap air flight and time consuming. The following is an investigation on airline vs. train journey, both journeys could be booked online and the date and destination are the same. From the selections, it shows that the cheapest fare traveling to Paris is still more expensive than travel by air. The time spend on train is about 4 hours where by plane is about 2 hours. Therefore, low-cost airlines could simulate the air travel industry and bring it to the recovery stage.
Virgin Atlantic was created in the early 80s, and it now becomes the second largest long-haul international airline operating services out of London's Heathrow and Gatwick Airports to 22 destinations all over the world.
However, according to the passenger number and the profit earned by Virgin Atlantic, the impacts from the world threats applied on Virgin Atlantic as well. The passengers number boost to 4.3 millions in the millennium, but fall down to 4.1 millions and 4 millions in 2001 and 2002 respectively. According to the transport sector's and airline sub-sector's trend, sales will start to recover in 2004.
Additionally, Virgin Atlantic focus on the innovation on aircraft and improving the service provided to customers. This may bring Virgin Atlantic focus on the Class AB customers segment and increase profit, due to "Virgin sees start of business class recovery" and "The business travel segment of the market has been hardest hit during the three-year crisis that has engulfed the global aviation industry and caused record airline losses." (Financial Times. London: Nov 4, 2003. pg. 1)
However, due to new low-cost airline entrants are now in the industry, "IATA itself has noted that 'this is not a temporary phenomenon and it will continue to challenge the full-service carriers" (Airlines - UK - June 2003, Mintel Market Report). Therefore, it may cause Virgin Atlantic lose the competitive edge in the economy class segment.
Even though, low-cost airlines are focus on the short-haul journey, it is still cannot be competitive in the long-haul market. Virgin Atlantic is providing long-haul journey, which may reduce threats from the low-cost airlines. In addition, Virgin Atlantic launched new routes to Australia, Cuba and the Bahamas, and will increase services on current destinations. This may bring Virgin Atlantic to increase sales in the global market.
As the 11 th September and the Iraq conflict have been claimed down, the world economy start to recover, the health scared issues are under control, passengers start to be confidence on traveling around. This may not just bring the tourism industry to recovery, and also the transport sector, as traveling around requires transportation. Apart from this, airline sub-sector also start to recover due to the launch of low-cost airline. The operator of Virgin Atlantic may also increase profit from the long-haul journey and high quality of service provided for passengers.
According to the Tourism 2020 Vision is the World Tourism Organization's long-term forecast and assessment of the development of tourism up to the first 20 years of the new millennium, it forecast that the international tourist arrivals will continue to increase, and it will possibly has about 1.6bn tourist arrivals in 2020. This forecast shows the world tourism industry is going to grow in the future.