This essay starts off with a brief introduction of electronic distribution channels presented in the relevant literature, followed by the presentation of the effects of internet on both tourism organizations and customers. Then goes on to discuss a designed international tourism package taken by chosen customers representing specific market segment .Included here are evaluation of the three www distribution channels by use of relevant academic frameworks. The final part is the recommendation to involved organizations by linking research findings to literature with a look on tourist consumer behavior on the Web.
Information is the life-blood of tourism and so technology is fundamental to the ability of the industry to operate (Cooper, 2005) .The surge of Internet use and availability has been phenomenal in recent years and has substantially affected virtually all sectors of tourism industry (Christou & Kassianidis 2002). The tourism and travel industries were particularly affected by these developments in the way organizations distributed their tourism products in the marketplace (Buhalis, Tjoa, & Jafari, 1998; Poon, 1993). Before exploring effects of new electronic distribution channels like internet on different players in marketplace, it is of great importance to take a look at how traditional electronic distribution channels work.
A distribution channel is "any organized and serviced system, paid for out of marketing budgets and created or utilized to provide convenient points of sales and /or access to consumers, away from the location of production and consumption " (Middleton ,2001:292). The traditional distribution channels in tourism normally include the direct one in which principals, such as airlines, hotels and attractions directly sell their products and services to consumers and the indirect one in which intermediaries are used to provide travel information and sell travel products to consumers (O'Connor, 1999). Middleton (2001) defined intermediaries as "any cooperate organization between principal and final consumer that facilitates purchases, the transfer of title to the buyer and sales revenue to the principal" (Middleton, 2001:293). Specifically the travel distribution role has been performed by three intermediaries, travel agencies (retailers), tour operators (wholesalers) and travel agencies (retailers) based in destination (Buhalis & Laws, 2001). Tour operators (aggregator) are intermediaries between suppliers and either travel agents or consumers. They purchase products and services from travel suppliers and package them into a product that they market to customer. (Inkpen, 1998). In this way aggregator builds relationship with customer and offers opportunity to purchase value package holiday (Buhalis, 2003). Travel agencies (integrator), on the other hand, are intermediaries between customer and they sell supplier's products and services to their customers and derive a commission for doing so (Inkpen, 1998). The traditional distribution channels were supported by a number of traditional electronic intermediaries (or traditional eTourism intermediaries) such as computer reservation systems (CRS) and global distribution systems (GDS) (Buhalis, 2003). Buhalis (2003) also introduced CRS and GDS as computerized systems that assist tourism enterprises with handling their inventories profitably and with facilitating the tourism products distribution.
The appearance of Internet has become a new sales and marketing distribution channel for tourism business and therefore its rapid development had a profound impact on both principals and travel intermediaries (Cooper, 2005; Buhalis, 2001; O'Conner, 1999; Inkpen, 1998). Tourism suppliers (particularly airline, car rental and hotel chains) took advantage of the new opportunities and developed their own websites which allows users to access directly their reservation systems. (Buhalis, 2003; Buhalis,2001 ; Sheldon, 1997).This included single supplier provisions, such as United Airlines (e.g. ), Avis (e.g. ) well as multi-supplier web pages that emerged to support airlines disintermediating travel agencies (e.g.  ).(Buhalis and Licata, 2001).The advantages for principles are great because internet , as a direct channel , can not only save labor cost but also save distribution cost by eliminating travel agent commission. (Sheldon, 1997; Buhalis, 2001, Buhalis, 2003, Cooper, 2005). With the development of internet, a number of web-based travel agencies also emerged (e.g.  ) while off-line agencies developed their on-line provision (e.g.  ). From the perspective of intermediaries, the rapid development of Internet offer both opportunities and threats to their existence (Sheldon, 1997; Buhalis, 2003; Cooper, 2005). On the one hand, most intermediaries actors realized the importance of using internet as a new media and quickly exploited the opportunities offered by internet and developed their online presence. Therefore they could quickly build complicated itineraries on line in accordance with specific need of customers by accessing into tourism suppliers' database, finding up-to-date schedules, prices and availability data. (inkpen, 1998).In addition to that, Sheldon(1997) proposed that the internet may provide travel agents with a business opportunity by enabling them to promote their products to a broader geographic market at a low cost. On the other hand, consumer access to travel database creates an inevitable threat to the existence of travel intermediaries as consumers can plan their trip and purchase online. (O'Conner, 1999) Moreover, intermediaries represents a considerable part in distribution cost and therefore it is understandable that the more players getting involved in a distribution channel, the more commissions and fees need to be paid and consequently increasing the price of the final product(Buhalis, 2003) .So the direct and intermediate contact between suppliers and customers can reduce the importance of travel agencies as middleman in the customer-agent-supplier network and consequently result in the disintermediation. (Buhalis, 1998) .However, Buhalis (2003) argued the travel intermediaries can remain their competiveness by enhancing their ability to "re-engineer" their core product and develop value-added services or final products. If intermediaries fail to do so, they will gradually loose their market share as more consumers will be purchasing tourism products directly from suppliers. So they need to identify their specific market segments and adopts different marketing strategy.
From perspective of customers, the internet provides access to transparent and comparable information on destinations, holiday packages , travel and lodging services as well as providing prices and availabilities .( Buhalis, 2003). Apart from that, development of Internet created experienced and knowledgeable "new" tourists seeking exceptional value for time and money (Cooper, 2005). As the number of Internet consumers continues to grow, it is important to learn more about them and the type of services they value the most (Buhalis, 2002).
The development of the Internet, electronic market also raised many new issues for branding. Horner and Swarbrooke (1996) defined branding as "a dynamic process of developing a name, term, sign, symbol, design or combination of these elements that is intended to identify the goods and services of a seller and differentiate them from those of competitors (Buhalis, 2003:167). On the one hand, the Internet provides a good opportunity for tourism organizations to promote their brand to a wider geographical area than any of their advertisement could reach (Buhalis, 2003). On the other hand, the internet has enabled new organizations to be developed and brought several new brands (Buhalis, 2003). Some of the prominent companies spent considerable amount of money establishing their online presence , hoping to capture a big market share of electronic market and therefore bringing more reservations and make profit . Expedia is a good example that has successfully builds its brand image in customers. McCole (2002) pointed out purchase behavior is more likely with branded (trustworthy) site .Therefore consideration should be given to identifying strategies for increasing consumer e-loyalty with brand website.
In spite of the rapid development and convenience of internet ,many barriers still exists for travel consumers which prevent them from purchasing travel via internet .One explanation for this phenomenon might be some consumer preferred the "human interface "and "personal advice" offered by travel agent (Lang , 2000).However, one of the biggest barriers, that has been well-documented in the literature was the lack of lack of security when booking via the internet, especially when it comes to credit card payments (Lang, 2000; Shelton, 1997). Although advanced encryption techniques are applied to protect the online purchase, most prospective customers still reluctant to give their credit-card details on internet .Therefore transaction security over the Internet remain a big concern to online travel companies and encryption systems need to be applied to protect on-line transaction security to minimize problems such as personal information leakage, online fraud, and so forth (Buhalis, 2003).
In addition to above possible barriers, Weber & Roehl (1999) pointed out the following concerns: technical difficulties and no assessment of product quality and privacy issues. So a measure of Web service quality is important to successful marketing as it helps to estimate efficiencies of the Web (Kim and Lee, 2004) .Many studies have been conducted by researchers to identify the crucial factors of Web service quality that affect customer satisfaction .Hanna and Millar (1997) suggested that page design and information content as two important factors . They also pointed out that every Website should keep Web information current and respond to customer information enquiries in a timely manner. In addition to that, as researchers found that website features is crucial for e-customer's information search behavior and purchase decision , marketers should pay attention to information content such as "the activities on the trip, travel regions /cities , sightseeing , maps ,special events/festivals, and reservation in order to build a competitive website (Chu, 2001). Therefore tourism marketers should take all these concerns into consideration when they design their website for online marketing. Moreover, Kim and Lee (2004) pointed out providing high-quality information and user-friendly functions will help to build customer loyalty.
In addition, researchers studies also indicate that online information users are young, well-educated, and have well-paid occupations. (Bonn, Furr & Susskind, 1999). These findings present two facts: one is that the online customer's information search is still limited to a small segment of young travelers. So online marketers should have a better understanding of the characteristics of online travelers and their online search preference in order to expand the travel markets through the internet.
John and Mary, a young couple in their early thirties working in London. John is an interior designer and Mary is a school teacher .They have no kids, well-educated, financially secured and well-traveled. They love going to new places to experience different cultures whenever they have free time .They saw from TV that this year is Las Vegas's 100 th birthday and the city is set to celebrate in style .Their friends, Graig and Shara, just came back from Las Vegas and described the city as "a purpose-built oasis of fun, dedicated simply for the pursuit of pleasure". So they decided to visit the amazing city and experience something new and exciting there. They have managed to arrange their annual leave in next February for an eight days trip to America. They fixed their budget on GBP1800/per person.
The world-famous Strip, Las Vegas, is a glittering neon wonderland of lavish hotels and casinos, theatres and shops, they naturally want to spend three nights there for sightseeing tour and exploring the city .Grand Canyon is the dreaming place for Mary and an excursion of a sightseeing flight over the Grand Canyon plus ground tour right at the South Rim of the Canyon is included in their stay. In addition to that, everybody's favorite "City by the Bay", San Francisco, remains one of most popular destinations in the United States and Mary want to pay a visit there. A San Francisco Bay Cruise will offer them an opportunity to sail under the magnificent Golden Gate Bridge and enjoy the festive lights adorning the Bay Bridge at night. So this excursion is definitely planned in their trip. In all, they are looking for a unique experience packed with fun, interest, excitement and a touch of glamour all the way in their trip to Las Vegas and San Francisco (Itinerary detail is shown in Appendix 1).
Punj and Staeline (1983) suggested that once a consumer recognized a need for some consumption activity, he is motivated to carry an information search to improve the quality of purchase outcomes (Cited from Oorni, 2004). However, information search behavior and tourist demographic characteristics are closely related (Jang, 2004).Researches indicated that experienced travelers rely heavily on internet to seek information, such as price and availability, as well as to be able to communicate their needs to tourism suppliers (Cooper, 2005). In the UK, Continental Research demonstrated that in 2003 the majority of 5.8 million adults who have used the web to buy airline tickets were in the 35-44 years' age range (Cooper, 2005).John and Mary belong to this category. They searched information from three different distribution channels, principal channel, aggregator channel and integrator channel and make a comparison of the information obtained from the three different distribution channels. Altogether they visited eight websites involved in the three distribution channels, integrator's channel and aggregator's channel and their findings are discussed from a customer's perspective.
Search process and price details are shown in Appendix 2.
As the website evaluation is a direct result of the customer's experience at a Website,
AID-10 Evaluation Framework is applied to evaluate the search process, effectiveness, booking and payment procedures, legal and security issues of the website according to John and Mary's experiences on searching information online. Eight websites of hotels, airlines, and car hire companies and intermediaries were examined following the 10 criteria using a 5-point rating scale. The 10 criteria includes: Ease of access, accessibility, navigation facilities, search capability, content quality, graphics/Images, Website layout, value-adding features, personalization/interactivity and online transactions. The detailed description of the rating criteria and evaluation results are shown in Appendix 3 and Appendix 4.
Three criteria, ease of access, accessibility, navigation and search capability attributed to the user friendless during the search process. The use of NetMechanic .com and Webxact .com allowed John and Mary to develop an accurate evaluation of the technical design aspects of each site. NetMechanic system conducts load time, bad links while Webxact test accessibility for each website. There are six websites satisfied the features of the ease of access category. They provided clear, simple, appropriate, and easy-to-remember domain names, good load time (less than 20 seconds) and easy to be found in a search engine. However, load time of Scenic's website is more than 40 seconds and two bad links were identified in blueandgoldfleet's website. Those websites that scored above 4 in navigation are easy to navigate and enables a visitor to freely click in and out of pages without causing confusion or distress. A home button is clearly available on every page, which makes it easy to find information without getting confused and lost .This also prevents the user from accidentally closing the browsers. Logically grouped links and the same navigation bar throughout the website helps to improve navigation .In addition to that, those websites have numerous internal and external links to further information. These sites scored 4 in search ability incorporated some form of online customer support, a site map or an internal site search engine .User friendliness also includes the ease of contact .What need to point out is all the eight websites provide direct telephone number, fax number and six websites also include their email address .
Two criteria, graphics/images and layout attributes to the achievement of site attractiveness. Specific features contributing to the overall site attractiveness are the layout, general aesthetics and appeal (AID Framework, Handout, and WEEK 9). Most sites were easy to read and provided access to information with standardized formats. However, blueandgoldfleet need improvement in this aspect. Those websites scored 4 all makes the artistic use of background imagery, pictures, color, text and sensible use of space. Seven sites are installed at least one kind of multi-media effect to attract customer .Expedia provided all three types of multi-media effects, sound, graphics and videos to offer customer a virtual tour of hotel room in their website . However, although stratosphere hotel Websites included photographs of the property and the guest room, it lacked virtual tours. Virtual tours to airplane and destinations are provided by United Airlines and Expedia respectively.
Website effectiveness was broken into three major components, that of Website content quality, value-adding features and personalization /interaction. With regard to website content quality , it consists of five items, accuracy of information, conciseness of information , currency of information , uniqueness of information and variety of travel information .Those websites scored above 4 all provide useful , timely and reliable information .However, none of the sites provided information on last updated date. Instead, six sites indicated the year the site were updated. The two hotel websites and Expedia provide room availability, room, rate and pictures of the hotel room. Transportation and direction are provided to help customer to find the hotel easily. Expedia even included an enlarged (can be zoomed) map and clear instructions from the airports and highway exits. Miyako Inn hotel and expedia also included a list of shops and attractions nearby .Along with content quality, content accuracy is important to provide reliable information to customers. Travelsphere, United Airlines and Expedia , Best Western Miyako Inn hotel all included a statement guaranteeing the provision of accurate information. In addition to that, Stratosphere hotel provides positive evidences, such as awards, testimonials to make the hotels more concrete for customers. In terms of unique features, most of sites incorporated value-added features characteristics of the tourism industry such as key factors (on location, currency, and climate, weather), maps, itineraries, news and media releases, and a photo gallery. Expedia, Best Western even provides a currency converter and a web-based contact form. Stratosphere hotel included electronic postcards, special offers, guest books and the use of Web cams to have a nice view of Las Vegas Strip. Personalization/ Interaction is another important feature to enhance website effectiveness. United airlines have advanced value-added features such as multi-language support, newsletter updates by email and mileage plus program. However, other websites only offer English support .The frequently asked questions (FAQ) feature was included in six websites .However, 3 sites situated this feature under "about us" ,"customer support" which would make it harder for customer to find .
Online transaction is a critical feature for customer to book travel products online as it involves both the booking and payment procedures and security issues .The search process found that all seven sites provided credit card transactions, while 2 sites included more than one method of transaction by e-mail, fax, or phone, in addition to credit card transactions. What need to pointed out here is not all products are bookable online in travelsphere due to complexity of some holidays. Basic information is required for online transaction. United airlines even offered meal choice and special request to take care of customer's needs in booking information form. All seven websites provide encryption or security certificates to ensure secure online transaction.
In addition to 10 criteria mentioned in AID framework, legal compliances is another criteria for website evaluation .The website were regarded as legally compliant based on how their copyright disclaimer, trademark, usage terms and privacy policies were displayed. All seven websites satisfied the criteria except Blueandgoldfleet .However, the copyright disclaimer made by scenic site is 2003 and need to be updated.
Consistent with literature review discussed earlier, John and Mary's website experience indicated that internet allows them to gather a plethora of Information experience and make comparison of same products from different distribution channels. On the other hand, Web allows travel suppliers to communicate with customers directly and this means that online travel intermediaries are not only entering competition with offline travel agencies, but also facing the competition from online travel suppliers. The implications of John and Mary's Website experience are discussed and the recommendations to principals and intermediaries are provided.
The price comparison in table 1 indicated that the price from hotel principal is higher than that offered by integrators. This proved research conducted by KPMG that it is cheaper to book through and intermediary than booking directly with hotel. (KPMG, 2004, Cited in Handout, Week 9). Integrator offer cost value by delivering less expensive than competitors. The price difference could be explained by the Merchant Model. The Merchant Model introduced the major integrators reserve (rather than buy) hotel room inventory with long-term contracts negotiated with hotel companies at fixed-lower-rates .Then integrator sell the rooms at rates below hotel advertised rates. Even integrator makes marginal profit on each transaction; it can make big profit by generating volume transactions. So the hotel Website did not originally provide customers with best rates. (O'Connor, 2003). Website offered customers a direct way to obtain travel price comparisons and make it easier for them to understand company's costs and weather profit margins are fair. Research showed travelers who only purchased from the internet rated price as an important selection criterion (Wolfe, et.al 2004). Consequently customers' purchases are driven by price and normally turn to the lowest price offer .The brand dilution model pointed out the principals having the highest control of price normally have the lowest brand dilution and vice versa. (Bowie, Paraskevas & Mitchell, 2005). As principals loose control of the price, they dilute their own brands and loose ownership of customer. So how to retain control of distribution/price and build customer's confidence in their brands became a big challenge for hotels. Consistent with literature review, building e-customer's loyalty is essential for hotel to regain market share. Offering "Guaranteed Best Rate may be a strategy to achieve such goal. Rudnitsky, CEO of Cedant's hotel group states "As the world's largest hotel franchisor, we are committed to ensuring our customers' trust and confidence in our brands. With the guaranteed best rates, our company will get the best deals as well as quick, convenient service through our branded website " (Cendent Corporation, 2002, Cited from Miller ,2004) Likewise, Best Western Miyako and stratosphere hotel can offer "Guaranteed Best Rate" at their hotel website to build e-commerce loyalty to their brand, thus avoiding their products from becoming a commodity . However, hotel company should bear in mind that GBR takes time to implement effectively and its effectiveness need further research. In addition to GBR, hotel website should give consideration to customer care and recognition as well as providing value-adding services to enhance customer satisfaction (Buhalis, 2003). Strasphere and Miyako Inn hotel need more improvement in this aspect. The improvements includes identification of the e-customer's return visits, emailing visitors regularly for special offers and establishing communication channel and offering additional information on the local area , events and attractions.
With regard to building e-customer loyalty, united airlines evaluated in this case are successful by interacting effectively with customers and providing personalized products. For example, it has launched a strategy to enable passengers to undertake a number of processes, including booking, ticketing, check-in and seat and meal selection from their computers. In addition to that, they offered mileage program to retain their regular fliers and their own brand. However, one problem with the website of united airline is it lack the immediate responses to acknowledge and confirm travelers' reservation and it improvement is required accordingly.
The impression of aggregator's website is the cheap price, but the products choice is comparatively limited. As discussed earlier in literature review, customers are able to acquire and build their own packages by accumulating individual elements on the internet. In addition, tourists have become increasingly demanding, requesting high-quality products and value for their time and money (Buhalis, 2003; Cooper, 2005). Therefore tour operators need to re-examine their core products and deliver innovative, personalized and competitive packages to meet different market .In order to address this issue, aggregator can arrange their package holidays by interest areas such as culture and arts activities, recreation and excursions, sporting activities aiming at different segment. The aggregator's website needs to learn more about customer's preference as well as to create their feedback thus providing customized interaction.
Perdue (2001) stated that the user's perception of the Website may be driven by such factors as ease of navigation and site accessibility. Online travel principals and intermediaries trying to attract more online purchases should emphasize their ability to provide navigational assistance and contact information. Kasavana (2002) also stated that a website design should appeal to largest number of users. So websites need to be user-friendly and easy-to navigate from customer's perspective. Therefore it is important for all travel organizations to provide a quick, efficient website experience. In accordance with this objective, scenic's website need to add a site map or index, a search engine facility to improve effectiveness of search process. Stratosphere's website needs to display the contact information clearly with a working link for e-mail address.
With regard to site attractiveness, the contrast between text, image, and background helped to build a good and favorable impression of the website. As Hanna and MiIlar (1997) stated that "a site that features the latest in Web page appearance will attract users purely for the effect." (Hanna and Millar, 1997:469).Murphy (1996b) stated Contrast between text, image, and background helped to build a good and favorable impression of the website (Murphy, 1996b). Expedia successfully applied a combination of sound, graphics and videos to offer customer a virtual tour of hotel room in their website. The application of multimedia in the Web design makes the search process a really positive experience. Therefore the time spent at a Website could be greatly increased if the site experience is a positive one for the user. (Hoffman and Novak , 1996; Cited in Douglas & Mills, 2004). Scenic and blueandfleet can apply this technology to display unique feature of their product in order to enhance site attractiveness. Generally, tourism organizations need to pay attention to site attractiveness in order not left behind by competitors.
As indicated in website evaluation outlined in appendix 4, all eight websites offered credit card transaction and provided advanced encryption techniques, such as SSL to secure transaction and protect customer's personal data. Literature review pointed out security was regarded as one of the major obstacles of the Web-based tansanction. (Buhalis, 2003) If online customers couldn't obtain a sense of security when they process sensitive personal information, they are not going to make the purchase (Madu & Madu, 2002, cited in Kim & Lee, 2004). Therefore both principals and intermediaries need to find out what factors make online customers perceive risk and improve their websites with findings. This study proved tourism organizations started to address to online security issues and take measures to overcome customer's concern for security problems. As encoding technology becomes more advanced and trusted in online market, the mechanism of securing data electronically shall be more routine(Buhalis, 2003).In addition to the technical measures required to secure customer's personal data, tourism organizations need to pay attention to trust in the sale and delivery of their products (Jang, 2004) . Hoffman and Novak (1998) supported the idea that trust plays a critical role in changing potential online customers into real purchaser(Cited in Jang, 2004). It is up to the tourism organizations to ensure security and build trust with customer's .All six websites except scenic and blueandgoldenfleet announced privacy policy in their websites guaranteeing confidentiality of customer's personal information. So scenic and bluegoldenfleet should contain the privacy policy in their website to gain customer's trust. Apart from privacy policy, tourism organizations should avoid the practices, such as hidden charges, and tricky promotions, which will damage their efforts of promoting trust to customers (Kim and Lee, 2004). Another recommendation for tourism organizations to build trust with online customers is to specify the last revised date of the website. None of the eight websites evaluated show this date on their website. Customers need assurance that the information is accurate and currently valid especially for room rate and room availability (Wei et al., 2001). So tourism organizations need to assure travelers the information on their Websites is current and accurate.
Another issue involved in reservation is although all the websites provided credit card transactions, only Expedia, Best western supported with a currency converter. From the point of view of providing personalized services, installation of currency converter as well as providing more language support is recommended.
With the increasing interest in electronic distribution channels, this study intended to investigate three different distribution channels from a customer's perspective. From the distribution channel eight websites involved in the three distribution channels were evaluated based on the criteria of AID Framework. The findings indicate that tourism organizations who trying to take market share should pay attention to website service quality as well as customer's needs.