This essay starts off with a brief introduction of cross-cultural behavior in tourism and specifically focuses the discussion on the Chinese tourists in Oxford. This part also identifies the number of Chinese tourist shall increase dramatically. Following is the presentation of a chosen consumer behavior model proposed by Mayo and Jarvis (1981) and theoretical discussion of its factors, especially culture and motivation factors. This model is used in the subsequent analysis of Chinese tourists' consumer behavior with the support of previous literature review and secondary data. Two factors of the model, cultural value and motivation, are analyzed and the implications for Oxford's Chinese tourism marketing strategies are drawn. The final part concludes that the knowledge of cultural influence on trip characteristics is of great importance to destination managers in Oxford specifically in selecting appropriate marketing strategies for this target market.
The past decades have witnessed a dramatic growth of the international tourism market and many people visit foreign destinations for various purposes. Traveler geographic origin, defined as "the nations where tourists who visit an area are permanently living" has for a long time been the main focus for market segmentation efforts (Flognfeldt, 1999:112). As Reid and Reid (1997) proposed that visitor characteristics and profiles must be found distinguishable by country of origin, so the knowledge of culture's influence on trip characteristics is of great importance to tourism marketers aiming at satisfying the needs and wants of international tourists.
With one fifth of the worlds' population, China has the greatest number of consumers in the world and has been recognized as the market with the greatest buying potential for the 21 st century. (Wang and Sheldon, 1995) In fact, the World Tourism Organization predicted that China will be the fourth largest outbound-tourist-generating country in the world by 2020 (WTO, 1997). Besides the huge population that China has (1.3 million), there are two other reasons for the predication. First, the increase of the disposable income of Chinese and secondly, the relaxation of outbound travel restrictions by the Chinese government (Wang and Sheldon, 1995). According to statistics of China National Tourism Administration (2004), China has become the biggest Asian nation in terms of outbound travelers, with the total number of outbound Chinese residents surpassing 13 million in the first half of the 2004 (www. Traveldailynews.com, 2005). The increase of outbound tourists indicates China's rapid economic growth and peoples' desire to see the world. From this point of view, China represents a potential important market for many countries, bearing in mind its population .Therefore it is likely to see the number of cross-cultural Chinese tourists shall increase dramatically in the future. With regard to UK, visits from China have more than doubled in the last five years to over 100,000 with spending rising 60%. The number is expected to increase as UK was officially approved as a destination for Chinese tourists. (www. xinhuanet.com, 2005). It is estimated that by 2010 there could be over 200,00 Chinese visitors in the UK and there is potential for China to be in Britain's top ten inbound tourism market by 2020 (Oxford July Tourism Newsletter, 2005). Focused on the historical city, Oxford, the understanding of Chinese visitor's behavioral and its relevance is important to the manager of a tourism organization here.
The influence of culture on travel has been well documented by many scholars. (Armstrong, Mok, Go and Chan, 1997; Pizam, Pine, Mok, and Shin, 1997). These studies reported that people from different culture have different preference and expectations. Reisinger and Turner (2003) also pointed out the national culture of different countries, such as values, norms or rules have a significant impact on tourist's behavior, experiences and holiday satisfaction. As a consequence, tourists representing different nationalities reveal unique differences in characteristics relating to tourism. One tourism product that satisfy the domestic tourist in a host country might not be regarded as satisfying for international tourists. If the tourism products or services do not adequately satisfy international tourists' needs and fail to address adequately their cultural value, tourism marketers need to adjust their product offerings (Reisinger and Turner, 2003). Therefore understanding the needs and wants of cross-cultural tourists is crucial to tourism manager of a destination.
Moutinho (1987) referred the consumer behavior as "the process of acquiring and organizing information in the direction of a purchase decision and of using and evaluating products and services" (Moutinho,1987: 5). In his theory, the process includes the stage of searching for information, purchasing, utilizing, and disposing of products and services. However, the tourist buying decision presents some unique aspects: the product or service customer brought cannot be measured and touched before the purchase and such purchase is planned through savings over a long period of time (Middleton, 2001). Therefore tourists buying decision is a process of serious and thorough consideration.
Mayo and Jarvis (1981) introduced a model focusing on the individual traveler's behavior from both a psychological and sociological perspective. In their opinion, the understanding of how individual travelers make decisions requires an "insight "into the psychological factors that influence their choices (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:19). In the following figure 1, Mayo and Jarvis illustrates that the travel decision-maker, in the center of the diagram, is affected by both internal and social, influences.
The internal psychological factors that influence travel behavior proposed by Mayo and Jarvis (1981) are (1) perception, (2) learning, (3) personality, (4) motives and (5) attitudes. Mayo and Jarvis referred to perception as "the process by which an individual selects, organizes, and interprets information to create a meaningful picture of the world ". Learning is "changes in an individual's behavior based on his experiences. Personality referes to "the patterns of behavior displayed by an individual, and to the mental structures that relate experience and behavior in an orderly way." Motives are described as "the internal energizing forces that direct a person's behavior toward the achievement of personal goals. Attitudes consist of "knowledge and positive or negative feelings about an object, an event, or another person" (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:19)
However, Mayo and Jarvis (1981) also mentioned these psychological factors don't work independently, travel decisions, thus are very much affected by forces outside the individual, and including the influences of other people .The forces that other people exert are called "social influence" (Mayo and Jarvis,1981:19). As figure 1 shows, these social influences can be grouped into four major areas "(1): role and family influence, (2) reference groups, (3) social classes, and (4) culture and subcultures" (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:20).
Cultural values are defined as "shared values, beliefs and norms that collectively distinguish a particular group of people from others" (Pizam et al., 1997:131).As discussed above, Mayo and Jarvis (1981) believed the culture in which a person lives has a significant impact on his or her leisure and travel behavior .In their opinion, the culture in which one lives can be viewed as" a large, impersonal reference group" (Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:250). Moreover, they proposed cultures can be classified in national terms, such as American and French Cultures. Reisinger and Turner shared same thought with Mayo and Jarvis .They pointed out the national culture of different countries, such as values, norms or rules have a significant impact on tourist's behavior, experiences and holiday satisfaction (Reisinger and Turner, 2003). Specifically , the cultural values might have influence on a person's relations with others, the way he perceive things, the services he want and the way he behaves as a customer . According to the literature reviewed, the following part discusses the cultural attributes of Chinese tourists with possible marketing implications for each attributes in the tourism industry in Oxford.
Why do people travel? This is not a simple question. Mayo and Jarvis (1981) believed the answers to the question depend on the individual and his cultural background .According to Mayo and Jarvis' theory, motivation is thought to be the "ultimate driving force that governing travel behavior "(Mayo and Jarvis, 1981:146).
A review of the motivation literature identified a number of factors that influence travel decisions.'Escape from the everyday environment', 'novelty', 'cultural experience', 'social interaction', and 'prestige ' motivation factors ( Kim and Prideaux, 2005:349) .However, the more important factors for traveling to foreign countries were "cultural experience" and "novelty seeking " (Kim & Prideaux, 2005:349 ) . Mayo and Jarvis (1981) even suggested the cultural motivations include the desire for knowledge of other countries - their music, art, folklore, dances, paintings and religion. The study conducted by Wang and Lau (2001) proved Hongkong Chinese lay emphasis on the novelty and authenticity of attractions .They have strong desire to taste local food and experience overseas environment and culture . It is clear that experiencing a different culture is a very important reason for Chinese to go on trips to foreign countries. In addition to that , Influenced by Confucian philosophy, Chinese have a tradition of valuing knowledge and culture (Bond and Hwang, 1987, Cited in Wong and Chung, 2003). As a famous historic city, the tradition and culture of Oxford should be an important addition to the tourist product and visitors' experiences of this area. The great appeal of Oxford to Chinese visitors is its history and culture .The university of Oxford, with its rich heritage of medieval buildings and the high reputation in the world, is a great appeal to Chinese tourists . The historic build environment, together with the traditions of university and colleges, creates an attractive physical environment and atmosphere. Tourism organization in Oxford can organize the educational college-visiting tours to enhance Chinese visitor's experience in the internationally renowned university. In addition to that, the themed presentation of Oxford Story offer Chinese tourists an opportunity to embark on the exciting "dark journey" which brings them to explore the historical world of the University and the city .Such tourist attractions with cultural theme or purpose are very popular among Chinese tourists .With regard to the museums in Oxford (such as Pitt-Rivers and Ashmolean), when marketing to Chinese tourists in pursuit of new experience and knowledge in overseas travel , they should focus on the culture and knowledge orientation of the trip .Meanwhile , in the light of Chinese tourists' demand for novelty and authenticity of attractions, cultural event with local residents will need to organized to provide them to observe and experience local culture and attractions. Alternatively, there will also be need for arranging specialist destination for Chinese tourist-----restaurants, exhibitions of links between Oxford and China.
With one-fifth of population in the world, China is regarded as the market with biggest buying potential in the 21 st Century. Moreover, there are two essential factors contributing to the continuing increase of China's outbound tourism: adequate income to be able to travel and official permission to do so .So it is reasonable to make the predication that Chinese overseas visitors are likely to increase in the future. As the famous historic city in UK, inevitably Oxford will be affected by this trend Therefore the growth of Chinese outbound tourism shall sparkle considerable interests of travel marketers into the unique behavior of Chinese consumers. As discussed above on the essay, the successful international marketing depends upon the understanding of the cultural backgrounds of various groups of international tourists. Therefore the understanding of the needs and wants of Chinese visitors is paramount to the Oxford destination managers aiming at this market share. Only in this way can the destination managers in Oxford joint together to make Oxford a preferred destination that offer high value, high satisfaction products to Chinese travelers .