This question relating to Anime fits in well with our theme of 'Japan at Play' and the field of anthropology. Play in Japan covers many aspects that we (westernised society) may not perceive as play, anime may be one of these. In anthropological terms it is important not to make assumptions and use definitions cross culturally as many words and terms mean different things, like this area of 'play'. Anime is the Japanese meaning for animation, and is classed as a passive form of play in this culture. We may not class it as play, but do classify it as a relaxing activity.
Anime is a big part of the Japanese culture and ranges from silly ideas to very serious ones, and is not necessarily intended for any specific age group. It is often related to or a reproduction of Manga (Japanese comic books) which is also a very popular interest in this culture. Anime stands out from western animation due to its stylized, colorful images and vibrant characters. (Wikipedia website) (See picture: 'Full Metal Panic' cartoon from ).
I am focusing on female characters as Japanese anime has a unique and contrasting way of portraying woman compared to say English or American animation/ films (which I will be discussing). (Martinez,1998)
I am going to base the body of the discussion on the film 'Spirited Away' directed by Hayao Miyazaki but will draw on other anime examples also.
From personal experience, it is clear that hero's and the strongest characters in western cartoons, action programmes and movies are predominantly played by males. A few examples may include: Sleeping Beauty, Cinderella, Popeye, H-man, Bananaman, The A Team, Spiderman, Superman and Batman, just to point out a few!.
These examples either show the male characters as the heroin, saviour, strong and/or courageous. They may be saving or fighting for a vulnerable women (ie. Popeye with Olive, Cinderella and her prince or Superman and Loius Lane), or they might be fighting for their society (i.e Batman and Bananaman), others work in a solely male group or gang (like The A Team). However in Japanese anime " Women are just as likely to play the Hero as the man" (Levi 1996, p115). Levi also points out that even if they aren't the 'heroin' or 'strongest' character, they don't tend to blend into the background, which may be seen in western animation. (Levi, 1996, p116).
Even the male Japanese Super heroes aren't the manliest characters. Tom Gill has picked up on and questioned the masculinity of Japanese 'Ultraman' (America's Superman). He points out that 'Ultraman' is a good fighter but hasn't got the over the top masculinity of 'Superman'. Gill has quoted 'Ultraman' as being "sexless and downright feminine" (Martinez, 1998, p35).
As you can see in the picture 'Ultraman' doesn't have the large biceps that 'Superman' has, instead he has a feminine figure, no sign of masculine genitalia and maybe even breasts!.
The reason I have brought up these points about male characters is to show that even the male Japanese characters aren't always that masculine. This leads me onto the female characters used in Japanese anime.
I think 'Spirited Away' is a good example to use for analysing female roles as it has a mix of characters and is not by all means a feminist film. Wrote by Hayao Miyazaki who has become internationally famous for his Manga/Anime creations. (Rodriguez, 2001). His film 'Spirited Away' won the Best Animated Feature in 2003, following a huge success of his previous film 'Princess Monoke'. (National Catholic reporter,2005).
The general story of 'Spirited Away' is of a young girl and her parents who are moving to a new place. They get lost on route and end up at (what they think is) an abandoned theme park, here her parents eat greedily at a restaurant and turn into pigs. The young girl (Chihiro) must work and make herself useful to survive here with all the spirits, talking animals and hybrids. She learns to value things and have respect. The film has a happy ending with her helping others and saving her parents, it is a very enchanting and gripping film.
The main character in the film is Chihiro, she is only ten and at the start of the film she seems vulnerable, sad and weak. She doesn't want to move and sulks in the back of the car, her flowers she is holding get damaged and she sobs some more. When they get lost at the entrance to the park she is scared and tries to stop her parents from going in, but she is helpless and ignored by her parents. Chihiro's character soon comes into a different light when her parents turn to pigs. She sees the spirits emerge and tries to escape until a young boy (Huku) approaches her and warns her she must get a job at the bathhouse and work hard to survive, after this she becomes strong and knows that to save herself and her parents she must be brave. She finds a job with Yubaba, a mean spirited old women who is in charge of everyone. After a few days Chihiro becomes the bravest and hardest working member at the bathhouse. She treats all the spirits and other workers the same, and doesn't judge people on their appearance. She doesn't take gold off one the guests- like all the other workers were, and shows there is more to life than tangible products. She doesn't doubt anyone and helps those that do bad things, and she goes to extremes (even putting her own life at risk) to save others she has grown fond of.
All these characteristics create a strong, heroic and brave female character that has been formed from a scared, vulnerable young girl. It shows that females don't always have to play the roles of the helpless and powerless that need to be rescued by the 'heroic' male. Mes points out that " Chihiro is the little heroine at the centre of 'Spirited Away'" (, 2002).
The pictures below show Chihiro's change from a sad and vulnerable character (the first two pictures) to a brave and heroic one (remaining pictures).
(Pictures from: )
They show the development of her character, the film maker (Hayao Miyazaki's) picked out two scenes himself in an interview which best show Chihiro's development to a heroic and full of life girl, these were the one when shes in the car (Pic: 1) and the final scene where she has faced the whole world (Pic: 6). (- 2002: Interview with Hayao Miyazaki).
Another female role that stands out as following the Japanese theme of using females as strong characters is Yubaba, the lady incharge of the Bathhouse. A picture of her can be seen in picture 5. She is a scary character with a short temper and strong powers. She can take peoples names from them and turn them into whatever she likes. All the other characters in the bathhouse are terrified of her and follow her every order. This again shows how it doesnt have to males as the most powerful characters.
A Japanese Anime that follows a similar notion is 'Ninja Scroll' directed by Yoshiaki Kawajiri. The most powerful Ninja is a female, who can kill everything by the touch of her mouth and is immune to poison (Kagero) (see picture). She works along side a male Ninja named Jubei who has helped her and now she must look out for him. Levi quotes "Kagero is a beautiful female whose touch means death and Jubei a quiet, loner -a masterless Ninja with merly human powers". (Levi, 1996, p79). The females in this anime are very strong, sexy and dont seem to wear much clothing, this may be to help gain a wider audience!.
It is hard to know exactly why the Japanese show females with so much power, its not as if the writters are females or even feminists. Levi draws on the point that new fans of anime may be shocked as they assume the female characters will reflect the low status of women in Japan. (Levi, 1996, p115). This statement however is a bit out of date, and society and especially womens status in Japan has changed since 1996 and continues to do so. The tradition to marry before 25, have children and devote your life to your children and household is fading out, but not dramatically. (Brinton, 1993) More women are working now and even in high up jobs and there is strong trends showing they are marrying at later ages. (Ministry of Health & Welfare cited in JIWE).
A logical reason for not phasing female characters into the background and giving them power is to gain a wider audience. Men will watch as they show a great interest in anime and manga (especially ones like Ninja scroll where females wear little clothing) and more women will watch due to the way they are portrayed in them. Although other factors such as the storylines, action, wisdom and creativity have something to do with the number of viewers. (Levi,1996). Having heroic females works in Japan and isn't such a shock as Japanese gods and heroes where often female, which is more uncommon in western traditions. (Levi,1996).
It is evident that Japanese comics and anime is gaining a growing female audience in America. Alexander points out that early anime was geared towards men, both in content and marketing but now is heavily shifting towards women, and is seen as more interesting to the female audience. (Asian Economic News, L.A 2005). She discusses that the success of 'Pokemon' and the fact that 'Spirited Away' won an Oscar for 'Best Animated Feature' has helped market anime and given it a wider audience. She also indicates that the fact girls and women's characters often heroines may have helped the growing female audience. (Asian Economic News, L.A 2005).
To answer my question- does Japanese Anime portray women's characters, as 'weak and vulnerable' or 'strong and heroic'? I would say there is obviously a strong tendency to create powerful female characters in Japanese anime. This is in contrast to western animation which almost always uses male heroines. As pointed out earlier, even the Japanese 'Ultraman' is somewhat feminine.
My ideas as to why they do this, is why not?, many Japanese gods where females, for example Amaterasu- the Sun Goddess was a female, she ruled the world from heaven, Benzaiten- the goddess of love and Izanami, the creator goddess and ruler of the underworld. (). Why shouldn't they follow traditions and show women's power in anime. Another reason to portray women in this way- may be to gain a wider audience, in Japan like in all other countries sales and viewers statistics are important. Contrastingly it may be a simple result of Japan's changing society, and anime is a reflection of women's status and how it is increasing.