The perception of dirt within England to this day at least, is one of varying degrees of distain. The mere presence of it within our homes be it, mud from a shoe on a once pristinely white carpet or something less obvious such as a sock on the kitchen table often leaves the observer with feelings of anguish at its inappropriate positioning.
Quite often, it seems that dirt can be allied with things associated with the outside world being brought in doors, in this common case the indoors is subsequently polluted as a result of the offending object. In an alternative situation, roles may be reversed whereby an object from 'inside' finds its way outside, in this situation the likely predicament would be for the seemingly out of place object to be considered polluted and robbed of its somewhat 'pure' former status, certainly rendered inappropriate for it to return to its former home as it were. Other confusing circumstances may be of where objects that 'belong' upstairs are brought downstairs within a house, or when under garments are visible in replacement of expected over garments. This example serves as a more domestic metaphor for the more generalised issue of pollution as a means of shaping and defining society, a way of establishing classification beliefs. It is these very views that approximate divisions of people, set them apart and creates differences in beliefs and values to produce an 'us and them' dimensional perspective of the world. In so doing, creating definitions of what the individual believes to be correct and therefore developing strong opinions of what ever might contradict this notion, the incorrect. Although the concept of dirt, taboo and pollution may indeed induce strong feelings of disorder, it does not exist. Surprisingly it is a superficial, psychological manifestation that only exists within the eye of the beholder; bearing in mind the global scale of the concept and various meanings it can denote, maybe this isn't so astonishing. Furthermore, the elimination of 'dirt' is not negative, but a positive effort used to organise the environment, making our surroundings conform to our own individual beliefs of 'purity'. Pollution is not so much feared as it is disdained, its removal seen as;
This, 'unity of experience' is what shapes the individual's accumulation of knowledge this, attributed with schema's of how we choose to interpret this incoming information frames our universal perspectives of the acceptable and discordant. By making this distinction, such as that between dirt and cleanliness, whether it be from influence of social constructs or individual belief we are able to filter relevant material that correlates appropriately with our structure of assumptions. We can then reject discordant cues, more often than accepting them to modify our system of labels, to ensure that this normative structure remains secure. An example of how we might define normative systems of classification within this society could be the common dismissal of such things as throwing unwanted objects out of ones window. For the majority of the British population, this act would be seen as dissonant, to say the least and would be more likely discarded than accredited as conventional social behaviour. The feat would probably be regarded by most as unacceptable and therefore subsequently classified as polluting behaviour. It is behaviour such as this therefore that distinguishes this majority of the British population, with the small minority that would regard this action indifferently, Gypsies, or traveller peoples. From this distinction it is more keenly possible to understand the various sanctions that can arise between both social groups, as systems of classification conflict within quite often a shared environment. This must also be accepted if one is to learn that the gypsy population within the UK is officially the most hated minority within the country.
In the case of such complaints, common accusations made by the sedentary non-gypsy population will acknowledge the offenders, 'foreign invaders', choosing to reject any sense of the gypsies potential locality or British heritage in order to reinforce their reason for contention. Primarily, this suggests a racist attitude of the Gorgio population and inspires questions as to why ethnic distinctions are of sudden supreme significance. Maybe it is an expression of one's perceived rights. The gypsy population as a social group do not assimilate the norms and values of the majority population, and therefore only reinforce their potential, ancestral distinction. The society are therefore seen as outsiders in this respect, separated by modes of classification that have the potential to challenge and usurp established norms within liminal environments. As it is, the regional identity of travellers is very often enigmatic. Accents are rarely linked with one county or even country and therefore relative nationality is often vague. However despite this, it appears that the old stereotyped ideas of gypsy identity continue to influence general perceptions.
To illustrate this point, one could look to the very specific values of the Yakha, Hindu population of East Nepal. Their individual approach to the consumption of food, more directly the foods they believe to be acceptable to eat, differs considerably to their close neighbours of another strain of Hindu belief. A pig sacrifice to the goddess Durga in celebration of her victory over evil would be deemed appropriate in light of a festival such as, Dasain. However the same ritual performed amongst their Hindu neighbours would be considered taboo.
As an example of a similar situation within England today, one could consider the classification systems of gypsies as a population with a contrasting set of ideas to the majority of the British population and also Europe in general. This society receives a frequently bad press, in light of their unconscious customs and modes of classification which clearly lie incongruent to the strong beliefs of cleanliness of those offended. However some oblivious customs of the 'Gorgio's' way of life (as gypsies would call members of the majority population), are of equal incongruence to the Gypsies own system of classification and is met with the same feelings of condescension. This society are guarded about the common 'Gorgio' adoption of domestic pets such as dogs, and especially cats which are innately dirty and polluted because they lick their own fur. This does tie in with the general classification belief whereby exterior surfaces must be kept of a significant distance away from interiors. Another reason for why cats are seen as the greatest, 'mochadi'; meaning ritually polluted, of all animals, is for their renowned carnivorous trait. They are known to consume both the outer and inner body parts of their prey. Moreover, they are also recognized for eating rodents, which may also lick their own fur and in so doing, expose the inner body to the hairs and outer bodily dirt of the exterior. On the contrary, the Gorgio population regard this animal as probably the cleanest of all, because of this fact, and that they also bury their faeces, hence their popularity as common, domestic pets.
However, Non-gypsies, also live by the same polluting concept as gypsies to a certain extent. For example, general disgust is shown for inner bodily substances when in the context of the external, these being; vomit, blood and saliva amongst others. Another more vivid example of correspondence is the mutual distaste at the consumption of horse meat. This animal is a symbol of exceptional cleanliness and purity in the eyes of the gypsy, and one of greater practical purpose for the non gypsy, thus to eat this animal is a serious transgression. Considering, the latter point, we consider the sight of such substances as contaminating, yet where gypsy values differ is in the different methods they take to conceal such substances. Whereas non gypsies consider the visible presence of such matter abominable, it is the sheer proximity of the offending substance which is equally appalling for the gypsy people.
For Gorgio's, polluting dirt must be in some way contained, hidden or covered, however for gypsies the treatment of such offending matter can be visible but must be of a minimal proximity to the clean. This implies thereof that a gypsies land area requirements often exceeds that of which a non-gypsy would deem satisfactory, with the method of use for this land seen as not only unhygienic but also wasteful and disrespectful. In this case it is not surprising that land occupied by non-gypsies as well as that of gypsy social groups overlaps, with obvious ethical implications for both parties. Conversely to non-gypsy opinion this behaviour is seen as respectful of gypsy tradition, also of ethnic moral boundaries that are fundamental in maintaining ethnic purity within the group, and of therefore removing polluting matter from that which is otherwise uncontaminated.
However there are most usually exceptions. Those being, acts which do not conform to what relative assumptions would predict, and can be described as individual acts of totemic significance. Thus, the eating of a hedgehog (the most respected of all animals) in gypsy society is not regarded polluting, but conversely a sacred act, a classification exception that must be accepted regardless.