Great and Strong does not fit any classical poem's form, like sonnets. It has no particular rhyming schema, and no regular metric pattern. However, it is full of sound effects and other stylistic devices conveying unexpected foregrounding.
The poem is composed of three sentences of unequal length: two very short ones of two and three lines, followed by the very long last one - twenty one lines. However, a decent analyse should not be based on such a division. Even just a glance at the poem allows to perceive a typographic break in the middle of the poem (l.14). The lines are shorter. Then, reading the poem (and it is even more obvious when listening to it) confirms this feeling as the syntax changes; that is why it is interesting to analyse how each part works, starting by the first one.
The beginning of the poem looks like a narration. It is composed of short clauses built on simple structures such as subject + verb + complement. There are three occurrences of the structure "he was" + adjective (l.2, 6 and 7). This is typical of a narrative description of a character. The latter is referred to by the personal pronoun "he", and only once by the noun group "this man" (l.11). The reader is not given his name, nor anything about who he is. But the author chose to provide the reader with other kind of information. First, let us examine the post-modifying adjectives. The first ones l.2 repeat the title "great and strong". It may refer to a biblical episode: Isaiah 27:1 "In that day the LORD with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent."
This intertextual reference already associates him with a killing weapon, although they are positive adjectives at first sight.
Another biblical allusion can be noticed l.4: "and went to wash his hands". In Matthew 27:24 "When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it." Here, the insinuation is even more impressive as it assimilates him to the religious symbol of human evil and suggests the idea of execution and blood.
The vision of blood is predominant through subtle devices such as intertextuality, but also more obviously thanks to the anaphora of the phrase "A little blood" (l.1, 4 and 11) which is uttered by the character. Although there is no inverted commas, we know that it is a direct speech thanks to the clause "he said"(l.1). The pre-modifying adjective "little" in an other context would tend to attenuate the morbid effect, but here it creates an uncanny irony because it is uttered by that perverse character.
The direct speech is a crucial feature: by giving voice to the persona, the author provides him with the great power of speech - a power that the character fully (ab)uses upon "others" (l.8). The importance of speech act and of words has a metatextual function. The author uses stylistic devices to foreground some aspects of his poem. For instance, the phonetic effects of sounds are strong. The sibilant /s/ is dominant in the first lines, especially at the end of words which makes the hissing last: "more or less" (l.1), "weakness" (l.3). As the poem goes on, the hissing is getting louder with the voiced sibilants /z/ ("with his elbows"), giving an feeling of suspense, as if something was going to happen and it was coming closer. This sensation seems to become real with the /r/ alliteration in different clusters l.9 and 10 ("air... transistors crawled through his ears"). Something is bound to happen, and the revelation of this "thing" may be found in the analyse of the second part.
The repetition of the same structure from line 14 to line 21 is very striking. Each line is a post-modifying clause referring to "he" (l.13), constructed on the basis:
except line 19, which deviates as "Clean" is substituted by "Pure", whose function (adjective) and meaning are identical, but it creates a different sound effect, as we shall see later.
Thus, each line is a simile that provides a new facet concerning "this man" (l.11), comparing him to various things. We can apply Short's parallelism rule to analyse these "things" he is compared to: X is a common noun, and its meaning is often linked to the body ("anatomy", "hands", etc.); the same lexical field was already present in the first part of the poem ("hands", "elbows", fists"). Y is another common noun (or proper noun in l.19) whose meaning refers to death, destruction, homicide. The similes define him as a murderer in a less subtle and more outstanding way than the allusions found in the first part. This effect is achieved on one hand thanks to the irony on the association of two words of opposite meaning ("clean" versus images of blood); on the other hand, thanks to the phonetic patterns of the passage that we shall describe now.
The /k/ alliteration in the first line of the second part (l.13) is very salient as it is on syllable-initial sounds. This consonance is echoed l.16 and l.19: "Clean as the conscience of a gun", "... of Gen ghis Khan". Its effect is reinforced since it is a velar plosive, stressed in most occurrences and also because it is the same sound that initiates the word "Clean" which is repeated through this passage. These cutting sounds can be interpreted as the expression of the destructive violence of that man.
The nasals are also prominent in this passage; there is a lot of /m/ and /n/ in these lines, and some // too: "Clea n as the a nato my of a hye na" (l.15). It is also present in the repeated "Clea n".
Line 19 introduces the bilabial plosive /p/ in a conspicuous manner - "Pure" is foregrounded as it is the only line where "Clean" is replaced by another adjective. It is echoed in the cluster heard in the sound pair "sperm"/ "spore". This echo ironically emphasizes the semantic antagonism between the adjective (idea of purity) and the noun it refers to (sense of death and blood).
Toward the end of the poem, it is worthy to note the shift from /p/ to /b/ alliteration: "bare behind", "bent"/ "bowed". They are both bilabial plosives but /b/ is voiced whereas /p/ is unvoiced. Again, the effect is underpinned by the fact that the consonance is on syllable-initials and it is the first sound of the word "blood". As we said before, the vision of blood is overwhelming in the poem. This is proved again through the presence of an unusual lexis. We already noticed the morbid connotation of the words in the Y place: "gun", "slaughter-house", etc. More arresting is the use of the word "tampons", almost never used in poetry. The parallelism between l.22 and l.23 enables the reader to link "the tampons" with "all". The effect would have been attenuated if he had used another word; for example:
Using a personal pronoun like "they" would be neutral, with no particular connotation. But the association of "all" with "tampons" is very meaningful because it reveals the narrator's (and certainly the writer's) aversion towards people's blind acceptance and support for the almighty murderer.
The last aspect that highlights the word "blood" is the typography of the poem. The penultimate line is composed of only one word "wept", verb whose subject is "a little blood" (end of the previous line). This particular typography represents the image of a tear (of blood) falling down, a single word for a single drop ("only a little"), that crushes and spread into three words on the line below "on the ground". The impact of these last lines is as moving as the whole poem, which can be compared to the persona, for both are powerful and takes the breath away.