The basis of this assignment is to broaden our knowledge and understanding as to why 'responding to others' within health and social care is important and how health professionals go about doing this effectively. In order to respond to others, firstly, we have to establish different forms of communication, both verbal and non-verbal as well as interpersonal skills in order to enable us to meet the needs and obtain relevant information from clients, family members and other health professionals. Throughout my piece of work I will go onto expand and explain in more detail why responding to others is important and how we, as health professionals go about doing this and I will also identify who the 'others' may be.
In order to help us appreciate the different roles, skills and responsibilities that exist when working effectively with others, as a subset we were given the task to carry out an interview. From constructing and then carrying this out as a subset we believed we would be able to obtain a better understanding of the range of communication and interpersonal skills that are needed to become a competent practitioner who is able to work with a variety of people in a range of settings. Again I will explain the whole process of this interview later on in my piece of work.
I will then go onto draw together a reasonable conclusion stating how I feel my personal qualities and experiences have affected the way I worked within my subset. I will also draw upon the main points I feel have been made.
Within health and social care, professionals need to be able to respond to others effectively and efficiently through communication, whether this is verbally or non-verbally. This communication can be in the means of writing, speaking, trying to persuade an individual, informing, entertaining, explaining, convincing or educating, there are also lots of other ways that communication can be carried out, these were just a few examples. According to Stanton (2004), she believes that we always have four general objectives when communicating, these being:
It is then thought if we fail to achieve one of these objectives then we have failed to communicate. This can then lead to frustration or resentment between the individuals that the communication is taking place. So, communicating effectively enables us to:
However, sometimes we can come across barriers to communication. These cause problems with communication, which can result in the objectives not being met or just generally responding to others ineffectively. Some barriers that health professionals could come across include:
Difference in perception - the way we view the world can be determined by our past experiences
Jumping to conclusions - we see what we expect to see and hear what we expect to hear, rather than what is actually there
Stereotyping - we learn from our experiences and so we run the risk of treating different people as if they were the same
Lack of knowledge - it's difficult to communicate effectively with someone who has a very different background from ours, or whose knowledge of the particular subject of discussion is considerably less than ours
Lack of interest - receiver's lack of interest in the message being given
Difficulties with self-expression - communicator has difficulty finding the words to convey their ideas or lacks confidence
Emotions - any strongly felt emotion of receiver or communicator is liable to prevent almost anything but the emotion being communicated
Personality - not just the differences in peoples personalities that can cause problems, often our resulting behaviour can then affect the behaviour of the other person
These examples of barriers were taken from Stanton (2004). I however, personally believe that the most common barriers to communication are people having a difference in perception and also jumping to conclusions. I believe this due to past experiences, as when our subset carried out our task I feel that some members of the group maybe felt that because I was younger than them they didn't need to take my opinions into account. This could be due to the fact that they maybe felt I didn't know as much as them because of my age and being younger, which to me meant that they jumped to a conclusion, however, I have actually carried out a similar task and therefore had quite a good idea how to go about doing the task, yet my views didn't seem to matter. I also believe that these are the most common barriers to communication due to people experiencing so many different aspects of life resulting in everyone interpreting the world differently making it hard for people not to pre-judge and assume different things in different situations. These can also be done in the unconscious mind, resulting in us being unaware that we're carrying this out and so it's harder to control.
The examples above are only a few examples of barriers to communication that health professionals could come across, however it is up to either the receiver or the communicator to make conditions as satisfactory as possible so that communication has a chance of being effective. Yet not always can barriers be avoided which results in health professionals not responding to others effectively. If this is the case then:
Wrong information could be obtained
Wrong actions could be carried out due to the individual being unaware of the truth or relevant information
Individuals may not understand what is expected of them
Individuals could feel devalued and disrespected
Frustration and resentment could occur
I believe that all the above are just a few of the problems that could result in miscommunication. Previous experience has again helped me to come to this conclusion. With the activity our subset carried out, I believe that we didn't communicate effectively as a result, I feel we didn't obtain enough information prior to carrying out our task. I then felt that because we didn't obtain more information I felt we then went about the task the wrong way resulting in the subset not being fully aware of what we were actually doing due to the group not communicating with each other and explaining what we were going to do. However, because we therefore didn't respond to each other effectively I feel that the task wasn't as good as it could have been which was quite frustrating. I will however explain in more detail later on in the assignment as to why I feel our subset didn't communicate effectively.
As I have shown it is very important that communication is carried out effectively in order to avoid any mistakes and misunderstandings and so that no individual feels devalued or disrespected.
Health professionals have to communicate with many different individuals, these individuals can be split into three main groups:
Other health professionals - maybe discussing a client or in need of referring a client
Clients - in order to establish their problem and help treat them
Client's family and friends - they will be supporting the client and these too may need supporting and also the clients' illness and treatment may need to be discussed with their family due to the patient being a child and therefore under the age of consent or the patient being too ill to be able to discuss their illness or contribute to their treatment or care
When health professionals communicate, they do so in three main ways, verbally, non-verbally and listening. According to Stanton (2204), in order to communicate effectively through verbal communication we all need to have personal qualities. As professionals these include:
Clarity - need to be able to express our ideas clearly. Language should be simple and material should be organised so it can be easily followed. Avoid trying to impress by using long, complicated words, making sure any terms, jargon or specialised vocabulary that maybe unfamiliar is fully explained
Accuracy - make sure the words that are used say exactly what we mean. Choose words with precise meanings to suit our purpose. Facts that are used should be correct and avoid making statements that go beyond the facts and might therefore be challenged
Empathy - try to be courteous and friendly, however angry we may feel, try to control the emotions and at least remain calm. By putting ourselves in the other person's shoes and trying to make ourselves feel what they are feeling can help to establish empathy for the other person, doesn't mean we have to agree with them or their ideas but it does help to be understanding and patient
Sincerity - being natural, always a danger when talking to strangers or people of higher status of becoming stiff and awkward or trying to put on an act, usually due to lack of confidence
Relaxation - when our muscles are tense, we have difficulty expressing ourselves naturally. Awkward movements can result in tension
We don't just use words to communicate, we may use pictures to either replace words or reinforce our verbal message. Also, when we speak we also communicate by non-verbal means, some of these include:
The above forms of non-verbal communication are sometimes called 'metacommunication', meaning, something 'in addition to the communication'. Non-verbal communication can be very powerful and the receiver may sometimes use these to help interpret what is meant, yet the meaning is then normally taken from the metacommunication rather than the words, especially if what we're saying conflicts what we're doing.
As well as health professionals communicating with other people they also need to listen effectively. By doing this Stanton (2004), believes that it results in:
Encouragement to others - results in others loosing some or all of their defensiveness and then they usually try and understand you better by listening more effectively
Possession of all the information - the more information obtained the easier it is to solve problems and make decisions more effectively. Careful listening usually motivates the individual to continue talking and with as much information as possible health professionals are usually then in a position to make accurate decisions
Improved relationships - as you listen, you understand them better, they appreciate your interest in them resulting in friendship maybe deepening
Resolution of problems - everyone wants understanding, the best way of expressing this is through sensitive listening. Disagreements and problems can best be solved when individuals listen carefully to each other
Better understanding of people - listening carefully gives clues as to how others think, what they feel is important and why they're saying what they're saying. This enables professionals to work better with clients
Unfortunately health professionals are faced with situations where they will have to deliver bad news. When it's this form of communication it is best that the health professional listens to the individual before delivering the information and when it's time to do so, they do so in an effective manner that doesn't bring about complications to the situation. They should also make sure they include all the relevant information and don't try to break the news gently by not making it sound exactly how it is just to ensure their own emotions are satisfied. Therefore, the health professional should try to put a side their emotions in order to be there for their client and also to enable effective communication to take place.
Therefore in order to respond to others effectively health professionals need to possess a number of skills and values to enable this to take place. As a subset we discussed this and believe a few of these values include:
By carrying out an interview in our subset it was believed that we would get to see an example of the wide range of communication and interpersonal skills that are needed in order to become a competent practitioner and enabling us to work with a variety of people in a range of settings. We therefore felt that this would help us when we work within our placements, as we would have hopefully built upon different skills through this activity. Within our subset each of us were studying something different within health care and so this gave us an insight into what working with different health professionals might be like.
In order to come up with reasonable interview questions we all went away and came up with five questions which we thought would enable us to obtain some of the information we need in order to be able to decide on a new member for the group. When I came to choosing my questions, I referred to an Internet site (Personal Qualities, 2003) that I had previously been reading. On here it had some questions that would be relevant within an interview. I therefore based my questions around these however, I adapted them to make them relevant for our interview. From coming up with these questions it later enabled us to put them all together and coming up with the best questions that we were going to use. We then went onto evaluate why these questions were useful and whether we would be able to collect the information we need from them.
As I mentioned earlier I believe our subset didn't communicate effectively, this I feel was because when it came to actually carrying the interview out I feel the majority of the group was too laid back and we didn't benefit from this as much as we could have. I feel that before actually carrying the interview out we should have carried out further research into carrying out interviews. This would have enabled us to gain a wider range of ideas as to how we could maybe carry out a very effective interview and obtaining the information we required. I also feel that we could have actually discussed the seating arrangement of the interview in order to make it more formal. I feel that due to carrying out a communication assignment before I had more of an idea as to how we should go about organising the interview and also how the interview should go. Yet due to being one of the younger ones within the group I feel my opinions weren't really taken into account, which in a way made me feel disrespected and I started to sit back in the group. This is a situation that could easily a rise within a hospital, yet not necessarily be due to age but maybe arising between professionals where one is of higher authority and doesn't take the other professionals opinions into account.
A study that may relate to this is that by Milgram (1974). This study showed how people obeyed to authority even though they didn't believe in what they were doing. Instead of the individuals sticking to what they believed in, they obeyed due to Milgram being of higher authority. One reason for this could have been that they felt that if they expressed their opinions and beliefs then they wouldn't have been taken into account, this feeling could be due to them previously expressing their opinions and beliefs and they were just ignored and instead encouraged to carry on with the experiment. Even though the situation was slightly different, it did however feel like the older members within my group were in charge and they didn't take my opinions into account, resulting in me sitting back and agreeing with what they said we did even though I didn't believe this was the right way to go about the situation.
As for when it came to coming up with the questions I felt that on the whole the subset worked well as a group as we discussed what was to be done and agreed quite easily on the purpose of each question and what we were wanting to obtain from each question.
Overall I feel that we could have researched into how we were going to carry out the interview a bit more, this would have enabled us to understand more about the purpose of the interview and the best way of carrying the interview out. I also feel we should have picked a more confident person to carry out the actual interview as then they would have felt more relaxed which would have benefited the interviewee. This again we can relate to practice, as the more confident we are the more relaxed our client will feel and they will probably be able to express their opinions more resulting in all the relevant information hopefully being obtained. The main thing I feel went well about this exercise was choosing our questions as we put a lot of work into these and they seemed to result in all the relevant information being obtained without the interviewee becoming confused or feeling as though we were being to personal. However, I feel we could have spent a little less time on the questions and instead carried out other research and concentrated on other aspects of the interview, such as the seating pattern.
From carrying out the interview I believe we got a good opportunity to see how different people communicate with each other and also how people treat each other. It was interesting to find out that some older people feel that they know more and maybe devalue individuals due to them being younger. This makes you realise that you could come across this within the profession and luckily from this activity I am now aware of this and I can now make the most of any opportunities that a rise to enable me to take this into account and maybe build up my confidence so in the future I can maybe go onto stand up for what I believe in and also get my opinions noticed if I feel this necessary.
I feel the interview also gave us an opportunity to build on our team building skills and organisational skills. I however, feel that I am a very independent person and I work better on my own. Yet within this profession it's not possible to work on my own and so it has helped me to try and improve my skills and confidence of working within a group and learning to listen to other people's opinions.
With half of the group being quite laid back I felt that the other members of the group had to work a bit more in order to make sure some of the deadlines we set were met. This sometimes meant that three of us worked and then we informed the rest of the group about what we had discussed, when instead it should have been the group discussing it all together, sometimes this did get a bit frustrating but again this could happen within the profession and we will not have a choice and we may have to go ahead and make some decisions without the rest of the team. I feel I am quite an organised person and so I always made sure I met the necessary deadlines we'd made, however, a few in the group didn't do the work that was sat. This made easy tasks a little more difficult and they took a bit more time, which meant we lost some time for other tasks. If I was to do this activity again I believe setting each person a specific task rather than setting everybody the same task would be more beneficial as each individual would be more inclined to carry out their task due to nobody else carrying it out and therefore not wanting to let the rest of the group down. Overall it was an interesting but challenging experience.