While it was once believed that primate social systems were 'closed genetic units', it has now been documented that there is considerable movement of individuals between groups (Pusey and Packer, 1987). This essay will outline different dispersal strategies and discuss the various hypotheses that have been put forward to explain why primates disperse. It will focus specifically on three different examples of dispersal types, female-biased dispersal in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), male-biased dispersal in East African vervet monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops) and both-sex dispersal in red howler monkeys (Alouatta seniculus), but touch on other examples where relevant. These strategies will then be discussed in an attempt to clarify the genetic consequences of dispersal for the individual, the social group and species population structure. Implications for conservation will also be discussed.
Although it was previously assumed that male-biased dispersal was the norm, there is growing evidence to show that many species practice bisexual dispersal and also a few species where females disperse. Species in which the females are philopatric and the males disperse are probably still the most common, certainly with most cercopithecines (Cheney and Seyfarth, 1983). However, many lemurs, some colobines and almost all neotropical primates provide examples of species where both sexes disperse - although one sex may travel further than the other (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). Situations also occur where the males are philopatric and the females disperse, and this is true of chimpanzees, muriquis, spider monkeys and gorillas (Pusey and Packer, 1987, Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000).
The timing of dispersal is often puberty for males and after sexual cycling has commenced for females (Pusey and Packer, 1987). In the past, it was assumed that primates disperse as an inbreeding avoidance strategy (Moore and Ali, 1984, Cheney and Seyfarth, 1983, Smith, 1992). However, more recently the reasons for dispersal have become a topic of scientific debate. Several hypotheses have been put forward including intrasexual competition for resources - both food and mates (Moore and Ali, 1984, Sterck, 1997), territory choice (Moore and Ali, 1984), avoidance of infanticide in combination with mate choice (Sterck, 1997, Pusey and Packer, 1987), attraction of novel mating partners (Smith, 1992) and abduction - of females by males, only common in hamadryas baboons (Pusey and Packer, 1984).
Certain events coinciding with the timing of dispersal appear to support different hypotheses as to the motivations behind dispersal. For example, Pusey (1980) explains that the timing of female dispersal in chimpanzees which generally occurs during oestrus periods and the fact that the females often return to their natal groups either between oestrus periods or once they have become pregnant, strongly supports the inbreeding avoidance hypothesis. Sterck (1997) describes female-biased dispersal in Thomas langurs (Presbytis thomasi) and concludes that the proximate cause is infanticide avoidance while the ultimate cause is likely to be inbreeding avoidance. Again, the timing is key, as females tend to transfer when the dominant male of their group is no longer a good protector.
Moore and Ali (1984) explain that there are a number of costs and benefits involved with any dispersal strategy. Benefits include inbreeding avoidance, habitat choice, mate availability and the avoidance of intraspecific competition. Costs include potentially increased risks of predation, disease and exposure and the danger of being attacked by the conspecifics of the new group. Primates are faced with weighing up the costs and benefits of dispersal and often include other inbreeding avoidance strategies including kin-recognition (Moore and Ali, 1984) and preference for unfamiliar mates (Starin, 2001). Whether inbreeding avoidance is a proximate or ultimate cause of dispersal strategies, these tactics still have genetic implications, which work at many levels. In order to explain this further, it is necessary to explore different primate social systems and the dispersal strategies that operate within these systems in some detail.
Pusey (1980) collected data on a habituated group of chimpanzees at Gombe National Park, Tanzania. Chimpanzees are known to operate within a fission-fusion social system - a wider community of males, females and offspring who split up to travel or feed alone or in 'parties', consisting of any combination of individuals belonging to the community (Dunbar and Barrett, 2000). As mentioned earlier, male chimpanzees are philopatric, while the females disperse. Pusey documented that as females begin sexual cycling their association with 'pre-oestrus favourite males' (often maternal relatives) decreases. This behaviour also coincides with shifts in range use and visits to other communities. Eventually, females either transfer permanently to other communities, or transfer temporarily while in oestrus, returning to their natal groups either between cycles or once they become pregnant. Females are not evicted from natal groups, but go by choice, despite the fact that they often experience extreme hostility from the resident females of the new group (Pusey, 1980).
In contrast, East African vervet monkeys operate a system of male-biased dispersal. Cheney and Seyfarth (1983) conducted research on a population of free-ranging vervets in Amboseli National Park, Kenya. Vervets live in multi-male groups of 12-27 individuals. The females always remain in their natal groups while the males transfer to neighbouring groups when they reach sexual maturity. Male vervet dispersal patterns can be defined as 'non-random'; 88% of males transferred to adjacent groups, which included old members of their previous group. Moreover, males tended to transfer with brothers. However, random transfer also occurs. This is common in older males who are transferring for the second time. Such males tend to transfer alone and cover larger distances. This is likely to be because the older males are bigger and better able to defend themselves. These males may also incur genetic costs if they transfer back into their natal group (Cheney and Seyfarth, 1983).
An example of both-sex dispersal is offered through an examination of red howler monkeys. Pope (1992) studied two populations of red howler monkeys in Venezuela. One population was living to the west of the area on a cattle ranch (the woodland community); the other population was living to the east on a wildlife reserve (the gallery forest community). The two communities are considered to be two distinct populations, with some unknown amount of gene flow taking place between them (Pope, 1992). Red howlers form multi-male troops, although one alfa-male fathers all or most offspring (a harem). Most males left their natal groups before adulthood (94%), joining other groups. Males dispersed several times but did not travel far (one home range diameter). Females also operated high dispersal rates (73%), but almost never transferred into existing groups, instead founding new troops with other solitary migrants. Females travelled much further than males (6 home range diameters). Once a female achieved breeding status within a troop, she remained there throughout her reproductive lifespan.
The social systems described above reveal much about the varying genetic consequences of dispersal. First, let us consider the individual. We can assume that it is in the interests of all individuals to produce fit, viable offspring to ensure that their genes are represented in the next generation. Within chimpanzee communities, the responsibility of inbreeding avoidance is on the females, who must avoid copulation with 'pre-oestrus' favourite but maternally related males and seek unfamiliar partners in new groups despite aggression from resident females. Mating between close kin is thought to cause an increase in homozygosity and the possible emergence of deleterious, recessive alleles (Smith, 1992). However, fraternal and peer migration, which has not only been documented for vervets but also rhesus macaques, Japanese macaques and baboons (Cheney and Seyfarth, 1983), can be viewed as a balance of the costs and benefits of dispersal. It raises the level of genetic relatedness within and between groups but offers the individual support during aggressive interactions associated with migration, therefore ensuring their survival. In addition, mating with individuals who share some degree of relatedness may carry some selective advantage (Cheney and Seyfarth, 1983).
Dispersal patterns affect levels of genetic variation within and among primate social groups. Again, different patterns have different consequences. In chimpanzee societies, although the males remain within their natal group and the responsibility is on the female to disperse, the males do play a role. Potential attacks on new females by resident females often prompt intervention by the resident males, who threaten the resident females and stay close to the new females, often copulating with them and thus ensuring the union of genetically unrelated individuals (Pusey, 1980). As the males are closely related, they have a collective interest in the health of the group and its continued survival.
Within red howler populations, gene flow among troops was exclusively through the exchange of breeding males (on average troop leaders were replaced once every 7.5 years (Pope, 1992)). However, the breeding females represented the highest level of genetic variation among troops. Unusually, new red howler troops are not formed through fissioning of larger groups along matrilineal lines, but rather by immigrant females. Therefore, females are not related. Unrelated males mate within genetically divergent matrilines, which increases the variance in gene frequencies among troops but decreases the correlation between uniting gametes within troops (Pope, 1992).
As vervet females are philopatric, the length of tenure of a male in any one group is likely to be set by the sexual maturity of potential daughters. Therefore, males must transfer twice, possibly more. Within non-random, peer migrations, brothers not only have alliances in their new social group, but can also keep track of close kin (i.e. brother's daughters, which need to be avoided as mating partners (Cheney and Seyfarth, 1983)).
The question of random versus non-random dispersal within vervet populations can also be discussed in terms of the species population structure, as the size of the 'deme' (the interbreeding population) is hugely affected by the level of migration between groups (Cowlishaw and Dunbar, 2000). Random dispersal would result in the most diverse migrant pool and would also serve to maximise effective population size. In a population of eight groups, random dispersal would create a population four times larger than non-random dispersal (Cheney and Seyfarth, 1992). In contrast, non-random dispersal would result in the least diverse migrant pool and minimise effective population size. Cheney and Seyfarth (1992) conclude that vervets operate a system of non-random dispersal followed by a secondary random dispersal. This falls in-between simple random versus non-random dispersal, and is a combination of both techniques as a way of maximising the benefits and minimising the costs of dispersal.
Knowledge regarding dispersal patterns and the ways in which these patterns help to keep primate populations healthy has important implications for conservation. We need to understand the dispersal tactics of different species as it relates to factors such as viable protected area size and the construction of corridors between fragmented areas. The presence of researchers and the habituation of groups must also be approached with the greatest of caution as it may disrupt social systems. For example, Pusey (1980) warns that the provisioning of the habituated community of chimpanzees at Gombe may have affected natural female dispersal patterns. Although females from the habituated community did transfer for temporary periods, many females returned and actually mated with males from their natal community (perhaps drawn back by the temptation of provisions). Researchers must ensure that they are documenting normal patterns of inter group transfer (Pusey, 1980). Knowledge about genetic variation within populations and species can also be useful as heterozygosity can affect adaptability levels (especially relevant as primates are subject to so many detrimental anthropogenic factors). The high levels of heterozygosity and large genetic differences among troops of red howlers may have provided the means by which this species has been able to adapt rapidly to changing habitats (Pope, 1992), as genetic diversity is required for primate populations to evolve in response to environmental change (Frankham et al., 2002).
In conclusion, the full range of proximate factors that trigger dispersal are probably yet to be identified (Smith, 1992). In many species, the tactics, timing and distance travelled during dispersal seem to involve a weighing up of associated costs and benefits. Two common factors of dispersal, that it is highly sex biased and that secondary transfer is common but rarely involves a return to the natal group, seem to support the inbreeding avoidance hypothesis (Pusey and Packer, 1987). However, whatever the motivation, high levels of dispersal can cause high levels of heterozygosity (Pusey and Packer, 1987). It is also clear that dispersal affects both the direction and level of gene flow among groups and the level of relatedness of individuals within groups (Melnick and Hoelzer, 1996). Dispersal strategies must be considered when developing any conservation initiative, for the reasons outlined above.