As the title already indicates, the poem "Not a Nice Place" describes a violent place, probably a whole country, where people live in danger and have to fear for their lives every day. The mood of chaos and violence in the poem is established with the help of different linguistic features, namely the lexis and word combination, the sound and visual patterning and the structure. Thus, this essay is going to analyse the poem with respect to the above mentioned features.
The first two lines of the poem "Holy cow! You should see that place." make clear right from the beginning that there is a persona directly addressing its audience. This is be done with the pronoun "you" and as this can be either singular or plural, there may be either one addressee or several. Thus, although the poem is a monologue, a situation like in a dialogue is established because there is more than one participant. The main part of the poem then (l. 3-26) contains a detailed description of the place hinted to in line 2 and thus refers back to that line. Here, the persona takes over the role of an observer and informs the addressee of the violence and danger people live in. Thus, the favoured sentence-type is a stating one and the third person plural is predominant, either as personal pronoun "they" (l.8) or in subjects like "children" (l.3), "men" (l.6), "women" (l.7) and "people" (l.5). This shows that everybody, even children, is involved in the conflict. The last two lines are similar to the first two as they involve a direct address to the audience via a rhetorical question. By this, a frame is created which underlines the personas shock ("Holy cow!" (l.1) ) about what he/she sees and which - in contrast to the mainly descriptive main part - displays his/her personal judgement of the events.
Concerning the visual and sound pattern, it is very striking that the poem does not fulfil many of the typical features of its genre poetry. It is neither subdivided into stanzas, nor is there a particular rhyme scheme. There is also no regular rhythm or metre. The only visual aspect that is maintained is that the poem is written in lines. But unlike other poems, where every line begins with a capital letter, no matter if the line starts in the middle of a sentence, some lines also begin with small letters here. They are only capitalized if they mark the beginning of a new sentence. Furthermore, the normal sentence structure of SVO is maintained and there is no deviation from it. To my mind, all this has the effect that the poem resembles more a dramatic speech spoken to an audience. This also fits to the findings of the first paragraph, namely that there is a persona (or speaker) addressing an addressee (audience) to inform and make them think about the miserable conditions the people have to live in.
These terrible conditions are mainly illustrated by the lexis and the combination of words. The vocabulary is predominantly from the area of war as for example the words "bulletproof" (l.3), "war surgeons" (l.11), "shot" (l.12) and "Uzi sub-machine guns" (l.23) show. By this, an atmosphere of chaos and danger is established. The use of parallelisms underlines this impression. In particular the parallelism in lines 12-16 supports the image of violation of law as you can get killed "for your Rolex watch/or your Nike boots/ or if you look crooked at somebody" (l.13-15). In this parallelism, the reason for getting shot becomes less and less important. First you are shot for the expensive things you wear -"Rolex" and "Nike" serve as symbols for expensive branches (Rolex is even more expensive than Nike) here - but then even for the way you look at other people. Thus, the parallelism stresses the senseless- and arbitrariness of the crime. Another aspect, which is graphically salient because of the inverted commas, is the use of direct speech in line 21. By foregrounding the "Have a nice day", the people's ignorance and attempt to live a normal life is contrasted to the harsh reality that is described in the rest of the poem. The sentence has also an ironical connotation as you will never be able to have a nice day in such a surrounding.
Besides the word choice and combination, the phonology of the words also helps to draw a picture of a violent and dangerous place. Throughout the poem, many plosives - especially the bilabial phoneme /p/ - are used. As these are very short and aspirated sounds, they sound like single gun shots and thus support the image of war. A very good example are the "bullet proof back packs" (l.3) as - when read aloud - it really seems as if bullets were shot with a machine gun because of the /b/ /p/ /b/ /p/ sequence. Another example is "could ge t sho t" (l.12) where the combination of the plosives /k/ and /t/ with monosyllabic words produces disjoint, machine gun like sounds. Besides the plosives, the use of the /oi/ and /ei/ diphtongs in "oi vei" (l. 12) helps to create a sound of deep sorrow to display the persona's grief about the situation. This is because diphthongs are very long sounds as they glide from one vowel to another and they can be drawn out by a speaker as long as he/she wishes. Another sound pattern is the alliteration in the title "Not a Nice Place" that is also repeated in line 10. By foregrounding the "not nice" phonologically, the euphemism of that expression is underlined as the place is not only not nice but rather like hell.
For my rewrite, I have also chosen this line and I will rewrite it from "It is not a nice place" to "Oh, it's such a lovely place." The reason for this rewriting is that people often, when asked about their home country and if they like it there, answer something similar to the rewrite. But in this context, such an answer is completely inappropriate as the place described is not a place that anybody would call "lovely". Thus, with the help of the sharp contrast between this line and the rest of the poem, the addressee realizes the irony of the sentence and its sarcastic connotation. To my mind, the rewritten line is even more salient than the original one as the use of the word "lovely" creates a greater deviation from the general mood and lexis of the poem than does "not nice". Because of the ironic connotation, the persona's criticism and attempt to dissociate himself/herself from the described place becomes even clearer.
All in all, the fact that a persona directly addresses the audience like in a dramatic speech has the effect that the poem's content is brought closer to the addressee as they get more involved. Furthermore, by combining war vocabulary with such phonological effects as described in the essay, the danger and violation of law can be stressed effectively as these are perceived visually as well as audibly. Thus, each linguistic feature that has been described above contributes to the main topic of the poem, namely to draw a picture of a violent and dangerous place and to criticize the behaviour of the people living there.