Participating in an exchange program and visiting Britain for one or two semesters has become increasingly popular among students from all over the world. The reasons for this are various and range from the wish to experience the British culture or to improve the English language skills to the development of independence and self-confidence. The Oxford Brookes University names itself a "cosmopolitan and international university" because 20% of the approximately 19,000 students are from "overseas". (Bird, 2005)
Nevertheless, the question remains if international students establish close relationships with native speakers or if they stay in separate groups. Thus, this report investigates to what extent international students communicate with English students at Oxford Brookes University. To gather data for this aim, international students were questioned about their interest in meeting English people and the number of English friends they had. These findings then can shed light on the effectiveness of taking part in an exchange program and if necessary, suggestions for improvement can be made.
The survey was carried out at the "International Caf", Cheney School Community Hall, Cheney Lane, on Monday, the 13 th February 2006 between 8 and 10 pm. Being a meeting point for international students, this venue was chosen to select the subjects as students from a variety of countries were present. Because the questionnaire contained gender-related questions, five male and five female students were asked to complete it. The questionnaire consisted of ten questions and focused on the relationship between international and English students and to what extent they communicated with each other. (See appendix for a detailed record)
First of all, the interviewees were asked to rate on a scale if it was easy for them to get to know people. More than a half (60%) agreed to this statement, 30% disagreed and one student neither agreed nor disagreed. (See Table 1)
The vast majority (80%), however, was particularly interested in meeting English people and only a small minority (10%) denied this. (See Table 1) The two most common reasons for that interest were either to improve the language (30%) or to get to know the culture (30%) or even both (40%). Only one respondent out of ten also ticked the "others" option and explained that he was mainly interested in making new friends.
When being asked how many of their friends were English, a large number of subjects (60%) claimed to have only 0 to 10% English friends, another 30% of the interviewees answered with 11 to 30% and one student chose the 31 to 50% option. Almost all respondents (80%) had met their English friends in University courses or by living with them (flatmates) and a few had made friends with English students via societies (10%) or the part-time job (10%). Taking the gender into account, a lot of subjects (60%) had approximately equal numbers of male and female English friends, but some (40%) met predominantly with the same sex.
In general, half of the students spend time with their English friends once to twice a week, 40% met them once a week and 10% more than twice a week. The next question then referred back to the reasons the interviewees had given for wishing to have close contact with English students and examined how far these reasons had been fulfilled. All students except two saw their main reasons, the improvement of their English and the experience of British culture, fulfilled. (See Table 1)
The final question invited the subjects to rate on a scale if it was easier to get to know international students than English students in general. An overwhelming majority (80%) strongly agreed to this. (See Table 1)
The gathered data clearly display that international students are particularly interested to communicate with English students in order to improve their language skills and to experience the British culture. Thus, the finding that more than half of the subjects have only 0 to 10% English friends and no interviewee has more than 50% of English friends is very striking as this contradicts the international students wish to meet English people. Even those respondents who consider themselves to be very outgoing reported not to have many English friends.
However, the main meeting points of English and international students tend to be the university courses or the flats where both groups live together and it appears that the gender of the friends does not play an important role in general. Nevertheless, the relationships established there do not seem to be very close as only one student claimed to meet his English friends more than twice a week whereas the majority meets them less frequently. Finally, the fact that nine out of ten international students find it much easier to get to know other internationals than English students reflects the tendency for international students and native speakers of English to stay in separate groups very clearly.
The results of this survey lead to the conclusion that though living in Britain for one or two semesters, most of the international students do not establish close relationships to English students but tend to stay in a separate group. Thus, this finding gives rise to the question how effective it is to take part in an exchange and calls for suggestions on how to improve the situation. As the data have displayed that friendships between English and international students are mainly established via university courses or by living together, one suggestion could be to ensure that there is an equal number of English and international students in each flat in a hall of residence. Furthermore, social events within the courses could be organized.
In general, the sample of the survey is very small and consequently the results may not necessarily be representative for all international students at Oxford Brookes University. Another limitation is that only internationals were selected as subjects and no English students were questioned. Questioning both groups would probably have led to a more differentiated view of the relationship between international and English students.
Being asked to write a report, I first was a bit sceptical if I could manage the task as I had never written one before. I also found it difficult to decide on a topic and to design an appropriate questionnaire for that topic as I was unsure if the subjects would understand all my questions. In retrospect, I would have altered some questions and deleted, for example, the gender-related ones as they did not lead to any interesting results.
In general, the task was easier than I thought in the beginning thanks to all the materials (useful vocabulary, examples of reports, guidelines on how to design a questionnaire and structure the report) we were provided with during the lessons. While dealing with the assignment, the most challenging task for me was to write in a style appropriate for a report and to focus on the quality of my expression.