My initial understanding of Occupational Therapy (OT) that I described at the beginning of term one has not changed, although through completing the first term, I feel I am now more secure in my understanding of what Occupational Therapy involves. Each module I have done so far gives a greater insight into what OT is about. The knowledge needed is extensive, as the Anatomy and Physiology module demonstrates, and each module covers interesting and relevant topics needed for practical and background information to become a professional.
I experienced a period of illness the week before Christmas which really made me think about the work of an OT. I was ill for three days with severe diarrhoea and vomiting and passing out. I didn't eat for two days, and was very weak and bed ridden. During this period, I longed to be able to do things again. I really wanted to be able to eat, and thoughts of lovely foods dominated my mind. I knew I couldn't eat yet as my stomach was fragile.
This longing I felt, just to be able to eat, was all I could think about at the time. I wanted to get well as soon as possible so I could eat and have the strength to go out, do things, see people and not feel like I was wasting time. It was all that was important to me. The experience of being in that situation really made me appreciate the strong desire to carry out simple, essential daily activities, when ill health is preventing you to.
It made me think about the work of an OT, and their role in helping and enabling people to do the things they really want to do, no matter how small or unimportant the same activities may seem to others. My illness was over in a few days, and I could do all the things I'd been longing to do whilst I'd been ill. However, for people with a long term illness or disability, having someone to work with them and help them to do things that are important to them, may literally be life changing. The work of an OT seems so worthwhile and important to me.
One thing that puzzles me about the course is that often, I feel the focus is generally on Occupational Therapy in hospital settings, and OT in learning disability settings is rarely mentioned. It is this kind of work that I see myself doing in the future as I currently have experience in it and learning disability is an area which interests me that I would like to develop. I would also like to gain further experience in other areas so I can clarify which areas I enjoy working in the most, but I wonder why the focus often seems to only be on OT in hospital settings.
I will solve my query by talking to my personal tutor and other tutors, and seeing if learning disability is covered further in term 2 of the course. I see from my core skills portfolio that we will be looking at learning disability, as well as mental health, orthotics and physical conditions, so this is something I will look forward to.