May is 63 and has a moderate learning disability which means she may have difficulties such as understanding, learning and remembering new things, and in generalising any learning to new situations. She may have difficulties with a number of social tasks, for example communication, self-care and awareness of health and safety. (Northfield, 2001)
A moderate learning disability is identified in early childhood and people with a moderate learning disability have an IQ range of 35/40 - 50/55. Cognitive, psychological, social and self management performance components can be affected. A learning disability is a lifelong condition and is non-progressive. The emphasis of intervention is therefore on managing the medical aspects of the condition and helping individuals achieve their highest potential. (Hansen and Atchison, 2000)
May attends a social services Day Centre, but she would like to cut down the days she goes from 3 days to 1 because she gets tired. She would like to find some other activities to do which are not too tiring, and which are sociable.
This intervention plan is based on the occupational behaviour frame of reference which focuses on the importance of occupation and having a balanced variety of occupational roles. The focus of attention is on the way the client spends their time during the week. (Creek, 2001). The long term aim can be discussed with the Day Centre staff to see if they are happy with the chosen activity, and therefore for May to cut down the days she goes from the centre from 3 days to 1.
Short term goal number 1) enables the OT to explain to May what will be involved in volunteering in a charity shop and May can then chose the charity shop she most prefers and ask to volunteer there. If they do not need a volunteer, the goal will have to be adapted and she will have to ask in another charity shop.
Short term goals 2) and 3) can be adapted by reducing the hours May volunteers if it proves too tiring. Or they can be graded, and she could start by working for 1  hours a morning, and then increase it to 3 hours.
Has May's long term goal been reached and her wishes met?
Interview May, her husband and the Day Centre staff to see how they feel about May's new routine, if there are any problems and if she is enjoying volunteering in the charity shop. Grade or adapt goals as necessary.
Repeat COPM to assess and compare May's perspective of her performance, problems and goals prior to and after intervention.