ear Sarah,
Hi, I hope you are well. I am gradually settling in to life at Oxford Brookes. It was a busy week last week with moving in to my halls, meeting lots of new people and having induction days every day for my Occupational Therapy course. It was all quite overwhelming really with everything being new. I am now in my second week and I feel more settled here. I am having my first timetabled week and I'm enjoying my course so far.
You asked in your last e-mail for me to explain to you what Occupational Therapy involves as a career - lots of people do ask, as it's one of the less well known health professions. Occupational Therapy is a profession in which the therapist works with the individual - who could have a mental or physical illness or disability - to achieve the highest level of independence and wellness in their daily lives. OT's usually work in either hospitals or social services, and can work with a very wide range of people including children, teenagers, adults, and elderly: in mental health, leaning disability, physical disability or rehabilitation settings.
It is a very varied career, so the course is also varied. It has been interesting so far; we had a whole day of anatomy and physiology on Monday, and were then doing arts and crafts and hand massages on Thursday! I knew OT had many different aspects within the same career, but I didn't think the course was going to have such contrast. The art and massaging sessions were to experience for ourselves activities that we may carry out with patients in the future. They were fun things to do, but were good to experience, so we could gain a different perspective on activities and therapies undertaken by an OT, and to be on the receiving end prior to the giving. It will be useful to be able to keep those sessions in mind in my future studies and practices, as meaningful activities are very important as therapeutic methods undertaken by an OT. I think I will enjoy this course as I gradually learn and experience new things in both my studies, and on the practical placement I will do in term three.
Before I came to University I was worrying that I'd find it hard to get back into studying again after my year out. Hopefully I will be alright as I gain and develop study skills from my course. I think it will take time to get into a routine, but I'll be alright once I get into the swing of things. I'm really glad I did take a gap year, as I feel the experiences I had, working with women with mental health problems in Malaysia, and then with children with disabilities in a special school in Dorset, will be of great value for my course. I can draw upon my knowledge and experience and relate it to my current studies.
I will be in touch again soon to keep you up to date with my news. Hope to hear from you soon.
From,
Sam.