In this essay I am going to define the concept of professional skills. I will look at the difference between generic and profession-specific skills. I will then focus on two specific areas: teamwork and reflection, and explore how they contribute to practice. I will draw upon my current knowledge and experience as an undergraduate Occupational Therapy student professional and will also look from a multi-professional viewpoint.
Before I define 'profession skills', I will first give the definition of a 'professional' in the sense of the subject being talked about here. Professional means to 'display a high level of competence or skill'; something that is 'undertaken or performed by people who are paid' or 'a professional person'. A health professional is 'a person who helps in identifying or preventing or treating illness or disability'.
(Collins Concise Dictionary and Thesaurus, p.762 and )
'Professional skills' are skills undertaken by a professional and encompass many various practices such as: teamwork, communication, reflection, clinical effectiveness, evidence based practice, problem solving and decision making. The list is extensive and there are many areas to consider in professional practice. The areas mentioned here are generic to all health and social care professions, whilst other areas are relevant to specific professions. For example, in a team, all professionals need good communication skills to be able to share information about a client or situation or idea, so all team members are informed and the team can work efficiently. Communication is therefore a generic skill. In comparison, a therapeutic radiographer must have the skill to be able to administer accurate doses of radiation to a tumour, whilst minimising the dose received by the surrounding tissues. This is a profession-specific skill, and is a skill only particular of a therapeutic radiographer.
There can sometimes be problems due to professionals feeling under pressure to focus on both generic skills and profession-specific skills. For example, a recent article in the British Journal of Occupational Therapy describes how there have been huge changes in mental health services with the development of community care and there is a challenge for OT's to meet the needs of the clients, as well as participate in the work of the team. The Capable Practitioner (Sainsbury Centre for Mental Health, 2001, as cited in Harrison D. 2003) acknowledges that practitioners need to combine shared core competencies with profession-specific skills. OT's are clear that their role has a focus on occupational performance, but they feel pressurised by the multi-professional team to undertake generic work. (Harrison D. 2003) I will discuss this problem of overlapping roles further in the following section on teamwork.
Team working is an essential component of the effective delivery of health and social care. (Department of Health, 2001) Multi-disciplinary teams, or multi-professional teams, are common in health and social care settings. They are when groups of different professional people work together to provide a direct client-care service (Creek, 1990). It is important to work as a team, and to do this, good team working skills are required, such as communication, trust and initiative.
In practice, the client is seen as being at the centre of the team, and must be involved in every stage of the service provided for him/her. Health professionals and carers should then all share equal contributions to the total service, with free flowing communication happening between all the members of the team. It is important that good communication occurs between the client and the health professionals, and also between the different professionals so as to be able to provide an efficient service. Professionals involved can include doctors, nurses, social workers, occupational therapists, physiotherapists, speech and language therapists and creative therapists. Friends and family should also be included as they are an important part of the team, providing emotional and practical support to the client in the home setting. (Creek, 1990).
Individual professionals bring many attributions to a team. As well as their profession-specific skills and knowledge, they bring their values and personality, which includes personal views, characteristics and history. (Payne, 2000). All of these traits and abilities are useful skills to enable them to work in a team and bring new knowledge and ideas to it.
'Reflection' and 'reflective practice' have become common terms in healthcare settings in recent years. Taylor (2000) describes life as a source of reflection, and says how human life is about day-to-day existence and the choices people make in relation to their lives and other people and events. Reflection relates to both our own everyday lives and professional practice. We often reflect on events and occurrences by looking back on them, thinking about them, and about what we could do better in the future. We may reflect by thinking about things autonomously, writing a reflective log or diary, or speaking with others.
Ghaye et al (1996, p.7) say that ' we believe that more work needs to be done on...ways of reflecting on practice to the quality of patient care...we need to consider the impact of reflection on the quality of practice and the benefits it offers caregivers' clients. The authors stress their belief that more thought needs to be put into reflection in practice, and emphasise the importance of reflection on the quality of practice.
In this essay I have discussed the concept of professional skills, including generic and profession-specific skills and problems associated with professionals feeling under pressure to focus on both of these areas in practice, and feeling their roles often overlap. I then focused on two specific areas of teamwork and reflection, defining and explaining them with examples from other authors and from my own experience.
In the teamwork section, I looked at the importance of good teamwork and what individuals can bring to a team. I then went on to look at problems in teamwork and specific skills professionals within a team should take on. I concluded that there are many different aspects and skills involved in effective teamwork.
In this section, I also mentioned in two places how there was a lack of availability of therapy team members. As an undergraduate Occupational Therapist I feel concerned about this area and I hope that I can help to change the outlook of this situation, and that therapy team members will be more widely accessible and better represented in the future.
In the reflection section I explained how reflective practice is now common in health and social care, and illustrated the reflective process with models, including the commonly used reflective cycle by Gibbs (1988). I looked at reflection in practice; in decision making and problem solving, and used an example of my own experience of reflecting in a module workshop for my Occupational Therapy course. Writing about reflection has enabled me to gain a better understanding of the subject, as it was previously new to me.
I found researching and writing this essay interesting and informative, and the points I have covered will be useful for my future practice as a health professional.