In this essay I will concentrate primarily on the area of learning disability and look into the provision of, access to and experience of health care for this particular group of people. I will refer to the notion of equity being achieved for this group by NHS services in Britain. Equity is 'the state, quality, or ideal of being just, impartial, and fair' (Dictionary.com, 2004) I will focus on three areas: the experience of learning disability, the history of health services for people with a learning disability and inequalities in health services for people with a learning disability and developments made.
People with learning disabilities need good access to NHS services, and may also require extra support, as summed up by Lindsay (1998, 1.7); 'People with learning disabilities need to have equal access to primary care, community and hospital services and in addition will need support to use these services. They will also require very specialised services to meet some of their mental and physical needs.'
People with a learning disability often look or act in a different way to other people. This can lead to them having some kind of social stigma. Goffman (1990, p.31) describes how, in a social situation 'with an individual known or perceived to have a stigma, we are likely to employ categorizations that do not fit, and we and he are likely to experience uneasiness.' For the majority or doctors and other health care professionals, working with a person with a learning disability should not be an issue if they have an understanding of learning disabilities and the extra needs this group may have. However, a proportion of them may not know how to act in some cases. This may be problematic in the instance of delivering a good and equitable service to this group.
People with a learning disability are known to have much greater health needs than the general population. This is due to the likelihood of them having or developing general health problems, sensory impairments, mental health problems, epilepsy, cerebral palsy and other physical disabilities. (Lindsey, 1998). Baggott (1998) talks about people with learning disabilities being one of the groups that uses the health services most heavily. Other groups mentioned are the elderly, children, people with a mental illness or disability, and people with a physical disability. These groups require a wide range of social care and support, and extra practical assistance and advice in health care provision. They may have more complex health needs and many may be vulnerable or dependant. The author goes on to say that it has been long recognised that these groups require special attention but there have also been long standing problems in developing an adequate network of services. (See following section on history of health services for people with a learning disability)
Health and the experience of health should take into account more than just physical and mental well-being. Dubos (cited in Thompson and Pickering 2001. p. 26) states that 'health and disease cannot be defined merely in terms of anatomical, physiological or mental attributes. Their real measure is in the ability to function in a manner acceptable to himself and the group of which he is part.' This is an important point, and relates to people with a learning disability who may have degrees of social difficulties. This social stigma which is apparent in society today, can lead to have an impact on the well-being of a person with a learning disability. It is often noted that it is not the persons condition which disables them, but society itself which inhibits a persons choices, abilities or physical access. (Oliver, 1996; Nettleton, 1995). However, some authors argue against this saying 'there is a tendency within the social model of disability to deny the experience of our own bodies, insisting that our physical differences and restrictions are entirely socially created. While environmental barriers and social attitudes are a crucial part of our experience of disability...to suggest that this is all there is to it is to deny the personal experience of physical and intellectual restrictions...' (Morris, cited in Oliver, 1996. p.38) The social model mentioned maintains that the state of health is socially constructed and ill health is brought about by social factors. The author above is arguing that this model puts all responsibility on society, which in fact, is not the case.
Experiences of healthcare for people with a learning disability can often be quite negative or confusing. For example, in the case of primary health care, dental practices or GP surgeries may have unhelpful waiting times which can cause problems for people with a learning disability who may be unable to understand the system in place. Following on from this, a GP may find this group difficult to work with due to service users who have little or no communication or limited knowledge about health issues. This can be a problem for both the service user and the GP if the latter has no skilled support. A particular issue in this area is that of informed consent. If the patient does not understand the details of a necessary procedure, they will be unable to give their informed consent which can lead to many problems. (Arevalo, 2001)
Another issue that can increase inequalities between groups is the issue of health promotion. For people with a learning disability, access to health-enhancing behaviours such as fitness activities and healthy eating awareness, may be limited by money issues or availability, or poor access to services. (Arevalo, 2001) Lawrie also states that 'the current emphasis on health promotion may not be filtering through to the services delivered to people with learning disabilities.' (Cited in Arevalo, 2001)
An example of an experience of health care for people with a learning disability is described in a recent article entitled ''Getting on' with cancer'. (Tuffrey-Wijne and Bernal, 2003) They state that one in ten people with a learning disability die of cancer (Hollins et al, 1998; Patja et al, 2001. Cited in Tuffrey-Wijne and Bernal, 2003) and information about cancer should be given in a format they can understand. Patients who have a learning disability often find it difficult to access mainstream information materials, and they are often not given enough information about their condition from those around them, or not given information in ways they can understand. Health professionals need to appreciate the needs of a patient with a learning disability and be able to try to communicate information in ways they can comprehend. The experience of being told you have cancer is worrying for any patient, but for a patient who finds it hard to understand what is happening to them, it can prove a very traumatic experience. The article goes on to describe the development of a new cancer information book aimed at people with a learning disability which uses a story and pictures to help patients understand their condition.
In the nineteenth century, attitudes towards people with a mental, physical or learning disability were what would be seen as abysmal today. The Royal Commission of the Care of the Feeble-Minded (1904-1908) argued that it was necessary to 'control this wandering population of mentally defective persons, who are many of them dangerous, morally and physically, and criminal in their characteristics.' (Cited in Brigham, 2000)
Up until the early twentieth century, people with learning disabilities were seen as a threat to society. They referred to them as 'idiots' and admitted them to institutions, workhouses, prisons or lunatic asylums. Institutions were built between the 1850's up to the 1990's. The purpose of them was not so much for specialised care for this group, but to separate them from the rest of society. It was a form of social control and the implementation of social classification systems which resulted in these institutional buildings being built specifically for the reason of segregating these groups from society and controlling them. Until 1959 those who lived in long-stay institutions were detained under the Mental Deficiency Act. (DoH, 2001) Conditions were often very poor and residents often experienced emotional, physical or sexual abuse. (Brigham, Atkinson, Jackson, Rolph and Walmsley, 2000)
The Department of Health White paper 'Valuing People - A New Strategy for Learning Disability for the 21st Century' issued in March 2001, talks about the general acceptance up until the 1950's that people with learning disabilities were better off living with other people with disabilities in segregated institutions, rather than with their families in the community. It describes how the terms 'mental deficiency' and 'mental sub-normality' reflected the underlying attitudes of this time. The NHS was implemented on July 5 th 1948, but in its early stages, failed to focus on people with a learning disability.
Services for people with a learning disability were far from equitable before the early twentieth century. Provisions of health and care services were poor, if not non-existent in the nineteenth century, and the experience of learning disability at this time was appalling and unjust in terms of social systems and quality of life. Services for people with a learning disability have changed rapidly since then. Poor standards of care for institutionalised patients in the 1960's and early 1970's became increasingly evident, as a series of cases showing maltreatment of patients in long term hospitals proved. Pressure from parents at this time also became an important influence on the drive for change. (Robb, 1967; Martin, 1984, cited in Baggott, 1998; DoH, 2001.)
The 1971 White Paper 'Better Services for the Mentally Handicapped' set an agenda for the next two decades focusing on increasing provision in the community for people with learning disabilities and therefore reducing the number of places in hospitals. It emphasised the importance of health services, social services and other local agencies collaborating more effectively. (DoH, 2001) Community care began to be implemented in the late 1960's and 1970's. Community care makes it difficult for society to ignore the needs of groups such as people with mental illness or a disability.
The term 'learning disability' was officially first used by Stephen Dorrell, then Minister of Health in 1991. It was adopted by the Department of Health in 1992. The term replaced previous ones which now seem negative, such as 'mental handicap' and 'mental sub-normality'. (Lindsey and Russell, 1999; Emerson, Hatton, Felce and Murphy, 2001)
Northway (2003) Talks about 'equal rights' and 'equal access to health care' and what it means when these principles are put into practice. The author talks about equality and every individual being treated in the same manner. For example, in the case of an appointment in a GP surgery or a hospital setting, a person with a learning disability would be treated the same as any other patient. This would mean, however, that no provision of accessible information would be given for the patient with a learning disability, and no extra time for the appointment. Therefore this service is equal in terms of formal delivery, but results in outcomes poorer for the person with a learning disability. Providing treatment that is the same can, in some situations, actually result in inequality.
A solution for this predicament is to provide different types and levels of support which take into account the individuals need. This is particularly important when promoting improved access to generic health care settings. The relationship between generic services and specialist support within these services should be carefully considered.
The NHS is traditionally geared to the provision of acute services, and services for people with mental illness or disability or the elderly were referred to as 'Cinderella services' in the 1980's and 1990's due to low-status, lack of resources and sometimes poor quality service. (Means and Smith, 1994. Cited in Baggott, 1998)
Lindsey and Russell (1999. p. 2) state that 'in recent years there has been a major change in the views of professionals. There is growing awareness that people with learning disabilities can express their own views about the impact of their disability on their daily life...there have also been major changes in the way that services are provided'. The authors talk about how there has been a shift from institutional to personalised care and there are many services now available including day services, residential services and respite care services. People with learning disabilities are being seen more as individuals with individual needs, and a range of services are now available for them. This means that services are more equitable in the cases of provision of and access. However, experience of health care can still be a problem, as mentioned in the 'experience of learning disability' section regarding the access of primary health care.
Difficulties with access to healthcare can include lack of understanding of the process of consultation and problems in the waiting room, and problems with reading letters, instructions on medication or telling the time. Communication with the health professional can be problematic and people with learning disabilities may need extra time and extra help, for example visual aids, to enable then to understand. (Lindsey and Russell, 1999)
The 2001 white paper 'Valuing People - A New Strategy for Learning Disability for the 21st Century', recognises that people with a learning disability need support to access health care and describes the role of a new healthcare facilitator. This is a professional within a team who works specifically to improve access to health services for people with a learning disability.
Previously, the NHS and Community Care Act 1990 focused on ensuring equal access to services, but failed to specify this in terms of services for people with learning disabilities, meaning this group was more likely to become a low priority, not on the basis of need, but due to limited specialist provision from health care services. (Gates and Beacock, cited in Thompson and Pickering 2001. p. 180) This can be seen as an example of 'inverse care law' where those whose needs are greatest, get the least. As mentioned previously, there are increased health risks and health needs for people who have a learning disability.
An example of a recent development to improve services and the experience of healthcare for people with learning disabilities is the introduction of NHS Trusts as part of the 1991 NHS and Community Care Act. Learning disability trusts were set up in order to have an organisation to concentrate solely on this particular group. They meant that decisions could be made faster to improve the service and they had control over their finances. It was also felt that those working closely with people with learning disabilities are in a better position to understand the care and support they need. (Oxfordshire Learning Disability NHS Trust)
The NHS learning disability trusts provide respite services, residential homes, home support and community development services and have multidisciplinary teams to give a high-quality service. The teams include community nurses, occupational therapists, physiotherapists, dieticians, psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers and speech and language therapists, among others.
A specific example of improved experience of healthcare for people with a learning disability is the access to respite services for children and young people with a profound multiple learning disability and complex health needs. These services provide beds, specialist equipment and a multi professional team trained specifically to work with this group. The staff get to know the children and young people well and can offer advice and support to their families. They also often attend hospital appointments and other appointments with the parents, to give them advice and support. These kinds of services are designed around the needs of the individual children and their families and provide a high-quality service in the case of the access, provision of, and experiences of health care for this particular group. (Oxfordshire Learning Disability NHS Trust)
In this essay, I focused on looking at provision of, access to and experiences of health care in Britain for people with a learning disability. I have looked at the experience of learning disability; the history of health services for people with a learning disability; and inequalities in health services for people with a learning disability and developments made.
In the experience of learning disability section, I looked at health and social issues for this group. I discussed social stigma experienced by them and the extra health needs they may have. In terms of equitable services for this group, I discussed how they may have problems accessing health care due to lack of understanding of health services or health issues, and how they may need skilled support to gain fair access to services. I also looked at the experience of illness and how it can be confusing and traumatic for a person with a learning disability to face an illness.
In the section on history, I looked into the past when people with a learning disability were not understood and were institutionalised to be segregated from society in the nineteenth century. I discussed the inequity of treatment of this group up until the early 1970's when government papers were released to improve services.
In the last section about inequalities in health services and developments made for this group, I talked about how there have been changes in recent years in the attitudes of professionals towards people with learning disabilities, and also in the development of services for them. Provision of, and access to services has improved, but there are still problems in the experience of healthcare and specialist support is needed. This support is being implemented in the case of NHS Trusts and other services available.
In general, services for people with learning disabilities have developed and improved significantly over the years. Provision of, access to and experiences of healthcare for this group have become more equitable, although services are still improving, and some issues still remain.