The relationship between mood and memory is a prominent area of psychological study and it has been shown that people's memories are indeed influenced by their feelings. For example, it seems that emotionally charged memories are generally remembered better than neutral ones. In a study where participants were required to recall autobiographical events that they had previously recorded, recollection was better for highly emotional events as opposed to non-emotional events (Eich, 2000).
However, some emotions may impair rather than improve memory. Linton (1975; cited by Baddeley, 1997) found a discrepancy between the recorded frequency of frustrating events in her life and her recollection of these events, and inferred that memory selectively preserves pleasant memories and excludes negative ones. These effects on memory can occur either during encoding or retrieval of memories. An example of the influence of feelings on memory during encoding can be seen in flashbulb memories.
Flashbulb memories are vivid recollections of the circumstances in which a highly emotional or personal event is learnt (Brown & Kulik, 1977; cited by Matlin 1994). For instance, people were found to have highly detailed memories of what they were doing at the time they learnt of President John Kennedy's assassination (Matlin, 1994). According to Brown & Kulik (1977), the influencing factors of a flashbulb memory are a high level of surprise and emotional arousal. They believe that these feelings during the encoding of a memory cause a special 'now print' mechanism which results in a permanent record of the significant incident as well as all recent cognitive events. However, they also remarked that these unusual memories are probably rehearsed more frequently, both silently and in conversation. This causes these memories to be more developed than everyday recollections (Eich, 2000).
Later research suggests that it is more likely that flashbulb memories involve standard mechanisms but are supplemented by rehearsal and personal relevance. Rubin & Kozin (1984; cited by Matlin, 1994) also claim that flashbulb memories maintain clarity for an extended period because they are heavily rehearsed. Overall, while feelings strengthen flashbulb memories in vividness and detail, they seem to complement rather than depart from standard memory mechanisms (Anderson & Conway, 1993; cited by Eich, 2000).
Conversely, powerful negative emotions may diminish the strength of memories (Baddeley, 1997). Freud suggested that this is because anxiety provoking events are repressed in order to protect the ego from unbearable stress (Eysenck & Keane, 1995). Thus, negative feelings attached to an event during encoding may cause the memory of it to be irretrievable under normal circumstances. This was illustrated in an experiment by Levinger & Clark (1961; cited by Baddeley, 1997) where participants were discovered to be weaker at recalling the associations given to words of potentially distressing content then at recalling associations given to neutral stimuli, thus suggesting that there was repression of the distressing material.
In another experiment by Waldfogel (1948; cited by Baddeley, 1997), participants were able to recall significantly more pleasant memories from their early life as opposed to unpleasant memories. While this too points towards repression, Waldfogel suggested that it could also be that embarrassing or negative memories are unpleasant to recount and are therefore less rehearsed and developed than pleasant memories. As a whole, the experimental findings on repression are inconclusive. Holmes (1972; cited by Eysenck & Keane, 1995) found that recollection was reduced by positive feedback just as much as ego-threatening feedback. He believes that this is probably because the feedback diverted attention from the recall test that followed. Therefore, the results of experiments on repression are somewhat questionable. In addition, the emphasis of this theory on interpretation rather than prediction makes it less suitable as a scientific explanation.
People's memories are also influenced by their feelings at the time of retrieval. Studies have shown that memory is better when the material to be studied matches a person's current mood. Therefore, a person who is feeling happy recalls more pleasant memories while a depressed person tends to recall more unpleasant material (Blaney, 1986; cited by Matlin, 1994). This is known as mood-congruent retrieval. In an experiment by Baron (1987; cited by Oatley, 1996), participants acted as interviewers and different moods were artificially induced in them. Results showed that while happy interviewers remembered more positive information from the interviewee, the inverse was true for sad interviewers.
This can be explained in terms of Gilligan & Bower's (1984; cited by Eysenck & Keane, 1995) hypothesis which states that material with highly emotional content is inclined to be especially associated with its congruent emotion node. Therefore, when material to be studied matches a person's current mood state, it links up with a network of connected memories and induces elaborate encoding of this information, resulting in heightened memory ability. During recollection, the nodes activated by the current mood state in turn activate the network of associations of that particular mood. Therefore, information which is congruent with this mood has a higher chance of being recalled (Isen, 1984; cited by Eich, 2000).
However, negative moods do not always enhance recall of negative memories. In a study by William & Broadbent (1986; cited by Eysenck & Keane, 1995), people who recently attempted suicide were found to be slower at accessing positive memories than non depressive or suicidal people but not faster at recalling negative memories. A possible reason for this is that negative memories may be so unpleasant to retrieve that actual effort is made to inhibit them (Eysenck & Keane, 1995).
Besides mood congruency effects on memory, there is a tendency for memory to improve when feelings during recall match the mood state during learning. It does not matter how the actual memories are emotionally charged or whether they are emotionally charged at all, as long as the emotions involved during encoding and retrieval coincide. This is referred to as mood state-dependent learning. In a study where participants learned a list of words either on land or under water, recollection was found to be better when the state in which the list was learned matched the state in which the studied material was recalled. Thus participants who learned the list underwater, performed better when tested underwater as opposed to on land (Godden & Baddeley, 1975; cited by Eysenck & Keane, 1995). The same applies to mood states, as was shown in studies by Bower, Monteiro, & Gilligan (1978) and Schare, Lisman, & Spear (1984; cited by Eysenck & Keane, 1995).
The most influential theoretical assumption for mood state-dependent learning is Bower's network theory. This theory proposes that emotions are regarded as nodes in a semantic network, as are ideas and information. At the time of learning, links are formed between the nodes representing the information to be encoded and the emotion nodes activated by the current mood state. When recall occurs, emotion nodes are activated by the present mood state during recollection and activation is spread to all other associated nodes. If the mood states during encoding and recall match, the activation of the relevant information nodes increases and memory concerning the learnt information is more efficient. However, the links between the learnt information and the emotion node involved are comparatively weak and so mood state-dependent effects are probably greater when there are fewer retrieval cues as when performing free recall tasks (Eysenck & Keane, 1995).
An alternative explanation is that the brain is organised according to emotion, and so when someone is feeling a particular way, all memories grouped under that emotion mode are made more accessible. Conway & Berkerian (1987; cited by Oatley, 1996) also hold the opinion that emotionally relevant information is organised into groups of basic emotions. They obtained evidence that between priming an unrelated word and priming an emotion term within a certain emotion group, the latter produced faster reaction times in a lexical decision task. Therefore, according to this theory of emotion modes, events that are remembered are filed under memory according to specific feelings. When those same feelings are invoked, there is a greater access to the memories of these events compared to other unrelated material thus causing the mood state-dependent memory effect (Conway, 1990; cited by Oatley, 1996). Oatley (1996) suggests that this phenomenon occurs so that incidents related to the current mood state may be recollected to remind us of how we may have previously reacted in a similar situation.
There are several explanations for why people's memories are influenced by their feelings. During encoding, strong emotions may result in flashbulb memories or repression. During retrieval on the other hand, mood congruent or mood state-dependent effects may occur due to associations between activated nodes or the way the brain is organised. An understanding of how and why memory is influenced in these ways is important in the development of cognitive therapy. For instance, this knowledge can be used to help depressed patients break out of their cycle of depression which is worsened by their enhanced recollection of negative memories. In addition, this understanding would be useful in discovering optimum studying conditions by making use of emotional states to enhance memory.