I will base this essay on Gibbs (1988) reflective cycle. I am going to reflect on the experience of working on a shared group work task, and focus on some of the key dynamics of our particular group.
I was put in a group of 5 students from different professional backgrounds to work on a group assignment. We had weekly 2 - 3 hour meetings where we discussed our plans and our progress. We also exchanged information and comments between meetings, on the university's 'Integrated Virtual Learning Environment' ('WebCT'). In the first couple of weeks, all team members researched general issues around our assignment, and once we had established the relevant issues, we divided the topics between us, researched them further, and wrote up our respective sections of the assignment.
Our team consisted of 5 students from 4 different professional backgrounds. Individual professionals bring many attributions to a team, both in practice, and in educational settings (Miller, C, Ross, N and Freeman, M., 1999). As well as their profession-specific skills and knowledge, they bring their values and personality, which includes personal views, characteristics and history (Payne, 2000). Our group consisted of students of mixed gender, of different ages and from different countries, meaning there was a wide range of experience and characteristics which gave much diversity to the group. Working on a shared assignment brought us together with a common cause, whilst bringing personal and profession-specific aptitude to the group.
It was a good experience to work in a group of students from different backgrounds and cultures. Creek (2002) says that it is good for students to learn about the complex issue of culture from interaction with individuals from different backgrounds, as well as through reflective practice. The author also says that 'perceptions, fears and biases related to people of other cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds are based on a lack on knowledge or incorrect information' (Creek, 2002, p.488). There are different ways of formulating cultural competence. A definition of cultural competence is,
This definition relates to health and social care practice, but can also be applied to other situations involving people from different cultures. Within our group, we had to be understanding of each others ideas and attitudes, and recognise that we may have different ways of going about things or communicating. The 'Campinha-Bacote's model of cultural competence' suggests that individuals or institutions must first have a desire to engage in the process of cultural competence, and then gives 4 elements needed to reach cultural competence.
Professionals must be sensitive to others values, beliefs and lifestyle, as well as examining their own values and biases. They can develop cultural knowledge by finding out more about the respective culture (Anionwu, Sookhoo and Adams, 2004). Within out group, we shared information about ourselves and our backgrounds. We discussed informally where we were from, and joked about stereotypes often given to people from that area. This was a useful exercise in getting to know each other better, and enabled us to gain a better understanding of each other so we could work more effectively as a group.
Three important components of a team are communication, role and focus (Miller, Freeman and Ross, 2001). In terms of communication, all group members were expected to contribute to the discussions, and do their fair share of the assignment. We did not allocate specific roles to each team member, other than dividing the responsibilities of researching and writing up different topics. We did not have a specific team leader, which meant we had to work more collaboratively. We shared the role of writing the minutes. In general, we each had equal membership of the team, although certain members were more outgoing than others who were much quieter in meetings. There was potential for the less forthcoming group members to be left out of discussions, but we tried to make sure that we included them, by asking their opinion, and ensuring they had time to speak.
Miller, Freeman and Ross (2001), talk about a 'safe learning environment' within a team, 'where it is expected and agreed that all team members would communicate openly and in depth with each other' (Miller, Freeman and Ross, 2001. p119). An aspect I valued within our team was that we had good understanding and communication skills and were each able to give, and receive constructive criticism. This was helpful in keeping a clear focus in the assignment, as we were able to tell other group members if we thought they were straying from the point. Payne (2000) says that both criticism and encouragement should be appropriate, specific, and aimed at positive improvement, which I feel, was the case in our group. Adair (1986, cited in Payne, 2000) says that trust is a key aspect to a team and health professionals must trust in themselves and in others in the team. I feel that this developed in our group as time went on.
I have learnt a lot from working in a group on a shared assignment, and have realised that much effort is needed on every group member's part to keep the group working collaboratively and to keep focus on the task (Miller, Freeman and Ross, 2001). Good communication skills are vital, and being able to give and receive constructive criticism was a plus point of our group. Payne (2000) says that members of teams should be prepared to take on and share responsibility for managing particular aspects of work, and allow authoritative figures to give orders where necessary. Within our group, we did not have an allocated group leader, as previously mentioned. We divided the responsibilities of the group work task, and in meetings gave feedback and ideas regarding the task, and respected group members who made suggestions on what to do next. However I did feel that to have a specific group leader may have been helpful at times, especially in the first few meetings when it was sometimes difficult, in that each of us had different ideas about how to do the task.
If I was to be involved in a similar group setup in the future, I would choose to allocate a group leader to ensure structure to the meetings, and that all other group members had their say, and to make decisions on how to undertake the required task, taking into account what the rest of the group feel (Porter-O'Grady and Krueger Wilson, 1998). This could be the same person each week, or the role alternated between group members. I think the main reason why our group did not allocate a leader was because nobody wanted to have authority over the others, and to also have responsibility, which Payne (2000) says is something many people fear regarding being a team leader.
I have also learnt from participating in this group that I was, in this case, one of the more dominant group members, and felt confident in expressing my views and ideas. This was also helped by the collaborative nature of the group, and team members being open and responding to others (Payne, 2000). I feel that I can and should be confident with my ideas and opinions in a small group situation, and this is something I can take from this experience to apply to my future professional practice. I have also valued the experience of working in a culturally diverse group, and I have learnt that there is much to consider when working with people from different cultural or socioeconomic backgrounds (Creek, 2002). Developing cultural competence is a continuous process which I will carry on developing throughout my career as a student, and as an occupational therapist.