In individuals with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) of the hand, does exercise treatment with the use of a resting hand splint increase (or maintain) range of movement (ROM) and muscle strength better than exercise treatment alone?
'RA is a chronic, progressive inflammatory disease primarily affecting joints, characterised by pain and fatigue' (Turner, Foster and Johnson, 2002, p543). The disease course is extremely variable between individuals and psychological status and social support affect its status. RA develops from early adulthood onwards, usually starting between 25 and 55 years (Turner, Foster and Johnson, 2002). Exercise and rest strategies, and splinting to allow proper alignment of deformed joints, can be part of physical, and occupational therapy interventions to help manage RA symptoms (Hansen and Atchison, 2000). 'Muscle strength and joint ROM should be maintained through exercise, full ranging of joints during daily activities and therapeutic activity programmes' (Turner, Foster and Johnson, 2002, p558). Splints 'support the joint, reduce stress to the joint capsule, reduce pain during motion and help decrease inflammation (Turner, Foster and Johnson, 2002, p558).
Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) are a simple, clear design in which a variable is manipulated and change observed (Abbott and Sapsford, 1997). They are seen to produce the most rigorous evidence which will result in objective and statistical analysis of the intervention outcomes (Taylor, 2000).
This randomised controlled trial will encompass the following key elements:
Random selection: a computerised selection from a group of people with RA, so the selection is not biased.
Random allocation to treatment groups: a computerised selection of half the selected participants to one treatment group, and half to the other.
Single blinding of the researcher.
To estimate how large a sample will be required, a statistician will be consulted to perform a power analysis (Buckeldee and McMahon, 1994). This will be done to ensure that an adequate number of participants will be included in the study to test the hypotheses and to have the power to determine whether the interventions made a difference in the study outcomes (Depoy and Gitlin, 1998). There are a number of considerations in determining a sample size; the data analytical procedures that will be used, statistical levels of significance, the strength of difference in sample values expected, and statistical power (an 80 % power level is considered the minimum level of acceptability from the power analysis) (Depoy and Gitlin, 1998). These are all to be considered before a sample size is chosen. For the purpose of this proposal, 'X' will be used to represent the number of participants.
A sample of X number of randomly selected patients with RA of the hand, from referrals from GP surgeries and primary care physicians, will be invited to participate in the study and informed consent will be sought. They will be randomly selected by a computer from the eligible population of all adults with RA, i.e. the 'sampling frame'. This is a simple random sampling technique involving random selection from the sampling frame (Robson, 2002). Willing and eligible participants will then be randomly allocated by a computer, in order to minimise bias (Taylor, 2000), to one of two groups:
A control group is important to provide a baseline against which the intervention group can be compared (Bury and Mead, 1998). Two sets of data will be collected; ROM and muscle strength of the hand will be assessed in participants before the intervention, and after 20 weeks of receiving respective treatment, using the Arthritis Hand Function Test (AHFT) (Backman and Mackie, 1995). This method is based on the before-and-after study design (a type of experimental study design) which is used to assess the impact of an intervention (Kumar, 1996).
Participants will be asked to attend a hand clinic once every 2 weeks for 20 weeks to see an occupational therapist (OT) who will give them exercises to do in their own time, to help with the symptoms of their RA. For the treatment group who will also be receiving splinting treatment, the OT will fabricate an appropriate splint for the participant and educate them on how to use it. The aims of the sessions will be for the OT to ensure the participants are undertaking their exercise regime, or exercise and splinting regime, and undertaking it correctly, and also for the participants to express any concerns or questions that may arise over the 20 week period. The AHFT will be undertaken in the first session and one week after the last session.
(Kumar, 1996)
Independent variable: The cause responsible for bringing about change, i.e. hand exercises with the use of resting splints.
Dependent variable: The outcome of the change brought about by changes in an independent variable, i.e. ROM and muscle strength.
Extraneous variable: Several other factors which are not measured in the study, which may effect changes attributed to the independent variables, i.e. whether participants continue the exercises in their own time, disease exacerbation as the result of major psychological stressors (Hansen and Atchison, 2000), other illnesses, psychological status and social support (Turner, Foster and Johnson, 2002).
The researcher is in a state of genuine uncertainty over which type of treatment is more effective. It would be unethical to undertake this research if one treatment was believed to be better than the other. The value of the project is an ethical issue, as its purpose should be to improve practice for all participants (Winter and Munn-Giddings, 2001), which this study is indeed aiming to do.
The two groups will be treated equally, aside from the intervention (Greenhalgh and Donald, 2000). Informed consent will be sought from potential participants, after giving them an information sheet, sent through the post, explaining the following:
the aims of the project and the nature of their involvement
contact names, addresses and telephone numbers in case of queries or concerns
their involvement is voluntary and choosing not to take part will in no way affect future treatment
individuals have the right to withdraw from the study at any stage
information gathered will be confidential and anonymous
permission will be sought before including participants data in material to be published or circulated to others
any potential risks of physical or psychological harm or discomfort
A sign-off space will be included for the participant to sign if they have read and agreed to the previous stipulations
(Kumar, 1996; Morton-Cooper, 2000; Winter and Munn-Giddings, 2001; Robson, 2002).
Contact details of participants will also be requested. A copy of the signed consent form will be given to the participants (Robson, 2002).
This proposal will be submitted to a Research Ethics Committee to gain approval before it is put into practice (Winter and Munn-Giddings, 2001; Robson, 2002).
An observer will be single blinded as double blinding of participants and observers technically impossible (Greenhalgh and Donald, 2000). Patients can not be blinded, as they have to give their informed consent to be placed randomly in one or the other group, they will therefore be aware of their treatment allocation. OTs applying the intervention cannot be blinded as they must know which treatment to give which patient. The trial will therefore be single blinded, that is one researcher will enter patients into the trail, and do the baseline measures of ROM and muscle strength using the Arthritis Hand Function Test (AHFT), and another will do the evaluations at 1 week after the intervention, using the same test. This second researcher doing the evaluation will be blinded, that is, unaware of treatment allocation to avoid bias (Buckeldee and McMahon, 1994).
The Arthritis Hand Function Test (AHFT) will be used to measure the variables of ROM and muscle strength. This test consists of 11 items designed to measure pure and applied strength and dexterity, and gives scores according to individuals' ability (Backman and Mackie, 1995). The outcome measures will be recorded at baseline (in the first week of the programme) and at 1 week after completion of the 20 week programme. 'Other variables' will be recorded at baseline only. A mean will be calculated for the age, gender and length of diagnosis of RA of the participants in each group, and the standard deviation (SD) given. SD will show the dispersion around the mean (Taylor, 2000; Greene and D'Olivera, 1999). This information will be supplied to enable the reader of the research to see these other factors which may have an impact on the results.
For participants who may withdraw from the treatment, an 'intention-to-treat' analysis will be undertaken, so all participants are accounted for (Bury and Mead, 1998). The results will be assessed by comparing outcomes in the treatment and control groups (Mulrow and Oxman, 1997, cited in Bury and Mead, 1998). The data produced will be ordinal data, which can be put into an order. For example, one score from the AHFT can be better or worse than another score. A non-parametric test, the Mann Witney U test will be used to determine is there is a statistically significant difference between the control group and the treatment group. (See table 2.) (Greene and D'Olivera, 1999; Robson, 2002). This needs to take place to determine whether any differences in outcome between these 2 groups would have occurred by chance. That is, whether it can be certain that any improvement in the treatment group was due to the intervention or due to chance factors (Taylor, 2000). The level of significance is expressed in terms of the P-value (P = probability). The smaller the P-value, the more confidence can be given that any differences are not due to chance (Taylor, 2000).
A limitation of the before-and-after study design is that it measures total change, so it cannot be determined whether independent or extraneous variables are responsible for producing the change in the dependent variable (Kumar, 1996). For example, individuals with RA may have disease exacerbation as the result of major psychological stressors (extraneous variable), which would have an effect on the results. The nature of RA may also effect the results as there are various stages of RA (early, moderate, severe, terminal) and strength may vary depending on times of the day when joint stiffness is decreased (Turner, Foster and Johnson, 2002). It may therefore, depend on the time of day the AHFT is carried out as to what results are obtained, as well as the stage of RA each participant has.