How do people with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) of the hand feel about the exercise programme and splinting regime they are currently following?
1. Why do some patients attend appointments to see the occupational therapist (OT), while some do not?
2. Why do some patients follow the exercise programme and splinting regime as prescribed by the OT, while some do not?
3. In what ways do the patients think the regime is useful in helping the symptoms of their RA?
Qualitative research is used to 'understand the meanings, experience, and phenomena as they evolve in the natural setting' (Depoy and Gitlin, 1994, cited in Taylor, 2000, p101). The qualitative research approach to be used for this study is naturalistic, phenomenological research. This focuses on understanding and interpreting human experience (Depoy and Gitlin, 1998). Particular phenomena, events or experiences are explored in an attempt to understand an individuals' lived experience (Spiegelberg, 1975, cited in Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995; Taylor, 2000). Crotty (1996, cited in Grbich, 1999) gives 5 steps involved in the phenomenological research process. (See table 1).
Naturalistic inquiry takes a holistic perspective and postulates that those who have the experiences are most knowledgeable about them (Depoy and Gitlin, 1998). Therefore, semi-structured interviews will be conducted, asking the patients themselves about their experiences.
To increase credibility, data will be collected using a variety of research methods, and from different sources. This process in know as triangulation and can enhance the rigour of the research (Mays and Pope, 2000; Taylor, 2000; Robson, 2002). Therefore, three hand clinics are being included in this study rather than one, and in order to answer the research questions, three forms of data collection will be conducted:
One to one semi-structured interviews with participants, conducted according to a list of topics to be covered in an interview guide. (See 'Research questions'). The interviews will be audio taped with the participants' consent, and subsequently transcribed.
Participants will be asked to keep a diary for 4 weeks, to keep a record of when/if they practice the exercise and splinting regime in their own time, and when/if they attend appointments to see the OT. They will also write about their feelings about their treatment related to appointments, the regime and daily life activities throughout the weeks.
A researchers diary will be kept, to enable readers of the research to understand 'how the researcher thinks, acts, interacts with and feels about the participants in the project, and how the researchers concerns and values affect the data' (Grbich, 1999, p89). The suspension of beliefs, assumptions and biases about the phenomena under investigation is known as 'phenomenological reduction' (Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995).
Participants will be invited to participate in one to one interviews with the researcher. The interviewer's appearance should be similar to the interviewee's so as not to come across as too authoritative, and the interviewer should try to make the interviewee comfortable in expressing their true experiences (Robson, 2002; Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995).
Semi-structured interviews are appropriate where a study focuses on the meaning of particular phenomena to the participants (King, 1994, cited in Grbich, 1999); they are therefore the most appropriate interview design for this study. Semi-structured interviews have predetermined questions, but the order in which they are asked can be modified based on what the interviewer feels is most appropriate. The wording, order and explanations of the questions can vary, and questions which seem inappropriate with a particular interviewee can be omitted, or additional ones added (Robson, 2002). The design of semi-structured interviews enables interviewees to elaborate on their answers, and the interviewer to ask probing questions, so comprehensive data can be obtained (See table 2, 'The 4 Components of Asking').
In the initial interview, participants will be asked open questions about their attending of appointments and whether they follow the exercise and splinting regime, and in what ways they think it helps. Further and probing questions will be asked, depending on the answers given. Probes are neutral statements which do not bias the subject to respond in any particular way. They are used to encourage more information, or elaborations, for example, "tell me more about it" (Depoy and Gitlin, 1998). Summary questions are also useful at the end of an interview, to enable the interviewer to check they have understood the interviewee correctly (Grbich, 1999).
The second interview will provide an opportunity to expand, verify and add descriptions to the phenomena being researched. The researcher can refer to limited or inadequately described information to gain further descriptions. Often, the participants will also have additional thoughts about the phenomena, following the initial interview (Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995). The second interview will take place after the 4 weeks that the participant has kept a diary, and will also be an opportunity to discuss what is written in the diary.
Permission has been gained from the hand clinics to invite RA patients to take part in the study, explaining that the purpose of the study is to improve practice for all participants (Winter and Munn-Giddings, 2001).
There are a number of issues in phenomenological research due to its personal nature, and consent should be viewed as an ongoing process (Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995). A one page explanatory letter will be sent to all potential participants including the following information:
The aims of the study and the nature of their involvement
Contact names, addresses and telephone numbers in case of queries or concerns
Clarification that the participant is free to leave the study at any time and is not obliged to answer any questions they feel uncomfortable with
Information gathered will be confidential and anonymous and measures will be taken to prevent data being linked with a specific participant
Any potential harm the participant may suffer
Should any of the above change, participants will be contacted and further permission sought
A sign-off space will be included for the participant to sign if they have read and agreed to the previous stipulations
(Grbich, 1999; Kumar, 1996; Morton-Cooper, 2000; Robson, 2002)
Contact details of participants will also be requested. A copy of the signed consent form will be given to the participants (Robson, 2002). The researcher will then contact willing and eligible participants by telephone one week after they agree to participate, to arrange a time for the interviews to take place and to answer any questions the participants may have (Sim and Wright, 2000).
All tape recordings and diaries will be kept in a secure location within the researcher's university department and archived. Once data analysis is completed the key findings of the study will be fed back to the relevant staff at the hand clinics, and any participants who wish to know the information (Sim and Wright, 2000).
This proposal will be submitted to a Research Ethics Committee to gain approval before it is put into practice (Winter and Munn-Giddings, 2001; Robson, 2002).
Data analysis begins when data collection begins; they are inseparable processes (Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995). Analysis will therefore take place throughout the research as an ongoing process (Taylor, 2000). Data analysis requires the researcher to become immersed in the data and in the phenomenon under investigation (Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995).
A strategy to ensure credibility and trustworthiness of the data will be to involve participants in the analysis of the research, by giving them access to the transcribed data, and also the researcher's interpretations of it, and allowing them to comment on the research (Taylor, 2000). This is known as member checking (Mays and Pope, 2000; Robson, 2002).
The data will be analysed using thematic analysis. The themes to be concentrated on will be those that relate to the participants feelings about the exercise and splinting regime they are currently undertaking. The researcher will familiarise themselves with the data and listen to the tapes, whilst reading the transcriptions for accuracy. Significant statements and recurring themes will be identified and extracted (Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995). The initial themes that emerge will be coded, described and categorised into broad 'higher themes' (Taylor, 2000; Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995). There may be some interconnection between categories, and there may also be some data which may not fit neatly into the main themes of the analysis (Taylor, 2000). The researcher will note this for further analysis. Clusters of themes will be organised and compared to the original descriptions to validate them and examine discrepancies (Streubert and Rinaldi Carpenter, 1995).
A descriptive account of the phenomena under investigation will be produced and a theoretical explanation given (Ritchie, Spencer and O'Connor, 2003). These results will give an answer to the research question. Peer evaluation, member checking and audit will be used to review the research process to ensure dependability and validity (Taylor, 2000; Robson, 2002). This kind of research cannot be generalised. However, the insights and understandings of individuals' experiences gained from phenomenological research can be used as tools for reflection and evaluation of practice, and to enrich knowledge (Taylor, 2000; Mays and Pope, 2000).