Aphra Behn begins this poem by relating the narrator's passion to a stream, through the use of metaphorical language. The second line creates an image of a fork in the stream as it splits into different, but equal courses. This appropriately summarises the theme of the poem; the narrator has to decide on a course to take, meaning she has to choose either Damon or Alexis.
In terms of rhyme scheme, the first and third stanzas consist of three rhyming couplets (aabbcc). This type of rhyme scheme is sometimes referred to as 'metrically accelerated rhyme' - the rhyme words are as close together as possible, speeding up the pace of the poem. The fast pace suggests a rapid stream of thought as the narrator, or persona, tries to make sense of her complex situation.
The rhyme scheme changes to ababcc in the second stanza, and consequently there is a break from rhyming couplets. This highlights the unexpected sound of 'mourn' at the end of the second line. The idea of mourning is central to the poem, as it helps relate a sense of longing and sadness.
There is a fairly equal balance of perfect and imperfect rhyme throughout the poem, although most of the imperfect rhyme occurs in the last stanza (god / blood and back / take). These are examples of pararhyme; the vowel sounds differ, but the consonants remain the same (in this case'd' and 'k'). Typically half or imperfect rhyme creates a disconcerting feel, and this is true for the last stanza. The increasing sense of tension and frustration is reinforced further by the question mark at the end of the fourth line. This is apt for the subject of the poem, as there is no satisfying conclusion. The narrator cannot choose between her two lovers, so the poem ends on a hopeless and resigned note. Despite the full rhyme in the final lines of the poem (crost / lost), the words simply reinforce each other and heighten the sense of loss and disillusionment. 'Crost' is a form of 'crossed', and in the phrase "all my hopes are crost" it probably meant 'obliterated'.
Another instance of full rhyme that is more disturbing than agreeable is 'heart / part' in the first stanza. Although the words are acoustically similar, they clash in terms of meaning. In this context the pairing of 'heart' and 'part' suggests something that should be complete, but is in fact separated. This could be referred to as 'counter-semantic' rhyme, because the connotations of 'part' question those of 'heart'.
Generally the poem is written in iambic tetrameter, with the last line of each stanza in iambic pentameter. Usually the second syllable of each line is emphasised, but there are some exceptions, such as the first line of the third stanza. In this case the first syllable 'cure' is stressed. This is a particularly significant point in the poem as it marks a change in tone. The third stanza begins commanding Cupid to take action. It signals a break from the more reflective nature of the preceding stanzas and offers the reader some sort of conclusion.