Initially these poems may seem similar. They both explore coming to terms with loss and use poetic language and techniques throughout. Yet structurally they are extremely different. Perhaps the most noticeable aspect of this is in terms of form. 'The Kaleidoscope' is in the form of a sonnet, as it consists of fourteen lines mainly in iambic pentameter. Its structure is closest to that of a Shakespearian sonnet, although the rhyme scheme of the first quatrain (ABBA) digresses slightly from the standard ABAB. 'The Kaleidoscope' also differs from a traditional sonnet in terms of subject matter; instead of being joyful and celebratory, its subject matter is more sombre.
The terminal couplet of a sonnet has a "usual tendency to summarise or comment on the quatrains, and hence to moralise" (Lennard, 2005, p.49). To an extent this is true here, as the concluding couplet of 'The Kaleidoscope' is more generalised than the rest of the poem. There is a shift from a largely personal experience ("Offering me, my flesh, my soul, my skin"), to a more detached and collective statement in line thirteen ("Grief wrongs us so"). However, unlike the more traditional Shakespearian sonnets, there is a lack of moral resolution. The poem ends on "not knowing why", which captures the incomprehensible nature of death.
On the other hand, 'Underworld' is written in free verse. Therefore the reader is not distracted by a rhyme scheme; significant words are emphasised by enjambment and caesura as opposed to end rhyme. For example there is strong enjambment at the end of the third line; "must I let you go / down alone into each night as winter". This emphasises 'go', a syllable that is also stressed rhythmically due to the trochaic meter of the second half of the line. In addition, the phrase 'must I let you go' has a different meaning when separated from the following line, as it implies more finality.
Another prominent instance of enjambment in 'Underworld' occurs between the second and third lines of the second stanza; "to lie still on the ice, to know this is / not for ever...". In this case, 'not' is emphasised at the beginning of the third line. It is a key word in this context, because it reinforces the theme of transience that is central to the poem. In addition, the tension between the syntax and the line break helps to create suspense, similar to that in the fifth and sixth lines of 'The Kaleidoscope'; "Or, turning from the landing, I might find / My presence watched...". In both cases the reader is urged onwards by a sense of anticipation.
Throughout 'The Kaleidoscope', structure is imposed primarily by end rhyme, metre and sound patterning. The phrase "my hands become a tray" echoes the "bearing a tray" at the end of the first line. These lines are similarly constructed, consisting of ten syllables mainly in iambic pentameter. This technique could be referred to as a scheme, as it increases the regularity of the language and adds structure to the piece. It implies that the persona of the poem is subconsciously comparing his life before and after his loss. The second instance is followed by an example of synecdoche; "Offering me, my flesh, my soul, my skin". The repetition of 'my' replaces the focus on 'you' and 'your' (for example "your books" and "your kaleidoscope") earlier in the poem. Here the persona lists specific elements of himself, both physical and spiritual, and together these techniques reinforce that he is all he has left.
Similarly, the sound patterning in 'Underworld' can influence our general understanding and impression of the poem. Greenlaw uses sibilance in both stanzas, for example "swallowed six pomegranate seeds" in the first stanza and "in something of summer" in the second. There is also assonance in lines three and four of the first stanza - the sound of 'go' is repeated in 'alone' in the next line. In addition there is internal rhyme in the fourth line of the second stanza connecting "through" and "you". Significantly the 'o' sound of 'go' and 'alone' creates a melancholic feel in the first half of the poem. On the other hand, the 'oo' sounds in the second half and the sibilance are soothing. This adds to the reassuring tone in the second stanza.
Although there is an absence of end rhyme and regular metre in 'Underworld', the language is linked instead by symbolism and imagery. The first stanza is an allegory for the Greek myth of Hades and Persephone, illustrated by the title and the reference to "six pomegranate seeds". It relates to the rest of the poem in terms of the main themes, as these are primarily death (or mortality) and transience. In Greek mythology, the underworld is seen as being underground and therefore physically separated from life. It is often linked to winter, and this is depicted as cold and lonely in the poem, through the mention of 'alone' in line four and the image of a 'freezing' path. In contrast, summer represents warmth and life in the second stanza, as it thaws the ice. This contrast between the two seasons is in turn related to the idea of transience, because neither one is permanent.
Finally, the poems are similar thematically in that death is an underlying concern, although there is a difference in the choice of language used. The phrase "must I let you go / down alone into each night as winter" (lines 3-4, stanza 1) in 'Underworld' is reminiscent of Dylan Thomas' 'Do Not Go Gentle into That Good Night', which he wrote during the critical illness of his father. 'Good night' is a common euphemism for death, and probably originated from Shakespeare's 'Hamlet'.
In contrast, Dunn approaches the subject of death in more explicit terms in 'The Kaleidoscope'; "looking in / at where you died." (line 11). There is strong caesura after 'died', forcing the reader to pause and absorb the impact of this blunt expression. Using hardened and upfront language is a characteristic of Dunn's poetry, though more apparent in his earlier poems (Childs, 1999, p.143). Nonetheless, it could be argued that "as if preparing for a holiday" in line four of 'The Kaleidoscope' is a euphemism for dying, as it is a pleasant way of describing someone's departure.