Is the use of time in narrative important? If so, why? Before these questions can be discussed in further detail, first it is necessary to clarify what narrative is. Simply put, a narrative is a story. How a writer, poet or playwright chooses to use time affects how the story is told, for example the events can be related in a simple, chronological order or with the use of flashbacks. Time is, in essence, a structural device that can be used to achieve a deliberate affect on a reader or audience. The concept of 'time' discussed in this essay can be defined as a component of a story, or a structural tool.
E. M. Forster certainly saw time as an important element of narrative. "In the novel", he says, "the allegiance to time is imperative: no novel could be written without it". But is the same true for a play? A time sequence is still present in a plot, although, again using Forster's terminology, "the sense of causality overshadows it". It is easier to create a precise sense of time in a novel than in a play, simply because there is a narrator throughout.
Perhaps inevitably then, the use of time differs across literary genres. This essay aims to compare the use of time in Shakespeare's The Winter's Tale (1611) and Jane Austen's Emma (1816). Both have revolutionised the use of time in narrative to some extent, and so provide interesting texts for discussion.
Before Shakespeare, Renaissance dramatists were expected to comply with Aristotle's 'Three Unities'. Aristotle recommended that the events in a play should occur over a time scale of no more than twenty-four hours (the 'unity of time'). Shakespeare deliberately ridicules the 'unity of time' in The Winter's Tale - it is referred to with an ironic tone in The Chorus of Time;
The phrase "impute it not a crime" (IV i 4) tells us that Shakespeare is knowingly breaking the rule of the 'unity of time'. This is not the first occasion on which Shakespeare refuses to abide by the conventional use of time in Renaissance drama. Neither is this his only play that has a choric narrator. Shakespeare also uses choric narrators in Pericles and Henry V, but it is the fact that the narrator in The Winter's Tale is the personification of time itself that has interested critics. Shakespeare's unique treatment of time in The Winter's Tale is largely responsible for the play's originality as a whole. Through disregarding the 'unity of time' and using time to function as a narrator, Shakespeare has more freedom to explore the nature of time and its effects.
Far from being controversial, Austen's use of time as a structural factor in Emma is typical of the early novel. Though as the term 'novel' means 'new', we would expect the genre itself to be innovative in some way. The novel was the first literary form that attempted to accurately depict everyday life, a characteristic that Ian Watt coined 'formal realism'. In terms of 'formal realism', the sense of time generated through a text can potentially add "a new dimension to reality". M. H. Abrams describes the aim of realistic fiction as follows;
Austen uses time to do exactly this. Emma is grounded in an ordinary, credible time scheme; the passing of time and the progression of the story are gradual and uninterrupted - just like in real life. This is effective at creating realism, because the characters in the novel experience time as the reader does.
Another structural feature of Emma is that the reader is often informed of the time period that has passed since the last significant incident, either through dialogue or the narration. For example; "a week had not passed since Miss Hawkins's name was first mentioned in Highbury" (vol II chapter iv), and "a very few days had passed after this adventure, when..." (vol III chapter iv). This technique of frequently referring to the passing of time is essential for the progression of the story, because it constantly edges the narrative forward. This is ultimately the function of Shakespeare's choric narrators, although the major difference is that the progression in time is not gradual and constant as it is in the novel. Some critics maintain that the time gap of sixteen years gives the play a disjointed feel, perhaps like the 'year and a day' technique in fairytales and nursery rhymes.
The use of time can manipulate the interpretation of a text; for example, the world portrayed in it can be realistic or histrionic depending on the time scheme used. At one extreme, fairytales deliberately escape the notion of time - a classic quote to illustrate this point is the customary opening of 'Once upon a time...'. Similarly, Shakespeare refuses to be specific in his depiction of time in The Winter's Tale. This is not to say that he disregards time as an issue. Time is referred to throughout the play using figurative language and imagery. For example, Camillo remarks;
Shakespeare's choice of the word 'branch' is ambiguous. This is significant as it highlights the dual nature of time, both as a creator and a destroyer. On one hand 'branch' could be interpreted as to flourish or extend. These meanings have positive connotations and imply that time is a creator. However, 'branch' can also mean diverge or separate. This interpretation gives a more negative view of time as a destroyer. This is equally true for the somewhat paradoxical statement in The Chorus of Time - Shakespeare points out that rules are made in time, but can also be destroyed in time.
Although there are references to the passing of time in The Winter's Tale, these are not particularised. Locke's 'principle of individuation' is the theory that "ideas become general by separating from them the circumstances of time and place". Therefore, as the play does not limit itself to a particular time and place, the themes and issues explored have a universal and timeless quality - perhaps more so than those in Emma.
So far, we have seen how the use of time can alter the degree of realism. Its other main function, which is prominent when comparing these texts, is to limit or enable character development. Watt observes that "many novelists...have made their subject the exploration of the personality as it is defined in the interpenetration of its past and present self-awareness". Time is crucial in terms of character development; because characters are elaborated on and disentangled through time. Usually a longer time scale is needed to do this successfully (the time scale for Emma is a year for example).
It would be impossible for the action in The Winter's Tale to take place over a maximum of twenty-four hours, because the character development of Leontes is fundamental to the plot. As Howard Felperin acknowledges, The Winter's Tale "reveals much more of the vital information concerning the principals than is, strictly speaking, required by the plot or usual even in a Shakespearean play". The characters in The Winter's Tale have a past, and (we can assume) a future. This is equally true in Emma; Austen offers us a brief account of Emma's past and her present situation in the first four paragraphs. In this respect The Winter's Tale and Emma are surprisingly similar - the central character is developed over time. This is made possible primarily by the length of the time scale employed.
In his essay entitled The Structural Pattern (1964), Ernest Schanzer emphasises how the first half of The Winter's Tale is replicated again in the second. The function of the Chorus of Time is not only important to highlight the contrast, but also the structural similarities. Schanzer argues that "by his gesture of turning the hour-glass Time...creates in us a feeling of repetition". His point that "both parts of the hour-glass look alike" is a valid and significant one. Each half of the hour-glass is a mirror image of the other. In many respects, so is each half of the play. Therefore in answer to those critics such as Panofsky who believe that "the figure of Father Time is used as a mere device to indicate the lapse of months, years or centuries", the Chorus of Time not only functions as a narrator, but also as a structural device to emphasise the repetition of events in the second half of the play.
It is easy to underestimate the importance of time, as it has a more subtle presence in narrative than, for example, the plot or central characters. Nonetheless, after a close analysis of a text it is clear that its use of time is fundamental to its interpretation.
After all, every writer or dramatist uses time, whether they intend to or not. I think Johnson had a valuable point when he said "Time is, of all modes of existence, most obsequious to the imagination: a lapse of years is as easily conceived as a passage of hours". This is a fact that is fundamental to story-telling, for we need to believe and accept the time scheme of the narrative before the story can be told.