This essay aims to explore the linguistic techniques employed in Edward Thomas' 'The Long Small Room', in order to gain a fuller understanding of the text. In the poem, the persona (likely to be Thomas himself) seems to be speculating about age and reflecting on the past. Perhaps as a result of this, the tone is melancholic. The last quatrain differs from the three preceding it in terms of subject matter, tense and degree of metaphorical language. This enables the persona to contemplate the themes of age and the passing of time in more detail.
Firstly though, let us consider the title. 'The Long Small Room' is an unusual collocation, because 'long' and 'small' contradict each other semantically. If a room is long, it is likely to also be described as big, rather than small. The fact that the room in the poem is long and small implies it is out of proportion and out of the ordinary, as indeed it is. Another point to make here is that length tends to be associated with width. In this case 'the long narrow room' might be an appropriate substitute, although this might ruin the simplicity of the title. The term 'narrow' is disyllabic rather than monosyllabic, and arguably not as neutral in this context. Together 'long' and 'narrow' generate a tunnel-like image and a sense of claustrophobia, more so than 'long' and 'small'.
'The long small room' is the presumed centre of the text; not only is it the title of the poem, but also the first quatrain describes it, the characters look in on it, and the focus of the third quatrain is what happened there. Or, more specifically, the centre and main subject matter of the text is simply a room. In the first line 'room' is the head of the noun group. 'Long' and 'small' are its pre-modifiers, and 'that showed willows in the west' is a post-modifying phrase.
To decentre the text, one might want to draw attention to the 'willows in the west'. These are mentioned in the first and last lines of the poem, a technique that adds structure to the text and at the same time suggests a cycle. It is interesting that Thomas chose to mention willows in place of any other tree. Some people might associate these with the weeping willow and therefore the act of crying. Indeed, Thomas applies the verb 'stream' to the leaves on the willow tree; this is emphasised by the assonance in 'leaves stream'. This phrase also connotes crying, as tears can be described as 'streaming', or 'a stream of tears'.
A sense of sorrow is also conveyed through the poem phonetically. In the first and forth quatrains, repetition of the 'oh' sound mimics the sound of sighing, for example the assonance in 'showed willows', and pillow/willow are end rhymed in the forth quatrain. There is also initial rhyme between 'narrowed' and 'although' in the second and third lines.
It may be significant that the long small room looks out onto the west where the sun sets, as this suggests a place in time nearer the end of a cycle. The concluding line of the poem mentions the 'last leaves', perhaps a sign that it is winter and reaching the end of the year. This sense of coming to the end of a cycle is related to the themes of age and time that are present more generally in the text. On the other hand, in the forth quatrain there are also references to beginnings. For example the 'clean white page' and 'each morning on the pillow' both create the sense of a new start, and for the latter the beginning of a cycle.
It is clear the long small room is a memory; this is implied by the phrase 'when I look back', as well as the fact that the first three quatrains are mainly in past tense. 'There' in the second quatrain also helps to distance the experience. If the second quatrain was rewritten in the present tense it might look something like this;
This repositions the reader so that they are in the room amongst the action. At the same time the room looses some of its intrigue and mystery. If the description of the room is relayed to the reader in past tense, it makes it easier for us to alienate.
There is a shift in temporal dimension from the third quatrain to the forth. The dash in the last line of the third quatrain indicates a significant change in thought, separating the line both visually and conceptually. It is followed by 'this', a more direct representation of experience than 'that'. The progressive participles 'crawling', 'resting' and 'starting' indicate that the first three lines of the forth quatrain are in the most immediate tense, the continuous present. If the tense was shifted to the generalising 'state' present, these lines might look as follows;
This dimension creates a stronger sense of routine than the '-ing' form, but does not produce the same extent of contrast between the third and forth quatrains. In the third the reader assumes that the persona is 'like moon, sparrow, and mouse' in that he or she also 'witnessed what [he/she] could never understand...'. There is an unexpressed causation here, but the structure of the text implies that like the other characters, the persona is a helpless bystander to the action. In marked contrast, in the subsequent stanza the persona participates in and directly manipulates the action.
In the concluding lines of the second quatrain, 'shall' projects into the future, and so does 'the old ivy and old er brick'. Here there is a direct comparison, as the second adjective is an extended and intensified version of the first. This would be lost if 'older' was replaced by a synonym, for example 'ancient'. 'Old' also relates thematically to the rest of the poem, as (unlike 'ancient') it is commonly used to describe people.
The metaphors in the poem are concentrated in the last quatrain, for instance 'crawling crab-like' and 'leaves stream'. These examples are both foregrounded through sound patterning. The initial 'c' alliteration in 'crawling crab-like' binds together the concept of crawling and the image of a crab, particularly as the alliterated syllables are stressed. It suggests a gradual process, and the comparison to a crab connotes brittle joints - these are both aspects of age. Using 'crawling' on its own, or 'crawling child-like' instead might create a different effect of youth and agility, and therefore contradict the theme of ageing. Up to this point there is little figurative language, and in this way the last quatrain is set apart from the rest of the poem.
To sum up, the subject matter of the first three quatrains is mainly concrete. The poem mentions tangible objects such as a room, a house, a fireplace and a page in a book - these are all concrete nouns. On the other hand, the focus of the last quatrain (age) is an abstract concept. Consequently, this stanza is more general. Unlike the others the thoughts expressed in it are not tied to a specific time and place. And perhaps most significantly, the immediate tense makes the action continuous and indefinite, rather like the daily routine of life itself.