This essay aims to analyse and compare the three opening paragraphs of Louise Erdrich's 'Tracks' (passage A) to 'Her First week' by Sharon Olds (passage C). Both texts can be defined as 20 th century American literature, although they differ in genre - the former is prose fiction and the latter is a poem. That said, the texts share a number of similarities. Both use techniques that are commonly found in other genres. For instance, prose is often thought of as 'non-poetic', but throughout the passage from Tracks are literary techniques such as alliteration, parallelism, metaphors and similes. In this sense the language of 'Tracks' does not fit the formal definition of prose fiction. Similarly, the form and language of the poem is perhaps closer to prose than poetry, due to the absence of end rhyme and a regular metrical pattern.
Firstly, one of the most noticeable aspects of both texts is that they are mainly in past tense. Consequently, both use diegesis, a basic form of narration that concerns telling and recounting, as opposed to showing or enacting. The idea of story-telling is particularly important in 'Tracks'; critics such as Nancy J Peterson suggest that Erdrich intended to emphasise the oral tradition of the Anishinabe tribe. Consequently the opening paragraphs are reminiscent of a dramatic monologue or a political speech, as the language is more phonetically significant than is usual in prose. Some common features of American rhetoric are anaphora and epistrophe; these are both apparent in the passage. For instance, line 11 is an example of anaphora; "but the earth is limitless, and so is luck and so were our people once". Here the conjunction 'and' is repeated together with 'so' at the beginning of a clause, forming a type of parallelism. Not only does this create structure by joining the clauses together, but it also highlights the sudden shift into past tense.
The parallelism in lines 8-9; "disaster must surely have spent its force, that disease must have claimed all of the Anishinabe...", firstly links the concepts of disaster and disease by using the 'parallelism rule'. Both have the prefix 'dis', a negation marker that highlights the absence of something, and both lead to terrible consequences and loss. The parallel structure emphasises their parallel meaning. On the other hand, 'spent' and 'claimed' could be seen as opposites - the former denotes loosing, the latter denotes gaining. It is interesting to note that both these terms are used in reference to money, a subject that characterises the industrialised and commercial culture that threatens the Anishinabe tribe.
The repeated structural features (the phrases 'must surely have' and 'must have') reiterate the tribe's feelings of certainty, only to be contradicted by the 'but' at the start of the next sentence. It is unusual to begin a sentence with 'but', and consequently it is foregrounded against grammatical norms. In this case the next sentence is also a new paragraph, so the word 'but' is especially prominent.
Old's poem also crosses the genre boundary separating poetry and prose, as it rejects traditional forms of poetry. The lines are a combination of long and short, and the number of syllables in each ranges from 7 to 15. Perhaps Olds chose free verse instead of a predetermined form because of its unpredictability, a quality that captures how it feels to first look after a newborn baby. Some poets think free verse allows a more spontaneous expression of emotion that does not need to be confined by the restrictions of rhyme and metre. Based on this argument, free verse is an apt form to express the experience of motherhood, an exceptionally emotional time. It also enables more interplay between syntax and the line, which is an important and foregrounded feature of the poem.
Another way in which 'Her first week' differs from the expected norms for poetry is that the start of each line is rarely marked by a capital letter (only 4 out of 28). This is an example of external deviation, as it breaks one of the genre norms for poetry - a norm that is external to the text.
As for external norms in relation to 'Tracks', the opening passage does not conform to the assumed 'rules' for narrating history. The narrator refuses to use specific names and therefore limits the number of proper nouns in the passage. For instance, he refers to "the spotted sickness" rather than smallpox or measles, and "a storm of government papers" instead of naming the specific documents. These examples are foregrounded in the text in addition to against external norms, as they both make use of poetic techniques. The former uses sibilance alliteration and the latter is a metaphor. It is important to note that by rejecting the specific names for historical details the narrator separates them from their time and place, and assigns to his story a timeless quality. Although the 'Nadouissioux land' and the year 1912 are mentioned in the first paragraph, these are the only specific details of time and place throughout the passage. The limited use of proper nouns makes the language accessible to a larger number of readers.
Specialist terminology is likely to produce the opposite effect. A prominent feature in Olds' poem is the change in subject matter lexis from familiar to scientific language. 'Scan' in the first line is reminiscent of prenatal hospital checks, although it does not function as a noun in this context and therefore its significance is questionable. Later on in the poem Olds uses biological terms such as 'moire sacs', 'spine' and 'chordate'. This is an example of internal (lexical) deviation - the reader does not expect to see terms like these in a poem about a mother's relationship with her child. In contrast, the phrases "part by part" and "her little bottom" are much less specific and use more common terminology. The scientific language makes the tone of the poem more detached; perhaps this is necessary so the narrator can describe the biological precision of her child. The scientific terms in the poem are mainly concrete nouns; these are needed for accurate description. In comparison, many of the nouns in passage A are abstract, such as 'disaster', 'disease' and 'punishments' - another feature of the passage that makes it more general.
In both texts a first-person narrator is used, and this enables the subject matter to be more personal than informational. The result is a less formal register. Both narrators begin to use the common contraction 'I'd', in line 8 of the poem and line 26 of the passage, to resemble familiar speech. As mentioned earlier, the oral tradition of story-telling is an important influence on 'Tracks'. The fact that the narrator directly addresses his granddaughter in the third paragraph creates the impression that he is speaking to her. As the granddaughter does not or cannot speak back, we can conclude that this part of the text is a monologue. The narrator is the main character in the story he is telling, as he refers to himself using the first-person pronoun 'I'. It may be that the granddaughter is also a character in the story, or perhaps she is an imaginary subject that symbolises the future generation. Again, the narrator does not use a proper noun to address her by name, and this opens up the possibility that he could in fact be talking to the reader.
The tense and personal pronouns used in the passage make the reader feel more included in the story compared to in the poem. This part of 'Tracks' is aimed at a second-person or 'you' position. It complicates the 'discourse architecture' of the text by introducing a narrator to narratee layer, in addition to that of author to reader. Significantly the narrator uses the present tense, and this makes the action more immediate; "you are the child...". In comparison, 'Her first week' uses a more basic, poet to reader discourse structure. Unlike the passage from 'Tracks' the text is not centred on a 'you' position, so there is no narratee. The poem is mainly in past tense, leading to a more distant representation of experience.
The opening passage of 'Tracks' appears to start at the beginning of a story, as the first sentence begins "we started dying...". The sentence goes on to describe the process of dying; interestingly it seems this process has a beginning and middle, but no end. The idea of continuity implies being uninterrupted and seemingly endless, and in this sense the snowfall parallels the deaths of the men.
The incidences in the first paragraph seem to be relayed to the reader in chronological order. This is clear from the list structure of the second sentence, and the conjunction 'and then'. But on the other hand, the pronominal references 'we' and 'what', in "we started dying" and "what descended from the north" mean that the passage technically begins in medias res, or in the middle of things. It is assumed that the reader knows who and what each phrase refers to. In this case the technique forces the reader to take the position of the Anishinabe people, and consequently places them closer to the action. Using pronouns before the nouns they refer to are introduced immediately raises questions, and this creates a suspense that operates by the hermeneutic code. Significantly the pronouns used in the passage change from 'us' and 'our' to 'I' and 'my' in line 23. This signals a shift in focus from the group identity of the tribe to the single identity of the narrator. It reiterates that the narrator is the last one left.
'Her first week' also begins in medias res; Olds only refers to the baby using 'she' and 'her'. Although here the effect created is slightly different to that in passage A, as the pronouns are third person singular rather than first person plural. The latter type is more likely to make the reader feel included in and close to the action.
But while passage A builds suspense by using the hermeneutic code (by raising questions), it is created in 'Her First week' using the principles of the proairetic code, a type of narration that concerns actions and their immediate consequences. An example in lines 8-9 can illustrate this; "...damp laundry in the dryer, I'd slip / a hand in, under her neck". The phrase "I'd slip" at the end of line 8 is by itself a complete syntactical unit, and has a different meaning if it is interpreted apart from its context in the next line. The reader is compelled to read on to find out the consequence or resolution of this potentially tragic action.
Olds frequently uses this 'extension structure' to create an arresting or heart-stopping effect at the end of the line. Line 21 is another, more prominent example; "Every time I checked, she was still / with us...". By itself the line is a complete clause, and it leads the reader to think perhaps the baby has stopped breathing, when in fact the next line confirms the opposite. Earlier on in the poem 'fallen' and 'tumble' are also enjambed, and both are actions with potentially disastrous consequences. This technique helps to express the flashes of paranoia and worry that parents experience on a daily basis.
It is clear the focus of the poem is the baby (the title is in a sense directed to her), or more specifically the nature of a mother/daughter relationship. The 'centre' of passage A is the Anishinabe tribe. Incidences in the text are described in relation to, and by their impact on them. In the first paragraph they are attacked from all directions; "the spotted sickness from the south", "a wind from the east", and "what descended from the north". These details establish the tribe as the main focus of the text by positioning them as deictically and geographically central to the action.
A characteristic of 'I-narrators' is that they can express a biased, personal opinion. In this case the tribe's experience is presented as a struggle rather than progress, and many of the nouns in the passage are highly modified. For instance in the phrase "bitter punishments of early winter", each aspect of the noun group has unpleasant connotations. 'Punishments' is the noun head (and just by itself implies pain), 'bitter' is a harsh pre-modifier, and 'of early winter' is a post-modifying phrase. Although the latter appears to be fairly neutral, out of all seasons winter has the most unpleasant and depressing conditions. It is interesting that the narrator defines his age as "no more than fifty winters" rather than in terms of years, implying that winter is the most challenging time of year.
The same is true for other metaphors in the text; the simile in line 22, "like a coarse rope, frayed at either end", heightens the feeling of being exposed and inadequately protected, and "a storm of government papers" in line 6 emphasises hostility and tension. There is also a preoccupation with death, dying and illness that is clear from the first sentence. Erdrich does not use any euphemisms for death; as a result the third word 'dying' is rather startling.
In contrast, in the poem the similes used to describe the baby are all based on beautiful or typically feminine images, implying an optimistic outlook on birth and life. For example in lines 7-8 she tumbles "like a load of damp laundry in the dryer". Not only is this striking because it is a domestic image, but also the phrase is foregrounded through sound patterning. The consonants 'l' and 'd' are fully alliterated three times each. This alliteration is more noticeable because the sounds are stressed and occur in a syllable-initial position (except for the 'd' at the end of 'load' and in the middle of 'laundry'). In line 25 the narrator gathers the baby to her side "like a loose bouquet" - another feminine image that is beautiful at the same time. The bouquet is loose, emphasising its wildness and freshness; perhaps this relates to the fact that the baby is newborn. The simile "limp as something...fallen from some sky" in lines 2-4 portrays her as angelic. Together these all images share a peaceful and optimistic quality, one that is also shared by 'gently', 'slowly', 'evenly' and 'quietly'. These are used throughout the poem in relation to the child, and add to the soothing effect.
On the other hand, in the metaphor the narrator uses to describe a part of herself; "struck with minuscule scars like creeks in sunlight", the language is pessimistic and harsh. 'Struck' implies a strong force, and creates the opposite effect to the calming, peaceful language in the rest of the poem. Using 'scars' to refer to wrinkles suggests imperfection and pain, and implies a pessimistic outlook on old age.
Finally, to conclude, these texts initially seem contrasting and opposed to each other - for instance they belong to different genres, and one celebrates life, the other reflects on death. But in spite of this, a stylistic analysis illustrates that many of the techniques they use are similar, although their effects tend to be context dependent.