'The Kaleidoscope' and 'On Re-Recording Mozart' are instantly comparable in that they deal with the subjects of death and bereavement. In terms of metre and rhyme, the Dunn poem adheres to certain rules of its genre, which I will be exploring shortly. However, the poem by Susan Wicks is a clear example of free verse. This form of poetry is written in continuous prose but finds structure in the organisation of line breaks and breaks in syntax. This form does not have a set rhyme or metre, and is naturally a looser, more flexible form as a result.
Both poems are examples of the sonnet design. A traditional sonnet is a form of 'love' poetry, although this is not the only subject that can lend itself to the form (for instance bereavement in the case of these two poems). Sonnets are generally written in fourteen lines and with a regular metre of iambic pentameter. There are various different forms of the sonnet, which alter the structure as well as rhyme scheme. For instance, the English sonnet is divided into 3 quatrains (with the rhyme scheme of 'abab') and one rhyming couplet to conclude. The Italian sonnet, however, is split into one octave and the concluding argument (volta) is within the last six lines, or sestet. The Dunn poem is an example of the English sonnet, and adheres to the basic structure of this form of poetry.
The Susan Wicks poem, however, does not conform to the strict metre of iambic pentameter due to the free verse model. The metre instead is anapaestic for the first few feet of line1, ending with an iamb in order to place stress on 'drove':
From this point onwards, the poem alternates between metre schemes ranging between some iambic feet, anapaestic and dactylic. The anapaestic metre in the first few feet lends a strong sense of movement to the poem, a steady beat, much like the docking of the tape alluded to in line six, or the throb of car wheels driving on an unsteady road.
The subject of loss is dealt with in the Wicks poem by trying to re-live a memory of a loved-one through music. The initial bereavement is felt in the two quatrains at the beginning of the poem. There is an emphasis on silence as the rhythm from the car and the clicking tape (felt through the beat from the anapaestic feet) are the only things that can be heard. The plosive sounds of 't', 'k' 'd' adds to this effect. This poem is an Italian form of sonnet and the volta comes through in the last six lines with the re-living of the memory of the lost one through the music on the tape:
The Douglas Dunn poem, however, is an English sonnet form in that the turn takes place in the last two lines in the poem, forming a rhyming couplet. In the previous 12 lines, the sense of grief felt by presumably the poet, can be an all-encompassing emotion. The iambic pentameter offers a sense of gravity to the poem. The rising second syllable in the iambic foot also creates a sense of climbing, as the poet literally climbs the stairs expecting to see his loved-one at the top. The excess or 'kaleidoscope' of commodities - 'tray', 'pillow', 'gowns' and 'frocks' - in the first four lines contrasts sharply the sense of loss and emptiness later in the poem. Instead, the poet's grief becomes everything:
He is offering himself, almost as a sacrifice or a demonstration of his desperation in wanting his wife back. The use of punctuation and anaphora (with the repetition of 'my...') here foregrounds each word so that the reader is forced to consider the painful subject which the poet is addressing and the feeling of powerlessness in it's entirety - in his entire body.
This feeling of paralysis through mourning can also be read in the Wicks poem with the use of enjambment after the first and third stanzas. The first stanza which ends with 'love' is structurally separated from the resulting part of the line - '...and love/itself were cut out' - so that the physical splitting of the stanza after the fourth line reflects the poet's feelings of being cut away from her beloved. The enjambment between stanzas three and four reflects the volta in the argument. The reader and the poet are beginning to find some relief from this almost deafening silence found in the two quatrains. We are literally pulled forwards from line 11-12 across the divide - '... Her breath/pulls me across darkness' as the poet is pulled from despair by the memory of her loved-one evoked by the music. The use of assonance and long consonant sounds, for instance 's' and 'n', emphasises the steady and smooth running of the tape as it plays anew and therefore the relief the poet feels from the silence and grief as she has metaphorically 'erased death'.
The two poems deal with a tragic subject in different, but equally effective ways, both using the sonnet form capably. The Dunn poem is the more structurally accurate when looking at this form. The sonnet is an elegy for his wife, and his consequent devastation at her death. The unexplainable nature of death is foregrounded in the last couplet, leaving the reader with an impression of the poet's helplessness.
The Wicks poem, in the basic sonnet form of fourteen lines, shows how something as simple as a piece of music can evoke strong memories of a person, such that it can be an alleviation from intense feelings of loss and emptiness. Susan Wicks herself observed, 'poetry itself requires us to remain essentially vulnerable.'. The irregular rhythm shows this vulnerability by creating a sense of passing time but with a lack of recognition to it. The lack of a consistent composition in the free verse structure in turn foregrounds the uncontrollable and unimaginable nature of death.