'Emma' was written in 1816 by Jane Austen and is an example of a 'domestic novel'. It is so called because it is a story about the domesticity of life and the subtleties of interactions within a household. The novel form itself is a highly structured art form which became significant as a literary form during the 18 th century. It coincided with the rise of industrialism and capitalism and also a higher appreciation of the importance of the individual. The novel form reflected this new found awareness and readers began to interpret meanings in the stories. The novel has a set of narrative procedures which are instantly recognisable and these procedures create a regulated structure for the novel which does not exist so strongly in other literary forms, such as the play. The genre of the play is naturally a freer form, with more scope for expression and interpretation as there is not such a strict structure. An actor portraying a character can choose to interpret a character in a number of ways, whereas characters in a novel are more regulated by structure and form.
Time is dealt with differently in the two forms. It is more regulated in the novel as it has to comply with strict narrative procedures. In 'The Winter's Tale' written by Shakespeare in 1611, time is personified and influences the story more obviously. In 'Emma', time manipulates and guides the life of the protagonist and the story in a structural way. It is a more subtle influence although it is very precisely dealt with. The story itself is set within the narrow time frame of one year and is chronological in its events which ground it in realism. The reader is 'subjected', almost, to this tight structure where events are manipulated by the influence of time. This has an effect on other areas of the novel in that everything is detailed and precise, including the weather and seasons, as well as the present and past histories of the characters.
In 'The Winter's Tale' there is not this intimate knowledge of the characters. There are many questions that remain unanswered, for instance, where do Leonte's accusations of Hermione's supposed infidelity arise from? What is his reasoning behind it? From the very beginning we see that this is a play of mystery and ambiguity. This adds to the fairytale aspect of the story, as the ambiguity is evident in the characters as well as in time. Realism is not priority in this play, as opposed to 'Emma', where realism in both time and setting is imperative.
The setting of Hartfield reflects the highly structured nature of the novel, as it is an organised and conventional, where there is very little change or discord. As we are told straight away, Emma 'had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her' {chapter one}. Hartfield, and in particular Emma's father, Mr Woodhouse, have a grounding effect on the story as they represent routine. The character of Mr Woodhouse in particular hates any upset or changes in his usual pattern. Time is so neatly and tightly controlled that anything out of the ordinary or any impulsive actions disturb the equilibrium of Emma's world. For instance, it is the characters of Frank Churchill, Jane Fairfax and Mrs Elton that help move the story onwards by their presence because they challenge Emma and her situation. Without these characters, there could not be progress, as they provide the circumstances for Emma to realise that she loves Mr Knightley.
Mr Knightley is a grounding influence on Emma because he characterises age and wisdom. There is an age gap of sixteen years between the two characters; he signifies the sensitivity and discretion of maturity, whilst Emma represents the vivacity and playfulness of youth. Together they create a successful partnership, signifying that age and youth can complement each other. This portrays another aspect of the multifaceted nature of time as a guiding influence in the novel.
The character of Frank Churchill challenges the conventionality of time in 'Emma'. The very fact that he arrives into the story late means that Emma is immediately vexed because he upsets her plans. He is also an impulsive character, as can be seen when he leaves for London at short notice merely for a haircut. Emma reflects that 'it did not accord with the rationality of plan'. The act seems to Emma as irrational and illogical. Everything for Emma is planned and organised and when something does not agree with these plans, there is immediate discord. Anything out of place, even time, is worrying for her. For instance, in chapter 25 when Emma is considering going to the Coles' party, the thought of her father staying up late makes her uneasy:
Time in 'Emma' plays a much different role than in 'The Winter's Tale'. The precise nature of time reflects the aspect of society which Austen was portraying in the 18th century. A realistic approach to time is therefore needed for the topic to be considered accurately. Sir Walter Scott said of Jane Austen that she 'knows intimately and observes precisely' social situations in the early 1800s'. The author focussed on nuances of society and behaviour in society as well aspects of public and private lives, and therefore needed to apply a structured time frame in order to show the subtleties of interactions and shifts in behaviour accurately. In 'The Winter's Tale' there is more of a freedom of expression of time and space. An ambiguous and unrealistic view of time and place lends itself well to the fairytale nature of the story. Time plays much more of a role in the telling of the story, whereas in 'Emma' it guides and manipulates the telling of the story. As Keith Sagar states, Time in 'The Winter's Tale' plays a number of roles and is not merely a plot device to move forward the story by sixteen years: 'Time the Destroyer (tragedy) turns his hourglass and becomes Time the Revealer, the Healer, the Restorer and the Begetter (comedy)'. 'The Winter's Tale' is an unusual play due to the fact that it cannot be easily categorised into any particular form of play. Many of Shakespeare's plays can be simplistically identified as either tragedies or comedies. Tragedies are of a tragic nature - usually with one or more deaths. 'Romeo and Juliet' is an example of a tragedy. Whilst a comedy is not often overtly funny, it usually has a happy ending involving marriage or reunion. 'As You Like It' is an example of a comedy. 'The Winter's Tale' however has both tragic and comic elements. Time plays an important role in distinguishing whether the play ends comically or tragically. In some of Shakespeare's plays where there are both comic and tragic elements, there can often be one line which can signal the difference between the play ending happily or otherwise. In 'Much Ado About Nothing' it is the line uttered by Beatrice; 'Kill Claudio' which almost leads to tragic consequences. In 'The Winter's Tale', it is the famous stage direction 'Exit, pursued by a bear' which switches the play from a tragedy to a comedy. At the start of Act IV, however, the entrance of Time also signals a visible shift in mood.
From this moment onwards there are comic elements which hint at a happy finale. We are introduced to Polyxenes' son, Florizel and also a grown Perdita suggesting a possible union. There is also comic dialogue between a Shepherd and his son. In all literary forms, time is an important device in exploring the themes of life. Time is a topic which has fascinated philosophers, writers and artists, as well as the public, for centuries. A good example of how time is ubiquitous is Andrew Marvell's poem 'To His Coy Mistress'.
Time is triumphant in every aspect of life, although it is portrayed differently in certain circumstances and different literary forms. It is a structural device in 'Emma' which enhances the regimented nature of the novel and is used to highlight Austen's observations of the subtleties of society. In 'The Winter's Tale' time is undetermined. The play is not concerned with realism as it runs along the classic fairytale arrangement of 'once upon a time...' The personification of time therefore complements this form because sixteen years need to pass in order for the story and the situation to right itself. Time becomes a healer. Although the play is not based in realism, we, as an audience accept it, because with drama we suspend our usual boundaries of realism. Time becomes the narrator whilst assuring us that there will be a happy finale, therefore bringing together the play as a whole. Time in both texts helps the author to explore themes which affect everyday life. Austen explores more precise themes of behaviour and society, whilst Shakespeare explores the grander themes of life - love and death. Time is the guiding force for the telling and exploration of these themes, whilst remaining an ever-influential backdrop to the characters' lives and our perception of them.