In every peer group, there are individuals who stand out as more popular than the rest. Children are no exception, and different children experience varying degrees of social acceptance from their peers. While some are liked and constantly surrounded by friends, others are ignored or even actively disliked.
Popular children are those who are sociable and outgoing. They are included in many group activities, receive many positive peer nominations and are rated favourably. Conversely, unpopular children are widely disliked, receive many negative peer nominations or none at all, and are excluded from group activities (Roff, Sells and Golden, 1972; cited by Elkind & Weiner, 1978).
It is apparent that some children are more popular than others; but what exactly causes this? Researchers have identified a number of factors which may affect the popularity of a child. These include physical attractiveness, personal name, dexterity and social skills (Bukatko & Daehler, 1992).
Generally, physically attractive children are more likely to be popular (Kleck, Richardson, & Ronald, 1974). Lerner & Lerner (1977; cited by Bukatko & Daehler, 1992) found a relationship between children's ratings of peers' attractiveness and sociometric measures of peer acceptance. Evidence shows that children associate good-looks with positive characteristics. Dion (1973; cited by Durkin, 1995) found that preschoolers predicted attractive peers to be better friends and frequently nominated "best friends" who were good-looking. In addition, when children were asked to rate photographs of unfamiliar peers, those with physically attractive faces were believed to be friendlier, more intelligent, more generous and less mean than those who were unattractive (Langlois and Stephan, 1977; cited by Clarke-Stewart & Friedman, 1987).
Popularity also appears to be influenced by body type. Children express a preference for peers with average or muscular body build, over those who are thin or chubby (Lerner & Schroeder, 1971; cited by Elkind & Weiner, 1978). Similarly Staffieri (1967; cited by Bukatko & Daehler, 1992) observed that boys with broad shoulders and large muscles top the popularity scale while short, chubby boys are the most unpopular.
It is unknown why children perceive attractive peers as better friends. Nevertheless, this stereotype may cause self-fulfilling behaviours. A child who is frequently included because of his/her physically attractiveness, has more opportunities to develop social skills which encourage peer acceptance (Bukatko & Daehler, 1992). Indeed, Vaughn and Langlois (1983; cited by Clarke-Stewart & Friedman, 1987) generally found physically attractive children to be more socially competent. Further evidence from Langlois and Downs (1979; cited by Durkin, 1995) shows that while no differences were apparent between attractive and unattractive children at age 3, more negative social behaviour was displayed by unattractive children by the time they turned 5. This suggests that their behaviour developed in response to their environment.
Children whose first names are perceived as attractive also tend to be more popular than children with unattractive or unusual names (McDavid & Harari, 1966; cited by Clarke-Stewart & Friedman, 1987). Hartup (1983; cited by Durkin, 1995) suggests that an unusual name might reflect a wider parenting deficiency which in turn affects the child's social behaviour. Parents who bestow outlandish names upon their children might not possess very good judgement and this may affect their care-giving style. Additionally, such parents are likely to be unconventional and to encourage non-conformist behaviour in their children (Bukatko & Daehler, 1992). This would have a detrimental effect on peer acceptance as children commonly prefer peers who adhere to prevailing group standards (Elkind & Weiner, 1978).
Other children might hesitate to approach a child with an uncommon name because he/she seems too different. This reduces the child's opportunities for interaction and the development of social skills. Also, children who are constantly teased because of their strange names might retaliate with aggressive behaviour - which only increases their unpopularity (Levine & Willis, 1994).
Other factors linked to popularity are motor skills and intelligence. Children who are coordinated, strong, and skilled in physical activities are more popular amongst their peers (Hops & Finch, 1985; cited by Bukatko & Daehler, 1992). According to Yamamoto, Lembright and Corrigan, (1966; cited by Elkind & Weiner, 1978) school-age children who are bright, do well academically and display various talents, especially athletic ability, are more well-liked than those with inferior grades and meagre talent.
One possibility is that children are influenced by the value society places on these abilities. Alternatively, it may be that intelligence and dexterity contribute greatly to games and activities which constitute the majority of children's interactions. Children with these talents would therefore have more friends and eventually become popular (Bukatko & Daehler, 1992).
Above all these factors, the best predictor of peer acceptance is the child's degree of social competence. The more social ability a child has, the greater his/her popularity. Popular children are found to be good social problem-solvers, successful negotiators and supportive of others (Mendelson et al, 1994; cited by Durkin, 1995). Rejected and neglected children on the other hand behave in socially inappropriate ways. They are aggressive, shy, withdrawn, and critical of peers (Asher et al, 1990; cited by Durkin, 1995). Neglected children tend to be socially immature and more egocentric (Rubin, 1982).
Cooperation seems to be an important trait. Laddal. (1988; cited by Durkin, 1995) found that over time, cooperative children become increasingly popular, but argumentative children continue to be disliked even if they later become compliant. This corresponds with Ladd's (1983; cited by Bukatko & Daehler, 1992) observation that popular children have more cooperative play, sociable conversation, and positive exchanges with other children than their less liked peers.
Children who are hostile, antisocial, and rough are disliked. Aggressive behaviour is strongly linked to rejection. 40-50% of rejected children are found to be aggressive (Tomada & Schneider, 1997) and children who display defiant behaviour including bullying and meanness are especially disliked (Siegler, Deloache & Eisenberg, 2003).
In addition, popular children are skilled at encouraging interaction. When encountering a newcomer, they are friendly, ask questions, give information and proffer invitations to visit (LaFreniere, 1984; cited by Clarke-Stewart & Friedman, 1987). They are typically non-aggressive, praise others and understand that concepts like turn-taking and compromising are more effective that yelling or violent behaviour. Conversely, rejected children struggle to resolve difficult social situations and are more likely to suggest hostile strategies (Siegler et al, 2003). They tend to see others as malicious even when this is not explicitly stated. For instance, if a peer bumps into them, they are inclined to interpret the action as intentional and to respond by complaining or hitting him/her (Crick & Dodge, 1994; cited by Siegler et al, 2003).
Experiments on social entry reveal further differences between popular and rejected children. Popular children are the most successful in joining a group already at play. Initially, they just watch the group, then emulate the group's activity and make group-oriented statements. They maintain focus on the group activity rather than themselves and ask to join in rather than force inclusion (Dodge et al, 1983; cited by Bukatko & Daehler, 1992).
Rejected children, however, seek attention by disrupting the activity - for example, by grabbing the materials - or making an unrelated statement about themselves. Neglected children merely watch passively (Dodge, 1983; cited by Durkin, 1995).
The social competence of children is subject to parental influences. Finnie and Russell (1988; cited by Buktako & Daehler, 1992) observed how mothers of preschoolers aided their child in social entry. Like their offspring, mothers of unpopular children often disrupt the group activity and use their authority to introduce their children. In contrast, mothers of popular children encourage their child's participation without interrupting group play. They are also likelier to promote pro-social and conflict resolution behaviour in their children.
Agreeable children are shown to have less demanding, more positive mothers while the opposite is true for unfriendly children (Putallaz, 1987; cited by Bukatko & Daehler, 1992). Besides this, parents largely control their children's developmental experiences and opportunities for peer interaction. These are instrumental in acquiring social skills (Durkin, 1995).
It is therefore unsurprising that attachment style correlates with popularity in childhood. Securely attached infants are predisposed to social competence and positive peer acceptance while disorganised attached infants are liable to become hostile preschoolers (Pastor, 1981; Lyons-Ruth et al, 1993; cited by Durkin, 1995). Healthy attachments allow children to learn and practice positive social skills, as well as to recognise and reciprocate affection. This is useful for peer interactions in childhood and later life (Hay, 1985).
Evidence shows that once established, peer status can persist throughout adulthood along with its implications on psychological development (Bukatko & Daehler, 1992). Individuals who are unpopular in childhood continue to experience negative social relations. Boys who were unsociable and withdrawn as children are found less likely to be married and have children of their own compared to their peers. As men, they are twice as likely as their peers to suffer divorce and marital separation. Also, individuals who were accepted by their peers in 5 th grade, do better in their family and social lives than others who lacked reciprocated close friendships (Siegler et al, 2003).
This is probably because peer relationships allow children to test behaviours as well as refine interpersonal and emotional abilities that are useful in adulthood. Social skills such as perspective taking, moral understanding and sex roles are required to facilitate relationships as adults (Dunn, 1993). If denied opportunities for healthy peer interaction, children are forced to mix with other rejected peers who may mutually reinforce deviant or antisocial behaviour (Siegler et al, 2003).
Undesirable peer status is also associated with poor academic performance and a higher dropout rate (Asher & Coie, 1990). Rejected children are more likely to repeat a year, be suspended or to play truant (Kupersmidt & Coie, 1990; cited by Siegler et al, 2003). Their grades have been found to worsen over time and unpopular children who are aggressive are especially likely to be uninterested in school (Wentzel & Asher, 1995; cited by Siegler et al, 2003).
Furthermore, socially withdrawn children tend to begin their careers later, are less successful and hold less stable jobs. Low work attendance, job satisfaction and productivity are also likely due to their social deficiencies. Indeed, rejected children experience more job dismissals due to negative behaviour than their more accepted peers (Janes et al, 1979; cited by Asher & Coie, 1990).
It is suggested that unpopular children avoid going to school because they feel lonely and isolated due to peer rejection. School may be viewed as such an aversive experience, that they are motivated to drop out (Kupersmidt, Coie & Dodge, 1990). The negative emotions associated with academic life may also prevent them from having the concentration and inspiration to seriously pursue scholastic excellence. This in turn, affects their career prospects.
Low peer social status in childhood is predictive of mental health problems in adolescence or adulthood (Kupersmidt, Coie & Dodge, 1990). 65% of psychotic servicemen had poor peer relations in childhood, whereas this was true for only 25% of non-psychotic servicemen (Roff, 1963; cited by Asher & Coie, 1990). In addition, individuals who later appeared on the psychiatric register received more negative peer nominations as children (Cowen et al, 1973; cited by Asher & Coie, 1990).
Perhaps good peer relations help build self esteem and provide adaptive skills needed to prevent the emergence of psychopathology in vulnerable children. The pressure of isolation and rejection may be enough to unbalance a child predisposed to psychopathological behaviour (Garmezy, Masten, & Tellegen, 1984; cited by Asher & Coie, 1990).
Other consequences of unpopularity in childhood include loneliness, depression and adjustment problems as adults. Aggressive children frequently become unhappy adults with conflict-filled relationships with their partners (Caspi et al, 1987). These children are also at risk of internalising problems, resulting in social anxiety and low self-worth as they grow older (Bowker et al, 1998; cited by Siegler et al, 2003). Furthermore, they report a lack of trust or loyalty.
Finally, studies also show that rejected children are prone to delinquency and adult criminality. Amongst upper-class boys, popularity was found to be a predictor of delinquency (Roff et al, 1972). Additionally, military reports revealed that almost twice as many men with bad conduct were unpopular as children compared to men who had good conduct (Roff, 1961).
It could be that aggressive, disruptive children are disliked by their peers and delinquency is merely a continuation of such behaviour rather than a result of poor peer acceptance. However, it is equally plausible that rejected children resort to delinquency and criminality in defence to rejection or in an effort to gain some sort of social recognition. Alternatively, such behaviour may result from the lack of opportunities to learn pro-social behaviour.
Given these facts and statistics, the outlook seems particularly gloomy for unpopular children. Evidence shows that peer rejection is self perpetuating and typically results in poor academic performance, delinquency, psychopathology, loneliness and maladjustment. However, socially isolated children were found to respond positively to lessons in pro-social behaviour. Their popularity increased significantly and was still evident a year later (Oden & Asher, 1977; cited by Clarke-Stewart & Friedman, 1987). With this in mind, further research should be undertaken to refine possible intervention measures that may improve the emotional well-being and psychological development of socially rejected children.