Deirdre is 65 years old and has depression after the death of her husband a year ago, from cancer. She did not respond to anti-depressant medication but has responded well to ECT (Electro-convulsive therapy). However, ECT is frequently helpful in the short term, although relapse rates are high over the long term (Fave & Rosenbaum, 1995, cited in Richards & Perri, 2002).
I would need to interview Deirdre and the other health professionals who have already been working with her. When interviewing Deirdre I would ask her opinion of how she is doing and how she feels she is responding to the ECT treatment. I would use both standardised and non-standardised tests with Deirdre to vary the ways I could gather information. Standardised tests would be helpful when measuring Deirdre's levels of depression and performance, for example the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (Law et al., 1994, cited in Turner et al., 2003). Non-standardised tests would be helpful as they are more flexible, involve less administration and allow me to focus more on functional ability in her home environment. For example, observing her daily living skills in her home or an ADL lab, co-ordination, attention span, concentration and memory. This would help me with assessing how soon she can reach her overarching aim of going home. I could also use instruments such as the Modified Interest Checklist (Kielhofner & Neville, 1983, cited in Kielhofner, 2002) to learn more about which leisure activities Deirdre would be interested in, to help her re-establish some interests and roles.
General areas of problem and/or need for Deirdre include coping with grief after the death of her husband, possible relapse after her ECT treatment, living alone and having no family nearby. In addition she is having memory and concentration difficulties after the ECT and needs to establish some more interests and roles. From the COPM I would be able to identify her difficulties with self-care, productivity and leisure, for example, difficulties in social circumstances, problems in self-care routines and household management. As her memory and concentration are an issue, consideration of her environment would be very important. This is because she lives alone and if her memory is hazy and is having difficulty with her concentration, she could potentially put herself in dangerous situations without even realising, for example leaving the gas on. As the case study states Deirdre is in the church choir, therefore I have assumed she may uphold some religious beliefs which, as a health professional, I would need to be sensitive to. In 1998, Koenig, George and Peterson, studied 87 medically ill older adults, many of which also suffered from serious depression. They found the highly religious patients were more likely to have a quick recovery from their depression, possibly due to the "meaning and purpose of life" concept.