For this task we had to imagine that our multi-professional group had an opportunity to interview a candidate for a vacant post in our 'team' and our group had a say in the final selection. The purpose of the interview was to investigate communication skills, value and attitudes and professional practice. The interview enabled our group to not only question a candidate's responses, but also evaluate our own responses regards communication skills, values and attitudes and professional practice. This opportunity enabled us individually, and as a team, to question how we respond to others and learn more about communication skills and social relationships.
The ability and purpose of responding to others is essential for a health and social care professional. Health and social care professionals need to be able to interact and understand others, whether it is other colleagues, patients or relatives. Communication skills and social relationships are vital in enabling them to do this and being able to effectively respond to others leads to better care and working relations. Effective communication in health and social care settings requires professionals to be able to analyse their own and other people's non-verbal behaviour as well as verbal.
Non-verbal communication is vital for health and social care professionals to be able to respond to others effectively. They need to be able to not only reflectively listen to others but also be able to take note of what their body language is saying. The main aspects of non-verbal communication are "facial expressions, eye contact, gesture, posture, proximity and touch" (Walsh 2000) as well as spatial behaviour which are highlighted by Argyle (1994) in 'The Psychology of Interpersonal Behaviour' who makes a very important regards cultural differences in personal space. As a health care professional is it important to take note of others cultures and what is a normal proximity for them from their culture may vary.
The process of designing the RTO Interview took place in numerous stages. For example, at the beginning we had to plan the questions, then discuss the order of the questions and then discuss how to record the responses. Firstly we felt that we wanted to have open questions to give our candidate more of a chance to dwell on certain points and expand on key issues for them. We also used a series of hypothetical questions to examine our candidates' beliefs for practice and coping with others. The hypothetical questions were centred on communication, responding and dealing with others. This allowed us to achieve more in depth responses from the candidate and when preparing the questions it gave us a chance to consider our own responses to the questions we were going to be asking, which in turn helped us to expand on our own values and beliefs and responses in practice to other colleagues and clients.
Secondly we needed to decide which order to ask the questions, this was quite a hard task, however after doing some research online we discovered the usual opening, 'warm-up' questions asked and used those examples to mould the structure of our interview. We also dwelled on past experiences of interviews and questioned why we were asked the questions we were asked and the order they were asked in. By doing this we gained a greater understanding of the process of organising an interview and this helped us to consider in detail the order we wanted to ask our questions. We decided that we would group our questions into three main categories with a different person asking each category. For example one person asked the general opening questions, one person asked the hypothetical questions and one person asked about past working experiences. We all felt that by having this structure each member of the group would feel they had an active role, as well as feeling we had achieved a very successful structure for our interview that flowed well.
Thirdly we decided to split our group into interviews and observers, the observers were there to record the responses of our candidate. We used a theory by Bales (1955) of structured observation to organise our observations. Robert Bales developed a system called Interaction Process Analysis (IPA) which helped to categorise interactions into four main categories of behaviour: positive reactions, negative reactions, problem solving attempts and questions. From these categories sub-categories can be formed which we used as guidelines to note down our candidates responses as well as making general observations about body language and other forms of non-verbal communication. This allowed us to achieve detailed responses from our candidate, and by having two observes it meant we were able to have a more thorough analysis of the responses received.
The process of conducting the RTO interview occurred throughout our planning, we spent time discussing how we felt best to carry out the interview beforehand and highlighting key aspects we needed to think about when conducting the interview. For example, we decided to conduct the interview in the familiar setting of our classroom so that we and our candidate would not feel uncomfortable. We also decided to have a more of a semi-circle layout of the seats rather than a line so that the candidate would feel more included in our group, less isolated and less in the spotlight. We initially decided to record the interview on a Dictaphone as well as through the observers writing down responses, however, we felt the emphasis was less about our candidates word for word answers and more about their general responses to us and the subjects rose in our questions. Ideally it would have been beneficial to record the interview on a camcorder to go over the interview several times, however, we lacked this equipment and also felt this may have made us and the candidate feel uncomfortable if being filmed.
As a group we did encounter a few problems; however none of them were especially hindering due to our individual dedication to the group. For example, nearly every member of the group was absent at least once, usually this would mean a group would not be able to move forward as swiftly on the planning and constructing of their interview, however, we used the facilities of webmail and WebCT which were easily available to us to communicate out of lesson time, this ensured all the group were well informed on possible decisions to be made and times and locations of group meetings. Subsequently this issue, which could have really hindered our progress, did not impact any of our decisions or the interview itself. I feel this is a good reflection of the excellent communication skills in our group and reflects our ability to work well together. We all had equal roles and did not have a specific leader and therefore everyone was valued equally and everyone's opinion in the group was considered and respected. We had a few disagreements in regards to small issues, such as one person wanting one question to go before another. To resolve such issues we simply discussed why one felt a certain order would be more appropriate and through majority voting we were able to come to fair decisions. Luckily we were all dedicated within our group and had similar styles of working which enabled us to consistently be organised throughout.
In Pagne's 'Teamwork in multi-professional care' six purposes for multi-professional work are highlighted, these include bringing together skills and sharing information. I feel that by working within a group these criteria's have defiantly been met. I have learnt a lot from my group and the experience of having to do the Responding to Others Interview.
One aspect of the RTO interview that could possibly be changed or modified in order to improve it would be having a few specific closed questions so we could get clear answers to specific questions we had. For example questions that simply required yes or no answers. These could verify the responses we already received as even though we had open questions they were quite specific and therefore having a few closed questions after an open question could have brought a bit more clarity. Also possibly doing the interview in a less structured manner, for example we relied a lot on the questions we had prepared, whereas I feel we would have made the candidate feel slightly freer to be more open if it had felt more like a structure 'chat'. If we were to conduct the interview again, maybe this could be an issue we could discuss and try to put into action. Despite these possible suggestions for change I feel the interview went very well and each individual made a very important contribution to the group.
My personal contribution within the group varied throughout, each member was given a role initially, which at the beginning we stuck to, however with time our roles became less structured and we each took turns in fulfilling the duties of each group role. My initial group role was 'innovator' which meant the person who had the creative and imaginative input. I also helped with the 'organiser' role, especially nearer the end of the process when we were not being as organised as I liked so therefore took matters into my own hands and organised the group myself. During the whole process I feel each member fulfilled certain aspects of all the roles identified by Cottrell (2003), these include 'Chairperson', 'Timekeeper', Record-keeper', 'Organiser', 'Resource investigator' and 'Innovator'.
I feel within the group my personal qualities of being organised and hard-working were positive and influenced the group encouragingly. I became a lot more understanding through the interview and really developed a skill for taking into consideration others points even if they clashed with my own. I feel this has helped me to broaden my perspective on values and attitudes and has improved my communication with others. Within the group I was also able to use my leadership skills from being Deputy Head Girl at college in situations where nobody else was being assertive.