There are numerous ways in which sociology and psychology aid health and social care professionals to understand the experience of health and its effects. Sociology benefits health and social care professionals as when working with clients, social context is vital as it has a great affect on their client's lives. By upholding a sociological approach within practice, professionals become concerned with broader issues and not individual cases. Psychology benefits health and social care professionals as it allows them to gain a greater understanding of why people are different and what shapes individuals. For example, many theories have been developed to explain behaviour and all the aspects that make people individual; I will be covering these topics as well as service delivery and the NHS, beliefs towards health and illness, psychological theories, stress and roles, all of which relate to health and social care professionals, illustrated through a fictitious case study.
People vary in many ways; gender, age, appearance, culture, religion, intelligence, attitudes, values, beliefs and behaviours. These factors have an impact on a client's health, illness and therefore a professional's responses to them. Psychology and sociology can assist professionals to understand people further, shaping their understanding of health and illness. One of the most obvious differences between people is gender. Men and women respond differently to illness and their experiences of help differ immensely. Average life expectancy shows one of the major gender differences in regards to health and illness. Statistics have shown an overall life expectancy for females of 80.2 years and for males, 73.5 years (McCracken, 1998, as cited in Whaley, 2000).
One theory for this statistic is that women tend to report more illnesses because adopting the sick role is more socially acceptable and therefore more common. The model of the sick role was designed by Parsons in the 1950s and the general concept is, in order to be excused from their usual duties and to be considered not to be responsible for their condition, the sick person is expected to seek professional advice and to adhere to treatments in order to get well. Medical practitioners are empowered to permit the sick person temporary absence from the workforce and family duties as well as to absolve them of blame. The socialization hypothesis presumes sick-role behaviour is more compatible with traditional female roles and, thus, women may feel less constrained than men in defining and reporting mild symptoms. Understanding the differences between men and women and how they use health services can help professionals to understand an individual's reaction to illness. For example, when Jake (case study) found a lump on his testicle, although his wife advised him to get it checked out, he felt weak about going to the doctors so his lump got left untreated.
Society has many varying opinions with regards to health care, what health care is, what it provides and how it is delivered. When thinking about service delivery the initial thought is usually the National Health Service (NHS). The NHS was set up in 1948 to provide healthcare for all citizens, based primarily on need and the concept of 'collective responsibility'. The NHS is funded by the taxpayer and managed by the Department of Health, which sets policy on health issues. Policies within the NHS experienced their greatest shift between the 1980s and 1990s. This was due to the introduction of the 'internal market', outlined in the 1989 White Paper. The 'internal market' introduced 'market principles' to health care delivery which meant a greater emphasis on funding and budgeting. As time has passed the NHS has shifted from 'collective responsibility' to 'individual responsibility' therefore having a greater emphasis on people being more responsible for their own health. This has lead to an increase in health promotion and professionals becoming more concerned with client's lifestyle choices. With this greater emphasis on 'individual responsibility', people are encouraged to become active in their health decisions and also to play a greater role in self diagnosis. This belief can be seen through the introduction of NHS Direct, a 24-hour nurse advice and health information service via the telephone and internet. It provides confidential information on health conditions, advice about what to do when ill and local health services. Once again, gender distinction demonstrates how different groups of people approach health services. Research in a hospital in Norwich found that men make less use of preventative services, often regarding going to the doctor as a sign of weakness. Women, on the other hand, tend to be more involved with health care and are used to accessing routine service. Men who ignore health problems often get advice informally from friends, therefore reverting to a quick fix, at casualty, rather than using local services (Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, 2004). The NHS has taken note of the misuses that can arise in service delivery and use and have taken action. The NHS Service Delivery and Organisation (SDO) is a "national research programme that has been established to consolidate and develop the evidence base on the organisation, management and delivery of health care services" (SDO, 2004). This organisation has drawn attention to several problems within NHS service delivery. Issues the organisation addresses are improving communication of how they target specific audiences through more effective advertising and a greater emphasis on health promotion, and a greater need to work closely with other NHS partner organisations. The increase in such organisations will hopefully improve service delivery within the health care system.
Attitudes and beliefs are a key concept when looking at people as a whole and also individually. People's perception towards themselves, others, professionals, health and illness generally and, finally, towards service delivery, differs greatly. This concept of people's values, attitudes and beliefs in regards to health and illness is often described as 'lay perspectives' or 'lay beliefs'. Professionals, researchers and theorists have begun to realise that lay health beliefs are not just condensed versions of medical knowledge but are shaped by a variety of factors including location, cultural context, personal biography and social identity. The psychology and sociology of lay health beliefs is valuable to health care professionals for various reasons. Sociological lay health beliefs can add to a greater understanding of lay-professional relationships by providing an insight into lay ideas which could have previously been regarded as 'incorrect' knowledge by professionals (Stacey, 1986, as cited in Nettleton, 1996). The professional-patient relationship, once regarded as a meeting between the knowledgeable and the ignorant lay person, is now more correctly described as a 'meeting between experts' (Tucker et al., 1985, as cited in Nettleton, 1996). One reason for this is an increase in fatal chronic conditions, leading professionals to realise their own limitations and the importance of other types of support. Additionally, people are encouraged to take a greater responsibility with their own health and now have a wider knowledge in regards to factors which influence an individual's health status.
Also, the study of health beliefs may contribute to knowledge of informal health care. As Strong (1979, as cited in Nettleton, 1996) states, "we are obliged to be doctors to ourselves and to others". Most health care is carried out by lay people in the form of self-care or caring for others, therefore by placing a higher regard on lay beliefs, may increase the patients status and sense of value within society and also in regards to health and illness. By professionals taking note of lay opinion, it will increase client satisfaction and self-worth, within the professional relationship and also within their status in society because, as Stacey (1988) notes, we are all health workers.
Psychological lay beliefs are often explained through lay models. The model of health and illness that people form is often known as nave or common-sense models. People can create fairly complicated systems of belief surrounding their health yet they often lack the knowledge to test these assertions, leaving them unchecked and unopposed. For example, Jake has been smoking all his life but because he has never known anyone to die from it or get any form of cancer, he refuses to quit, regardless of experts opinions. This reflects research conducted by Cornwell (1984, as cited in Forshaw, 2002) which highlighted that 92% of the working-class people he interviewed in East London did not believe that smoking caused cancer. This emphasizes the need for appropriate health care education but also the difficulty health promoters have in adjusting existing health models by the general public. Lay notions of health and illness can affect the extent to which people comply with advice given to them by professionals.
The Health Belief Model (HBM) dates back to Rosenstock (1966) and is one of the most important frameworks for understanding health beliefs. The HBM is based on the view that a person will take a health-related action if they feel a negative health condition can be avoided, if they have a positive expectation that by taking the recommended action they will avoid a negative health condition and they believe they can successfully take the recommended health action. The model motivates people to take positive health action by using the desire of avoiding a negative health consequence as the prime motivation. For example, HIV is a negative health consequence, and the desire to avoid HIV can be used to motivate sexually active people into practicing safe sex.
The HBM highlights an area of psychology which has a great impact on health care professionals, that of behaviour and learning. Through the HBM individuals begin to learn to view a situation differently, thus changing their behaviour. Many theories have been developed to explain behaviour including learning theory, psychoanalytic theory, and humanism. Learning theory is based on the principles of conditioning, in which there are two main areas, classical and operant conditioning. Classical conditioning, developed by Ivan Pavlov (1849-1936), occurs when a neutral stimulus is paired with an unconditioned stimulus, eventually producing a conditioned stimulus and response. Operant conditioning, developed by B.F. Skinner (1904-1990), is the result of reinforcement or punishment, which either increases or decreases the likelihood of a behaviour being repeated. Classical and operant conditioning can help health and social care professionals to understand health and the effects of illness in two main ways. Firstly, professionals can apply classical conditioning to patient's health behaviours. As my case study shows, Chris associates smoking with socialising, and began to not only smoke when socialising but also when alone in order to recreate those feelings. Professionals can apply operant conditioning to patient's health behaviour, for example a child may have behaviour problems but when being good, be rewarded, therefore increasing the chances of positive behaviour in the future.
Psychoanalytic theory is both an account of personality development and a therapy. The basic principle is that early experiences may result in unconscious conflicts that motivate adult behaviour. Freud, Jung, Alder and Erikson developed psychoanalytic theories focused on case studies of patients in the clinical context of psychotherapy. Their theories are concerned with the nature of personality in general, and in particular Freud and Jung tried to account for individual differences (Gross, 1992). Freud structures personality in terms of three categories, the id, ego, and superego, which often come into conflict because they are motivated by different principles. Conflicts create anxieties that are dealt with by defence mechanisms like repression, displacement, projection and denial. Psychoanalytic theory suggests that, for some people, the tension between their repressed thoughts and their conscious thoughts leads to psychological problems, which is when psychoanalytic psychotherapy is required. An example of how a professional could use the psychoanalytic theory is to confront, interpret or reconstruct the patient's interpretations of the world which helps to solve their problems.
Humanism is a philosophy oriented towards human beings, their feelings and what they have accomplished. There are two major psychologists who adopted the humanistic approach; Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow. Humanism is unique in the way that it emphasises the importance of subjective experience in understanding an individual. New forms of therapy arose from the introduction of humanist practice. Client Centred Therapy (CCT) was developed by Carl Rogers who believed that people are good and that they all possess an innate drive towards Self Actualisation. The primary object of Roger's therapeutic approach was to help the client focus on their own feelings. Abraham Maslow, like Rogers rejected the psychoanalytic and behavioural approaches; Maslow believed that they ignored the positive aspect of human life and therefore introduced the Hierarchy of Needs. Client Centred Therapy and Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs are both used by health and social care professionals to understand individuals further. Both focus on having a great positive outlook and approach and are therefore used a lot within mental health settings.
Stress is an example of a behaviour and experience that theorists have begun to explain in both psychological and sociological terms. Stress affects most people and therefore is an important factor for health care professionals to understand the effect on clients and, indeed, themselves. Stress is also unusual in that it can cause itself; if a person is aware of their stress symptoms, it is quite likely to increase their stress. Thus, a cycle which is difficult to break is established. Mechanic (1978, as cited in Forshaw, 2002) exposed that stress can lead to an increase in use of healthcare resources, because stress can cause ill-health and stressed people are more likely to become worried about their health, even when they need not be. This is a fact that Salovey and Birnbaum (1989, as cited in Forshaw, 2002) pointed out, who found that individuals put into a negative mood reported more aches and pains than those in a positive or neutral mood. Stress in health professionals is quite a common occurrence due to long hours, difficult problems they face and sometimes being unable to distance themselves. An extreme stress response is burnout, in which the workers can no longer function effectively. The three main characteristics of burnout according to Maslach and Jackson (1982, as cited in Eysenck, 2002) are emotional exhaustion, depersonalisation and perceived inadequacy. Overcoming burnout is not possible unless the reasons for its occurrence are treated. This means, that working conditions must be changed through a good balance between activities to create the healthiest option for professions to prevent full-blown burnout.
There are many scales that have been devised to try and measure and catalogue stress. One of the most influential was created by Holmes and Rahe in 1967 called the Social Readjustment Rating Scale (SRRS). The SRRS uses a points system to measure levels of stress according to the severity of possible causes, for example the death of a partner is listed as the most stressful event with a rating of 100. However the levels of stress this may cause differs depending on factors including your age, the age of your partner and the reason of the death. Another drawback of the scale was the failure to allow for positive and negative stressors. For example moving house is listed as a stressful experience, however the person may want to move house. So therefore the experiences have negative effects but also a positive outcome. Kanneral. (1981) developed the Hassles Scale to try and measure stress caused by minor things, something the SRRS lacked. They realised that stress from these minor 'stressors' could add up to a significant health problem. Their scale included little negative things such as arguments and queuing, but also 'uplifts' - little positive event. By taking account of both the positive and negative of every problem that may cause stress, the scale helps to portray a better overall picture, (however it still has flaws including not enough emphasis on major life events).
Coping with stress, like anything, depends on the physical and mental resources, including the personality and attitudes of the individual. Lazarus (1966) developed a model to try and explain the process of coping with stress and found that events are 'filtered' by individuals. If an event is perceived to be potentially harmful, and if a person believes they are ill-equipped to deal with it, it will become likely to cause full-blown stress. Thus, by coping with a stressful situation it is possible to cure the problem. In 1986, Folkman et al. described eight types of coping strategies used by individuals facing stress. These were escape-avoidance, distancing, positive reappraisal, self-controlling, seeking social support, problem-solving, accepting responsibility, and confronting. Understanding how people cope with stress can affect their responses to health and illness and therefore it is vital for health care professionals to know about the ways to measure, and also the different individual responses to coping with, stress. For example, in relation to my case study, the responses to the stress of Jake losing his job would have rated highly on the SRRS. The coping strategy adopted by Jake and his family were seeking social support and problem-solving. Jake sought support from his family and they realised the problem could be solved, through Jane and Chris getting jobs. Social support is the support given to individuals from family, friends, peers and professionals, and can be a fundamental factor in reducing stress. According to Stroebe (2000, as cited in Forshaw, 2002) the main categories are appraisal support, emotional support, esteem support, informational support and instrumental support. Within my case study the support Jake was offered was emotional support from his wife and son.
As social support demonstrates, throughout life people adopt a number of different roles. For example, professional, patient (which have already been discussed previously in relation to the sick role), friend, family, carer or a role within the community. Each role imposes a range of duties and tasks to be completed successfully, either by individual standards or the standards of others. Most people have a number of different roles and need to consider the demands of each and prioritise activities to maintain a healthy balance in life. For example, some people value the role of the homemaker above that of a career while some people prioritise careers finding the homeowner role as restrictive. As a health care professional, it is vital to comprehend the roles a client has and how this may shape their health and the effect illness may have on them and their family, community and own profession. For instance, Jake lost his job due to his illness, low feelings and lack of motivation, his wife and son had to therefore go and get jobs. His role as breadwinner changed as did Jane's role as homemaker. This imposed some stress on the family as adjusting to new roles can take time to get used to and can create a sense of disorder in the home. The roles of family and friends can be so valuable to individuals, sometimes more so than professionals. Individuals often turn to family or friends before professionals and would rather receive help and support from them. This can be seen through the increase of informal carers, whereby the role of just family or friend has increasingly shifted to role of informal carer in many homes. Intermittent informal care is carried out by most families, while long term informal care is carried out by approximately 1.3 million people who spend more than 20 hours a week caring for a dependant relative. The responsibility of informal carers can lead them to have increased levels of stress, which can cause increased levels of perceived illness and therefore increased use of services. These factors put strain on the government and health care professionals.
Sociology and Psychology are essential to health and social care professionals when understanding the experience of health on individuals and the effects that illness and service delivery can have upon individuals, families and society.