The Hockney Management Co. originally began with the establishment of The Hockney Suites London in early 50's. Not until the third serviced apartment- The Hockney Suites Edinburgh opened was its Management Company set up, in order to achieve the most satisfaction of business traveler, retain customer loyalty and offer higher quality of client services. As a successful business of luxury serviced apartment, The Hockney Suites London, sitting in the most happening zone of central London, has been considered as one of the most remarkable pioneers in the UK hospitality industry over the past six decades.
Keen on its mission statement- "Enjoying Flexibility and Comfort at Your Luxurious Home Away From Home", the Hockney Management Co. provides luxuriously furnished, extended stay accommodations and same standard of client services as any four or five star hotel (see Appendix 1); further, customers' needs of privacy and homely feeling away from home are ensured during the stays with the Hockney Suites. Over the past half century, The Hockney Management Co. has made its brand reputable among the industry and customers, and also profitably operated 7 others luxury serviced apartment in Great Britain, along with 5 units in Europe, 3 units in the United States, and 4 units in the rest of the world (see Appendix 1).
Most lately, The Hockney Management Co. has noticed the gap between the rapid growths of Tourism in India and its relatively slower development in infrastructure, such as accommodation (World Tourism Organization, 2004). Therefore, the emergence of market of serviced apartment in India- one of the world's biggest economies in Asia, has drawn The Hockney Management Co.'s attention and made the company looking for the opportunities to compete and stand out in the hospitality industry in India.
Business environment analysis will assist the global business to (Lee & Carter 2005): reduce risk of failure, identify the key environmental variables (see Appendix 2), aid strategy planning and decision-making, make more effective choice of market and marketing mix, as well as assess the risk of conducting business between the home country and the host country. Marketers hence need to recognize the similarities and differences of two different countries that greatly influence the marketing of the business (Bowie & Buttle, 2004). This section endeavors to analyze and compare the business environments of India and the UK.
India, one of greatest purchasing power in the world (The Report: VisitBritian's performance in 2005-6, 2006), is also well-known for its mass population and speedy development, only second to China (British High Commission, 2006). Throughout the last decade, India's economic situation and national development have prospered, making it appealing to many foreign investments (BBC News, 2006); as a matter of fact, foreign direct investors now enjoy 100% automatic entry to India (See Appendix 2) which led India to the world's largest recipient of Foreign Direct Investment by receiving $3.75 billion in the financial year of 2004-2005 (UK Trade & Investment, 2006). Similarly, the UK, have had a strong economic growth (World Development Indicators database, 2006) and a FDI-friendly climate (refer to Appendix 2) in the recent years.
Generally, India and the UK have been sharing a global vision and democratic value for long, and the relationship in between was more improved as a result of signing a Joint Agreement by the two Prime Ministers in September 2004 (British High Commission, 2006). This encouraged the two nations to form the strategic partnerships (British High Commission, 2006), continuously discuss, and subsequently corporate in the contemporary agendas (see Appendix 2) involving terrorism, nuclear energy, science, technology, security, economic partnerships, culture and education (International High Commission, 2006).
From a technological perspective, India and UK are both easy accessible by air and roughly have the same amount of international airports (IHC London, 2006, Incredible India, 2006 & Visit Britain, 2006), while Indian domestic flights are more common than in the UK due to its size of India, up to approximately 60 destinations. Additionally, domestic flights within India are very cheap compared to the UK. Nevertheless, the quality of Indian airports has been especially concerned, indicated by the High commission of India (2006), which might then make effect on possible return visits.
In addition, Indian government has made more constant efforts than the UK in IT education and many kinds of technological development plans over the past years (Asialink, 2006). India consequently has become the IT leader and a central for outsourcing business services among the world (Mipimasia, 2006), leading to its ongoing growth of number of domestic and international business travelers (Zavari, 2006) those who take part into the start-up period of the entry of new companies and frequent training (Thaker, 2006).
Middleton & Clark put emphasis on economic variables in the countries or regions, while discussing the volume of demand, for the reason that it helps elaborating the pattern of tourists live (2004). India's rapid economic growth (see Appendix 2) creates vast demand for domestic holiday and business trips, as a result of the exchange rate (44.10 INR per US$), that Indian currency is cheap compared to the UK. Consequently, its economic growth helps to attract foreign visitors. Adding up, refer to Appendix 3, India's main overseas markets, the UK (15.9%) and US (14.9%), are experiencing a strong economic growth, which may further increase the tourist traveling to India (Travel and Tourism Forecast, 2005).
Numbers of Tourist arrival (see Appendix 3-1) over the past years gave the evidence to place its tourism industry in the stage of "Involvement" in terms of "Tourist Area Life Cycle" (Butler, 1980). Among all the international tourists, according to a study of world tourism organization in 2003, there were 2.5 million holidaymakers whilst only 0.18 million people visit India for business purpose in all kinds (World Tourism Organization, 2006). Yet the continuously escalating economics offers the capacity of supporting tourism growth as well as being a criteria reflecting on numbers of trips for business purposes (Middleton & Clark, 2000); therefore, the demand of international business traveler in the recent years and following future can be estimated optimistically.
Aside from the volume of international tourist, domestic tourism also makes great impact on a nation's tourism industry (Bigano et al, 2004). Experiencing general development of India (Mobility Drivers), its volume of domestic traveling as well increased, from a total of 270 million tourists in 2002 to 309 million tourists with growth of 14% in 2004(Travel and Tourism Forecast, 2005), and the surge of domestic tourism is expected to raise 15-20% in the following four or five years, which may tremendously benefit hospitality businesses in India (Federation of Hotel & Restaurant of India, 2006). Purpose of domestic traveling differentiates depending on regions (Demographic Drivers). For example, the southern states of India account for the higher share of tourists for social travel (Geographic Drivers), while the northern states share more tourists for business traveling (Indian Hospitality Industry, 2006). A study on domestic tourism by National Council of Applied Economics Research during 2002-2003 pointed out that nearly two third of all tourists in India traveled for social purpose (Social-cultural Drivers); that is to say, traveling for social purposes, overall, stands the largest percentage of trips across the country, and it may because of lower average expenditure for social trip of each household than other purposes of traveling (Indian Hospitality Industry, 2006).
Thanks to a healthy foreign investment environment (Government/ Regulatory Drivers), strong domestic travel trend and Indian government's emphasis on IT development (Drivers of Information and Communication technology), India has moved itself firmly into the place of the world's rapidly fueling tourism market. In fact, Revealed in a HotelBenchmark Survey by Deloitte (2006), hotel demand in India is anticipated to grow at 18% per annum in the following future, and much likely, prime cities will continue suffering from the shortage of hotel rooms supply as they already are at present (Deloitte, 2006).
"There is too much demand," said Barry Sternlicht, on behalf of Starwood Capital Group LLC, who has announced to invest up to $500 millions in India for the next three years on November 14, 2006 (Cornell School of Hotel Administration, 2006). Among this impressive demand of hotel accommodation in India, in accordance with research conducted by HVS International-India, a consultancy firm, 12-18% of the hotel business is extended stay (Rediff.com, 2006). Extended-stay products, consequently, is seen as a sector that offer tremendous potential, being estimated to occupy 11.0%-13.0% among Indian hospitality market over the near future (Thaker, 2006).
Michael Porter demonstrated a remarkably theoretical framework regarding competitive framework in 1980 to analyze the five factors that influencing the supply of a market. The supply of serviced apartment in India will then be criticized through these five forces analysis- threats of entry, threats of substitute, bargaining power of customers, bargaining power of suppliers and rivalry among existing competitors (refer to Appendix 4-2).
The attitude of Indian government toward tourism has significant impacts on its tourism development (Tourism Market Trend, 2004). For example, "Incredible India" (www. IncredibleIndia.org), the project organized by the Department of Tourism of India, effectively enhanced visibility and increased awareness of India as a tourism destination. On the other hand, 100% foreign direct investment were permitted since February 2005 (Ministry of Finance, Government of India, 2006), which formed a warm welcome to foreign investors that diminish the barriers of entry and resulted in a impressive growth of suppliers in hospitality market (Redfitt.com, 2006).
Although the volume of tourism in India is speedily increasing (see Appendix 3-2), the number of visitor arrivals of India is relatively scanty compared with other world's tourist destinations (see Appendix 4-1). As a matter of fact, India as a product of tourist destination can be more easily replaced by other tourist destination due to safety, health, and infrastructure factors (India Retail Review, 2006). That is to say, threats of substitute for suppliers immersed from an international competition perspective. Conversely, existing domestic competition is less intense since there amounts of serviced apartment or hotel residences is still little (Thaker, 2006; Zavari, 2006). It is suggested by the figures that the domestic threats of substitute and rivalry among existing competitors are lower (refer to Appendix 4-2), and therefore the bargaining power of suppliers stays insignificant. Last but not the least, the bargaining power of customers is regarded as low due to the shortage of current supply of hospitality accommodation, according to a research taken by HVS International (2005).
India's economy has grown dramatically since 1991 (see Appendix 2). Its GDP growth went up 9% in 2005 (World Development Indicators database, 2006), in turn it contributed a positive development to India's tourism (World Tourism Organization, 2004). The significant tourism growth is largely attributed to its economic reform, which for instance reduced the government control on foreign trade and foreign direct investment (World Bank, 2006). Thank to the strong connection between the UK and India, moreover, UK companies are reckoned to be well positioned in making the most of this growing export and investment market.
Just as mentioned, former PESTE analysis (refer to Appendix 2) has shown a general depiction of business environment in India and Porter's five forces competitive analysis (refer to Appendix 5) in the previous section illustrated the recent competition of serviced apartment market in India. Additionally, weighted Porter's five forces analysis (as Appendix 5-1) shows the factors that related to market attractiveness (Porter, 1985) and hence offer the proof that India is a market worth foreign investment in hospitality industry.
Before entering a foreign market, a business company needs to take the choice and importance of the market entry mode into account (Tallman and Shenkar, 1994). In that case, the business company then need to choose the most suitable mode in which the business will satisfy itself in the conflicting pressure of the foreign and domestic operating environment (Paliwoda, 1986) and will secure for relocating its sources and facility from the home country to the host country (Erramili, 2002). There are numerous marketing entry strategies depending on different level of control, however, soft services firms, where production and consumption can not be decoupled such as health care, hotel and tourism (Blomstermo et al, 2006), have a tendency to opt for joint ventures, licensing/ franchising, or foreign direct investment/ ownership.
Suppliers of soft services required higher control entry mode, Palmer and Cole stressed (1995). As a soft services supplier who attempts to entry an cultural distant country, it is also recommended by Blomstermo and Sharma (2006) to choose a high control entry mode (such as FDI or ownership) from a perspective of industrial experience, with the intention of building up unique competence, on-site research, adaptation to the needs of the foreign buyers and markets, and customer relationships (Blomstermo and Sharma, 2006; Hastings and Perry, 2000). On the other hand, in real industry world, Jones Lang Lasalle Hotels- the global hotel investment services group- argued that, local existing residential property developers are better equipped and familiar with serviced apartment products compared with hotel groups those seeking for opportunities to enter serviced apartment sector (Hotel News Resources, 2002). That is to say, cooperating with local Property Development Companies appears to be more practical and beneficial to a foreign entrant in the long-term view. Hence the more appropriate method of entry strategy for The Hockney Management Co. will be joint equity venture, in consideration with India's flavored investment climate (refer to Appendix 2- PESTE analysis), estimated low cost and risk of entry, applicable knowledge of serviced apartment sectors in India (Hotel News Resources, 2002), and also concerning its thriving domestic competition (refer to Porter's five forces analysis).
Since The Hockney Management Co. has been a high-resource company for years and providing luxury serviced apartment product to specialist markets, The Hockney Management Co. tends to adopt "differentiated/multi-segmented" marketing strategy in support of market targeting (Blythe, 2003). By means of normally concentrating on two or a few more selective segments ("selective specialization strategy"), though they may not be closely related, the company aims to fulfill the needs of these specific niches (Abell, 1980). Take it as an example; "corporate sector" is the core target market (Foxley, 2001) of The Hockney Suite, London, while "business traveler sector" and "extended-stay holidaymakers sector" are regarded as secondary market segmentation.
Owing to India's impressive economic growth, the concept of extended stay hotel, forerunner of serviced apartment, was firstly introduced into India in response to ongoing expansion of demand for quality accommodations of medium or short-term stay from professionals and businessmen (Zavari, 2006). As a result, middle to senior management positions in many international companies (such as Banks, Management and Consulting companies, and so forth) and IT, ITeS, and BPO companies those who are in the formation stage would usually generates huge demand for serviced apartment (Zavari, 2006; Thaker, 2006; Rediff.com, 2006). Embassies and Foreign Trade Commissions in India also show needs for serviced apartment, in order to offer their consolers and senior members of staff medium to long-term accommodation (Zavari, 2006). Furthermore, single female business travelers (Zavari, 2006) and visitors for medical tourism (Foxley, 2001; Rediff.com, 2006) are also a prospective surge of the target market for serviced apartment.
To sum up, supported by evidence above, "Corporate sector" (cooperating with International Firms, IT, ITeS, BPO, MICE, Embassies, Foreign Commissions, Primary Medical Centers, etc) will remain the core market segmentation of The Hockney Management Co. in India. Other than that, sectors of "Business traveler", "Single female business traveler" and "domestic tourists" are the segmentation that The Hockney Management Co. will make efforts to attract to a certain extent.
Decision-making in a strategic management orientation in global marketing counts for the reason that it facilitates to determine the typology of its international expansion (Lee & Carter, 2005; Bowie & Buttle, 2004; Perlmutter, 1969). Haward Perlmutter first classified the four distinctive management orientations in late 60's- Ethnocentrism, Polycentrism, Regiocentrism and Geocentrism (Perlmutter, 1969). And then, The EPRG framework (refer to Appendix 6) he proposed has been well-known and widely used to identify different strategic orientations over the decades (Lee & Carter, 2005).
"The image and value attached to a brand is core to its positioning in the market" (Lee & Carter, 2005). The benefit from building up a brand may consist of expanding greater loyalty, greater power of suppliers, sales expansion and profit increase (also supported by Bowie & Buttle, 2004), and that it enables the companies to survive unfavorable economic conditions (Kotler et al, 2003). The Hockney Management Co. will insist to market its serviced apartment product under "The Hockney Suites", as the brand name has consistently stood for a good reputation and high awareness to customers (Bowie & Buttle, 2004); nevertheless, soft branding strategy will be chosen according to the needs of the target market and the business environment of India, so as to maximum the better cooperation with its venture partner and to fit its polycentric management orientation (Holverson & Revaz, 2006).
In order to make certain that the target market recognizes and understands the brand image and the serviced apartment product among all the competitors (such as Marriot Executive Lakeside Chalet, Taj Wellington Mews Luxury Residences, Grand Hyatt Residences), the Hockney Management Co. attempts to make emphasis on its distinctive and appealing characteristics to differentiate and position itself in the minds of target market (Cai & Hobson, 2004).
Aside from the commodity elements mentioned in Appendix 1 ("Antes"- quoted from Prager, 2006) that any luxury branded residences might have (Bowie & Buttle, 2004), the unique characteristics ("Drivers"- quoted from Prager, 2006) of The Hockney Suites in India will be: First of all, individual and practical working space is included in each unit, which can flexibly be set up as temporary meeting room; additionally, parking lot offer is guaranteed, since the central location of The Hockney Suites situated will increase customers' needs in parking space (Special Attributes strategy). Secondly, focusing on offering exclusive image, high quality of tangible and intangible elements with slightly cheaper price, compared with other branded hotel residences (Price/Quality strategy). Thirdly, due to primarily targeting middle to senior managers/business traveler, 24-hour in room Internet Access and telephone help desk are provided (Customer Benefit strategy). Furthermore, British- luxury interior decoration is one of the principles of The Hockney Suites product, aiming to form the phenomenon of upper class or celebrity lifestyle (User strategy).
"Marketing mix is a set of marketing tools that the firm uses to pursue its marketing objectives in the target market" (Kotler, 1991). Whether to adopt its marketing mix elements (such as its product, packaging and so forth) for foreign target market or standardize and sell essentially the identical elements in favor of significant cost saving, it is a fundamental task for international marketing (Calantone et al, 2004; White & Griffith, 1997; Usunier, 1996; Cavusgil et al, 1993; Buzzell, 1968). Amusingly, the both strategies (adaptation and standardization) however are normally used at the same time (Vrontis & Papasolomou, 2005).
Instead of choosing either one, both typologies of standardization and adaptation will be carried out by The Hockney Management Co. in order to optimize effective marketing strategies at most (White & Griffith, 1997). Illustrated by Usunier (1996), there are three layers of product attributes that assist marketers to make better decision between standardization and adaptation: the physical attributes, the service attributes, and the symbolic attributes. The Hockney Management Co. will standardize its physical establishment of serviced apartment by representing luxurious British interior dcor (physical attributes), adapt its housekeeping and maid cooking services system (service attributes) with regard to different cultural lifestyle and eating habits from the UK.
In terms of the existing hospitality business in India, serviced apartment sector is not only a new perspective but still on a small scale of basis, however, this market has commenced to bloom and the potential is evaluated as positively high as mentioned above. Serviced apartment sector mainly provides an alternative to the corporate companies or institutions in India and international business travelers, who are in need with extended-stay accommodation and desire to be pampered in the comfortable and private space. Evidences confirms the timing of entering the Indian market at this moment is positive for The Hockney Management Co. and the aims of surviving in the foreign area and then making profit are achievable.
However, the dynamic competition in the following decade, among all the existing firms and new entrants, especially luxury branded hotel residences, is also predictable. The Hockney Management Co. should actuate and prepare for the next good step for The Hockney Suites Greater Delhi, such as developing more practical marketing plans applicable to the local conditions, assessing customer satisfaction regularly or renovating the internal facilities occasionally, with the expectation of managing a continuous hospitality business with profit returned.