As the emergence and constantly increasing use of the Internet, visual communication of Website design, travel and tourism product in particular, has been and continued to be one of the most essential segmentation where marketers and advertisers lay emphasis on. On the other hand, gender difference varies the visual images seen by the travel information searchers and the patterns of their consumption, which has outlined the need for understanding the attitude and preference for visual representation of online searchers/potential consumers, from a gender perspective. In order to reflect this implication, this research paper attempts to examine the interconnected relation between the Internet, online visual communication, and gender difference, and to explore the various ways of interpretation and preference with regard to visual content of tourism product websites influenced by genders. The methodology employed in this paper is evaluating and reviewing existing literature based on secondary data in the fields of marketing communication, visual communication, consumer behaviour, and gender studies. The assumptions arise in the paper, within views of gender difference, are to highlight the role of pictorial representation in online marketing communication of tourism product, and to bring out the various aspects of seeing online visual representation in tourism destination websites depending on genders. Although, likely, there are other variables which may also make impact on online visual communication between tourism websites and consumers, such as the form of modernity, intercultural difference, social status, education, and composition of travel party, and so forth, this paper anticipates proposing a comprehension that is constructive for further studies. Of great concern for marketing managers in tourism industry, recommendations for more effective internet marketing strategies and Website design are provided.
"Modern life takes place onscreen", Mirzoeff assumed (1999). Presently, human beings are living in a media-oriented world that is all about image. Hundreds of visual messages flash in people's eyes daily via new media such as the Internet, big screen, and traditional media, such as photography, video, television programme, as well as printed materials (e.g. newspaper, magazine, poster, brochure, etc). In 1998, twenty-three million Americans were daily users of the Internet (Mirzoeff, 1999); by 2006, ninety-seven million American adults (about 66% of total population in U.S.) use the Internet on an average day (Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2006). Since the internet is capable of such large amount of 'audience', marketers and advertisers see it as a new marketing environment of importance. In fact, Leopold (HSMAI, Marketing Review, 2006) indicated that all consumers daily experience more than 3,000 marketing and advertising messages from a variety of media sources.
On the subject of a company's marketing communication strategies, Fox (2005) laid stress on the importance of designed graphic images or pictorial representation. A successful visual image may represent the core issue of the product itself, draw target customers' attention, and more outstandingly, make the image attach in the audience's mind. The usage of multiple media as described above presenting pictorial or graphic images, contributes a more effective and cost-saving method to marketers in communicating with their target consumers (Dijkstra, M et al, 2003). This supports Oliva's argument (1998) about the benefit of choosing the Internet as a marketing communication tool, which helps marketers and advertising planners reduce cost, discover new market, transform relationship, and add better value to the shareholder.
With regards to the tourism industry, Lake (2001) argued that the Internet has been one of the most essential sources for travel information search. Evidence shows that people in the twenty-first century have a significant tendency to surf on the Internet when searching for tourism destination information, especially, when seeking for the distant places where they have never been to. On daily basis, 8 percent of 97 million Internet users in U.S. seek for travel information online on daily basis, while 3 percentage purchases or makes a reservation for travel online (Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2006). Further, a recent research (Kim et al, 2006) pointed out that both gender of Internet users spent nearly 5 hours online for planning their recent trips. Therefore, as the reliance on the Internet for potential travellers to obtain travel information online is considerable, the increased need of understanding online users' attitudes and behaviours for a Tourism Marketer has become more and more fundamental.
However, the information (including literal context and visual image) seen by the searcher (potential customer) may vary depending on the different genders. Meyer-Levy's previous research (1988) demonstrated that females tended to explore more detailed information before making decisions, while males relied on more objective cues, only available information, and their own opinions. Compared with males, females are regarded to be more "visually-oriented, more intrinsically motivated, and more romantic" (Holbrook, 1986). Over two decades, a recent research examined this argument and proved that, in modern times, gender differences influence the attitude and preference of the online users when searching travel information online, and hence have impact on decision making and consumer behaviour (Kim D et al, 2006).
Yet, as online travel information includes literal context and pictorial representation, what is the communication and functionality of pictorial representation (such as still visual image and dynamic images) in online tourism marketing? Moreover, what are the differences of perceived pictorial image and hence of consumer behaviour from a gender perspective? For the reason that little research related to the issues mentioned above has been performed, this paper involves the approaches of existing literature review and secondary data analysis in an attempt to bridge the academic gap and contribute better understanding of the effectiveness in current applied tourism marketing strategies on the Internet and the diverse role of visual communication in online tourism product websites between female and male. This paper is also anticipated to bring out implications for further studies in the field and recommendations of more effective marketing approaches on tourism destination websites for managers and advertisers in the industry.
Before the popularity of the Internet, pictures had been considered one of the most effective marketing communication tools with regard to advertising. According to their research, Edell et al. found that more than 55% of travel planners tended to be influenced by the pictures embedded in the advertisements on their choice of decision (1983). Pictures help marketers and advertisers to draw customers' attention, project desirable visual image and the condition of tourism product into customers' mind and also create their brand images. Leongal. (1996) reported that pictures, compared to text, are more memorable and easier for creating an impression of products or services on customers, based on their research findings, because pictures has the capacities of imaginary and verbal codes in customers' memory whereas text produces verbal codes only.
In the hospitality and tourism industry, as mentioned earlier in this report, the use of the Internet assists marketers and advertisers to overcome the disadvantage of the intangible nature of tourism products and services; on the other hand, it also facilitates customers to obtain more comprehensive information about the products and services in the process of their decision-making (Koernig, 2003). Picture presentation online, moreover, can add tangible cues to intangible tourism product and services and helps customers engage in mentally imaging the benefit and even virtually experiencing their dreaming destination (Klein, 2003). More expressly, in their studies, Jeong & Choi (2004) endeavoured to measure the effectiveness of picture presentation on hotel Websites for an attempt to identify customers' attitude and behavioural intention. They concluded that picture content and realism of picture on the Web appeared to be the powerful indicators of customer attitudes; that is to say, the more numbers of pictures performing the tourism product and services as well as the pictures featured employees and previous customers shown on the website, the more favourable customers' attitude emerges.
From a visual communication perspective in which it phrases picture as photograph, as soon as photography existed, travel photographs appeared (Osborne, 2000). From the tourist point of view, travel photograph visualises the context of tourist attractions and experience to last the holiday longer than it had ever been; at the meanwhile, it brings visions of the destinations back to those people who have never been to the places, stimulates their imaginary, and encourages them to 'consume the places'- that is, travelling-in the future (Urry, 2002). Coupled with Urry's thoughts, Schroeder (2002) pointed out the importance of recognizing the visual image of a destination for both marketers and travellers. Travellers perform travel action and purchase tourism product with an expectation for experiencing the so-called authentic products, for example, British Fish & Chips, Naples Pizza, Greek cheese or Parisian Caf. Oppositely, tourism marketers, particularly for tourism destination marketers, retail their products combined with the image of the destinations to meet customers' needs of consuming places (Schroeder, 2002). Earlier, Urry (1995) stated that 'the tourist gaze' is in fact focusing on particular characteristics and objects of travel destination, such as Paris and Eiffel Tower, London and Big Ben, New York and Time Square, artistic works, specialised food and so on. Therefore, understanding and positively positioning the icons of the destinations can be fundamental on tourism marketers and advertisers' choices of pictorial representation to customers (Human, 1999).
In his recent book, again, Schroeder (2004) confirmed the interactive connection between photography, advertising and visual consumption, on a basis of consumer research. As the advance of information technology, the internet requires photography or pictorial presentation as one of the components to perform the content marketers or Web designers assign, while photographs of advertising and promotion become more and more dominant force with regard to marketing communication since the visual images spread out rapidly over the globe via the Internet (Schroeder & Borgerson, 2002). However, reflecting on the academic gap mentioned above, only a few of research has placed emphasis on photography/pictorial presentation in the field of marketing and consumer behaviour (Belk, 1998). Schroeder argued that it might result from the complex and elusive nature of visual consumption which formed barriers for scholars and students to unveil and analyse the knowledge in this area (2004).
Moreover, an insight of art historical and intercultural knowledge would offer assistance to marketers and advertisers in positioning and understanding the concept, identity, and intention of photography/pictorial representation, Schroeder recommended (2004). Take it as an example, the photography of the advertisements of CK ONE that first published in 1999 involved two art historical genres: Group portraits, generally linked to 'Golden era of Dutch art' and performed strong masculinity; and fashion photography, mostly associated with women than men. By means of integrating these two gendered genre of art historical techniques, the ads of CK ONE successfully performed a genderless image to the public and drew much of customers' attention, without customers figuring out why (Schroeder, 2000). The need for qualified marketers and advertisers and continuous training in art historical and intercultural aspects is therefore emerged.
Echoing to the research results from marketing and consumer behaviour perspective that has been discussed earlier in this paper, it can be persuaded that gender, as a demographic characteristic, makes significant impact on online consumers' decision making during the process of consumption activities. For example, at the earlier stage when the internet became popular in the ninetieth's, Internet users were dominantly males and males tended to process information online faster than females (Harrison & Rainer, 1992). By twentieth-first century, researchers (Teo, 2001; Sexton et al, 2002) found that, still, men were more likely to be Internet users and utilize the Internet for more kinds of activities. More familiarity toward the use of the Internet and the operational computer skills in men resulted in that women showed more anxiety when using the Internet than men (Ono & Zavodny, 2003). However, following the rapid change of technology adoption and consumers' adoption to the Internet, in terms of travel planning, more and more women tend to share the responsibility and search travel information online actively, and also become primary decision-maker among the household (Kim et al, 2006).
In recent years, a number of researchers argue that gender difference is in fact not significant in processing cognitive messages (O'Keefe, 2002), while it is still evident that women are easier to persuade and more adept in interpreting non-verbal communication than man, such as sighs, visual-images, and sounds (Everhart et al, 2001), which is unfailing with Wood's statement (1966): compared to men, women responded to non-verbal message by inducing more 'associative' and 'imagery-laced' interpretation and presenting more descriptions. Accordingly, this can be suggested that female may be more easily stimulated more by the metaphors designed in marketing promotions or advertisements.
From the review of sociological literature, Urry did not develop the context in 'engendered' tourist gaze (Urry, 1995), though, other feminist scholars have made effort in this phenomenon. As the growing number of female tourists and travel planners, however, females may not see the travel destination as the way men see it, even though females and males share the similar characteristics in respect of social status, educational level, and reference groups (Deem, 1996). Assumedly, this argument can also be applied to the various way of women's seeing the pictorial representation on travel and tourism Websites, compared to men. Contradictorily, rooted in her research findings, Massey (1994) disclosed that male power have been the mainstream with regard to tourism and the male gaze make strong influence on opposite gender, as if female travel-makers mostly have gendered notions reflecting on their tourist gaze. For example, during the research interviews, a number of women were interrupted or corrected by their male companion on the subject of travel destination information or definition of tourism. On the other hand, it is also revealed that women tend to focus on the travel destination where women are the major consumers, so are the major employers, such as department stores, and day-care services. These findings may contribute some pieces of implication for marketers and advertisers on what (in relation to travel destination or tourist product) can be generally seen and what will be desired to see by females whilst female take part into the performance of travelling, from travel information gathering, online purchase, to travel destination consuming.
Within the scenario of the gender roles playing in travel planning which results in purchase action eventually or not, there is a need for tourism marketers and website designers to re-think of the arrangement of Web content and accessibility, from the view of gender difference, so as to segment the increasing groups of female online searchers, provide more favoured information, and serve the travel public in a more effective way. In this case, comprehending and identifying how opposite genders process information and 'read' visual representation in a different way is considered to be crucial.
Previous research revealed that, although most travel planners search for travel information online, 81% of them do not make purchases online (GUV, 1999) and 75% of them discontinue/cancel the process of online transaction (BizRate, 1999), and more amazingly, 80% of Web users do not revisit the Websites (NVision, 1999). As a result, with the growing importance of selling tourism product and service online and the increasing number of potential travellers surfing on the Internet seeking for travel information, there is indeed a necessity of a better understanding in how to structure an effective Web content to impress the surfers/potential travellers at the first moment, for great concerns to online tourism marketers.
This paper adopts approaches of literature review and secondary data analysis, from a historical perspective, to comprehend the knowledge in the advent of the Internet and the benefit of using the Internet as a marketing communication medium, along with its application in hospitality and tourism industry. The communication and functionality of pictorial representation/visual representation/photography on travel and tourism website is the greatest concern in Web effectiveness in this paper. Only little research, however, associated with the effectiveness of pictorial representation on the Web has been elicited and elaborated. Therefore, this paper first endeavours to identify the difference in online consumer behaviour from an angle of socio-demographics, and discusses what do potential travellers possibly long to gaze upon on the travel and tourism websites from a visual consumption viewpoint and argues that opposite genders may differ the way potential travellers process the travel information on the Websites, with an attempt to indicate the key aspects that tourism marketers should lay stress on.
As a matter of fact, an assumption can be laid out, through the propositions discussed through the paper, that the relation between pictorial presentation and gender difference is positive and preferences and effectiveness of visual representation online diverse depending on the genders, within the context of travel and tourism websites. However, this assumption needs further empirical studies to examine and contribute a proof, since little existing literature is capable to consolidate this point of view. Another limitation of this paper direct to the lack of discussion in tourists' consumer behaviour linked with the shift from a solid and fixed modernity to a much more fluid and speeded-up liquid modernity (Baumann, 2000)., in which tourists' decision-making and purchase behaviours might be influenced. Do tourists and potential travellers' lifestyle, consumer behaviour and attitude alter due to the change of the form of modernity? This implication also requires further review of existing literature and future research to answer the question.
Last but not the least, since the issues centralised in this paper requests further experimental studies to develop a clearer and novel framework of the effects of pictorial representation on travel and tourism websites from a gender perspective, with a hope to contribute guidance on adequate methodologies, a brief review of research approaches those have been done to Website effectiveness evaluation is presented as following: by 2006, there were 56 papers published that dealt with tourism marketing on the Internet and presented 47 different research approaches, such as modified Balance Scored Card, Rating systems, Web analysis model, and so on, which were used to evaluate the content of hospitality and tourism destination website, based on Han & Mills's findings (Referred to Appendix 1).