Both the US and Canada enjoy high government stability (Appendix 1) (World Bank, 2007). Regarding to the promotion of competition and economic efficiency, US antitrust laws apply equally to both the foreign and domestic corporate sectors, however in Canada these are less specific and involve less industries (AWWA, 2007). US corporate tax rates are lower compared to those in other industrialised countries (Appendix 1), however, different states and municipalities often assess special taxes on hotel and motel lodging (Country Commerce, 2006). The same rate is currently higher in Canada (Appendix 1), however government is planning to lower it by 2010 (Country Commerce, 2006), therefore creating favourable conditions for the hotel sector's development (IMF, 2006). Both governments offer a range of incentives, such as tax exemption or deduction, loan guarantee and employee grants (Appendix 1), though these are mainly industry and regional specific, and exclude the hotel sector (Country Commerce, 2006), giving less support and posing barriers to its development (Appendix 2). With a liberal trade regime, most industries in the US are open to foreign investors and there are comparatively less barriers for these to enter the market (Country Review, 2007). However, in comparison, Canada has relatively stricter policies regarding foreign investment with much less foreign-owned companies (Country Review, 2007) (Appendix 1). Employment and labour legislation, but especially equal opportunity laws, predominate heavily in both the US and Canada, however, in the former there are generally no contracts between the employer and the employee (Country Commerce, 2006), justifying high labour turnover. This has always posed an issue and a source of conflict in the hotel sector. Further unrest comes from the threat of terrorism. Hotels are known targets and with its danger growing every year, this region, and especially the US, remains a prime target of terrorists (Cetron, 2006), which may possibly affect the sector and popularity of the region.
The North American economy has maintained stable rates of growth over the past two years (IMF, 2006; Appendix 1), mainly due to business non-residential investments, and personal expenditure which, nonetheless, have been counterbalanced with decreased investment in residential construction (BEA, 2007; BBC, 2007). Personal expenditure was particularly significant in the US with rising GNI levels and per capita also enhancing the strength and power of both economies (Appendix 1). Rises in services' gross domestic product and personal disposable income prove the demand for accommodation and food services (Appendix 1). Added proof of the industry's high and economic contribution is the increase in US international tourism arrivals and receipts (UNWTO, 2006) (Appendix 1). Though inflation has increased (Appendix 1), it is being controlled by both countries and maintained within targets so to ensure price stability, provide opportunities for and reflect economic growth (Bank of Canada, 2007). This control reassures the hotel sector that prices and wages will not be increased in face of domestic financial pressures. This confidence reinforces lower inflation, allowing for long-term planning and ensuring that investments will not lose significant value over the years (Bank of Canada, 2007).
The Canadian dollar's revaluation may constrain the country's export potential (rising prices for international traders), yet this is counteracted by rising domestic demand and opportunities for hotels to expand domestically (FXCM, 2006). The combination of controlled inflation, money supply and interest rates align consumer expenditure power and price stability (Bank of Canada, 2007), hence attracting lasting business in a steady economy. Adding to corporate tax reduction, the ease of starting a business and lack of wage and price controls (Appendix 1) encourage hotel development.
Unemployment has remained relatively unchanged and the increase in jobs in the accommodation/food services industries (Statistics Canada, 2007c) has proven one of the main contributors to Canada's record high in employment. Considerable increases are seen in the same sector in the US (Appendix 1).
Population growth rates in both Canada and the US have declined since the 1950s with relatively low annual averages of about or less than 1% between 2001 to 2006 (Country Profile, 2006). However, against this backdrop, birth rates in ethnic minority communities are high, thus showing the region's cultural diversity. The significantly aging population (Appendix 1) is caused by rising numbers of those aged over 65, and longer life expectancy (Country Profile, 2006). Younger generations (Gen-X and Gen-Y) (Appendix 1) are also exerting their influence on patterns of change, shaping social trends, consumer demands and levels of affluence (ISHC, 2007) as their fast paced lifestyles (Orbitz, 2007) may reveal the shortening of business and leisure travels but the need for more luxurious hotel experiences. Both trends affect the availability of human resources, concept development, design, the influence and application of technology and the characteristics of the guest experience.
Most of the population in this region is concentrated in urban areas in eastern US, adjacent parts of Ontario and Qubec and the US Pacific coast (Encarta, 2007). However, the recent economic boost in western Canada and south-western US indicate a regional shift in population to the sparsely or moderately populated west and south parts, affecting the distribution and location of hotel development.
Both countries have high living standards as well as highly developed education and health systems, which prompt the population to have high career expectations (UN, 2006). Rapid technological development and the expansion of e-commerce have significantly changed lifestyles in North America with online shopping and booking becoming one of the most popular means of purchasing (Country Commerce, 2006).
North America has consistently maintained the leading role in the field of technological progress (Eule, 2006) as both the government and industry make great efforts on various types of research and development (Appendix 1). Comparatively to the US, Canada allocates less of its budget to technological development but places more emphasis on environmental concerns and energy efficiency. The US also actively takes part in technological development and its energy saving program, encouraging increasing partnerships with the hotel sector (Appendix 1) (Energy Star, 2005). Given the close relationship between the two countries, the sharing of intelligence and technology between them is positive and prompt, greatly benefiting research and development (Wilsoncenter, 2007), and establishing the region as the hub for technology innovation and contributing to the hotel sector's advancement.
The Internet has changed the hotel sector's distribution channels, advertising medium and consumer purchasing habits (Appendix 1), having increased online booking (Hitwise, 2007), and led to a shift in hotel strategies towards direct reservation systems (Hospitality eBusiness Strategies, 2004). Further, hi-tech in-room features are also a prime focus of hospitality technology development (Hotel Online, 2005) within the phenomenon of modern interior design, aimed at satisfying and impressing customers with the latest developments (Hotel News Resources, 2005). With regards to room infrastructure, bathroom maintenance and innovation require special attention and action from hoteliers in the U.S and Canada, as it is an area where customer dissatisfaction mostly stems from (Appendix 1).
Canada is an important oil exporter (Appendix 1), and natural gas is significantly used in several industries and sectors, including hotels (EIA, 2004). The significantly high energy consumption in the region is attributed to geographical vastness, cold climate, high living standards, low cost and high availability of energy (EIA, 2004). Consequently, Canada is determined to improve its environmental position and thus renewable energy sources are fast gaining pace and currently above the average rate of high income countries (World Bank, 2006)(Appendix 1). It is highly likely that both governments will soon take a stronger position on climate change (The White House, 2007; EIA, 2004) with significant policies, rules and regulations on waste, pollution and energy, and therefore the hotel sector will be forced to change its ways and adopt more environmentally-friendly approaches to its operations.
The sector is also particularly sensitive to natural disasters and human conflicts. However, through advanced economies of scale and the experience of 9/11, the North American industry has shown its rapid response to crises and the ability to speedily recover, which enforced by local communities' constant eagerness and planning in crisis management (Ernst & Young, 2007), reassure developers, despite increasing threats of disasters, of the sector's efficient coping with volatile conditions.
The region's economic stability is counterbalanced by a mature stage of its ecocyle which suggests a possible decline in coming years. Also, the threat of terrorism is ever-present and in addition to new passport requirements, generates some political instability, which together with Canada's restrictions on foreign investment may negatively affect stakeholders. Nonetheless, the region's free market economy, high levels of diversity, changing demographics and lifestyles, significant investment in technological research and development of renewable sources of energy make it attractive to investors. Further, increased outsourcing and interest by private investors help counterbalance mounting costs of suppliers and high levels of unionization. Changing demographics, lifestyles and rising demand from consumers who are increasingly price-sensitive and knowledgeable about products and services, as well as the threat of stricter environmental policies, also pose a danger of emerging substitute products and services. The combination of opportunities and threats in addition to evident co-existence and cooperation between companies themselves and the sector and other industries indicate its current high and make it favourable for further growth and development.
Innovation in the hotel sector appears to be heavily based on new concepts from other industries (e.g technology, fashion, design, manufacturing and textile) which are then transferred and adapted to the sector. Given its high dependence on the transformations of other industries, the hotel sector therefore primarily reflects emerging trends, e.g. new food design and composition (trends in organic ingredients, healthy eating), communication facilities in rooms (Appendix 3) and changes in the economy (reflected in price shifts and cost control).
The mature stage of the sector's ecocycle signifies that companies are now focusing on improving efficiency levels, restructuring procedures and re-allocating resources in order to ensure predictable outcomes, therefore leading to the continuous diversification of products and services, and a possible slowdown in innovation. Nonetheless, with the sector's ecocycle in account, innovation can also be viewed as a process by which small improvements in diverse areas of functioning-"functional differentiation" (Ohmae, 1982; p. 97)-can indeed assist hotels to maximize their strengths, minimise weaknesses, improve their competence and potential as well as create new opportunities for growth (see CSF). Most well-established hotel companies' have vast portfolios, with significant presence in key locations, considerable and comparable economies of scale as well as substantial congruence and profitable management of critical success factors (Appendix 1 and CSF). Those who pioneer the developments tend to be the main players themselves and this may again be justified by their significant power generated from economies of knowledge and scale. The combination of the stage of the ecocycle, economies of knowledge and the source of the main developments being from other industries, all contribute to the availability of innovation to all, and a significant degree of imitation. Also, given that the innovations are mainly from other industries, and therefore extensively accessible to all companies, consumers are not as impressed as they would be if a development stemmed from within the sector and an organization in particular. The high level of similarity between brands, their products and services indeed confuses guests (Brandimension, 2006; Ohmae, 1982), especially those who are not loyal to any specific hotel organization, and should be a cause for companies to dare to go beyond improvement, development and imitation and challenge existing practices, products and services (Brandimension, 2006).
A reflection of critical success factors and their importance is the development of technology and its diffusion in the sector. Innovations in this area revolve mainly around deals between global hotel brands and development companies, focused primarily on improving internet access for guests, the introduction of VoIP in rooms, and enhanced in-room facilities (Appendix 3). Technology has spread into the different departments and innovations such as hand held POS systems for food and beverage operations and mobile wireless check-in systems for the convenience of guests. In addition, kiosks with boarding pass printing, the guarantee of the cheapest online booking rates through constant monitoring of internet prices and the improvement of central reservations' systems which have enabled cutting out intermediaries, are becoming the norm (Appendix 3). Technology has also found its way into intensely personalising the guest experience, through the emergence of an interactive suite selection tool, where extended-stay guests can choose their suites, upon reservation, according to their preferences. The iPod innovation has been integrated in staff training, where mobile learning will be provided through specifically developed programs for the software and be made widely available (Appendix 3).
The emergence of new hotel concepts mirrors not only trends in various industries but also changes in society. Designer, lifestyle and extended stay hotels, serviced apartments, vacation ownership or partly owned residences, though a potential substitute threat, represent inevitable adaptations to ever-changing needs. They may therefore be regarded as innovations, though their impact on the sector and society is highly restricted, as these transformations show high levels of adaptation, limited co-evolution, and minimal influence and persuasion of ground-breaking change. These new concepts (Appendix 2 & 3), apart from changing the guest experience, may also bring about modifications to previously established rules and regulations (e.g. the possibility of keeping pets in rooms and its probable relation to extended stays by W hotels). Further developments include the use of alternative and renewable sources of energy, recycling and composting of waste. Apart from reflecting a recent trend, these actions certainly have an ecological value attributed to them as well as reducing costs and most improving performance (Appendix 3).
It may therefore appear that given the hotel sector's dependence on innovation from other industries, it is merely affected by their ripple effects. However, the consequences felt by the hotel sector may pose as catalysers for increased developments in those and other industries and sectors.
Competition in the hotel sector has shifted from directly competing with each other on price and occupancy to implicitly competing through diversifying products and services, perfecting performance, proficiently relocating resources and achieving customer satisfaction, so to gain competitive advantage, increase profitability and achieve corporate goals. Further, the consolidation and stabilization in the hotel industry since the late 1990s, expected to accelerate and result in 10 to 20 major hotel chains worldwide (Mathews, 1995), indicates a trend towards mergers and acquisitions as opposed to direct competition, and a consequent co-existence and co-evolution of the major players. The major internal driver for this change is the sector's mature ecocycle stage, which in general requires improving performance rather than fierce price competition, namely severe discounts, which result in zero margins and the decrease of quality and customer satisfaction.
The change in competition is also driven by several external factors. The development of the sector is highly dependent on the improvement of other industries, thus technological advances, the enhancement of daily products and developments in construction combine to affect the hotel sector and impel organizations to compete on the basis of adapting to innovations from other industries. Secondly, the hotel sector is substantially affected by social-cultural trends. Changing demographic characteristics of aging population, needs and demands of X & Y generations, shifting lifestyles and purchasing behaviour and power, add to increased personalisation and growing concerns for the environment (Appendix 4) urging the hotel sector to compete through diversifying products and services to meet different customer needs. Further, the hotel sector is particularly sensitive to natural disasters, terrorism and political conflict. This to an extent also drives hotel groups to co-exist and co-evolve through mergers and acquisitions, in a quest to increase their economies of scale and extensive presence worldwide, as well as providing competitive advantage and a safety net for organizations when these unexpected, high-impact events occur in specific areas, and therefore maintain stability at a corporate level.
Considering the idiosyncratic characteristics of the sector (e.g. high unpredictability, dependence on other industries and disposable income), high levels of imitation and limited innovation, gaining temporary competitive advantage and continuously anticipating needs, identifying new trends, creating new customers and furthering relationships with existing ones is vital. Hyatt's Board EZ kiosk (Appendix 3) is an example of the first two S's where the organization partnered with a technology company and following specific market research, developed a service which anticipated guests' needs, accompanied recent socio-cultural trends and possibly attracted new customers. Hyatt recognized that guests arrive tired to hotels and want to rest (need and want), and appreciated the need for technological advancement to materialize it (identifying new ways to serve customers-existing and new-better). Customers also prevailed over other stakeholders, e.g. excessive staff may have to be redistributed or laid off, porters trained to understand the kiosks, new partnerships and contracts with technology companies and energy suppliers may be needed.
The lack of speed and surprise in the kiosk innovation may be justified by its adaptation from self check-ins prevalent in the airline industry (dependence on other industries) and the lengthy pursuit of its development (significant publicity before implementation). Surprise and speed disability and the introduction of innovations from other industries make novelties available for competitors to almost catch up when an innovation is just launched, thus hardly disturbing the market's status quo. Hospitality organizations have the vision, but lack the capabilities.
The kiosk innovation is too recent a development to realise how much of the three tactics it includes for market disruption. Self check-in may cause significant changes in hotel lay-outs, the use of labour force, training, job descriptions and labour costs, therefore changing how business rules. It may also suggest the need for mergers and acquisitions between hotel organizations and technology development companies, triggering competitors into binding contracts. Therefore, if its potential is fully exhausted and developed (e.g. the progression to and beyond mobile wireless check-in systems) it may disrupt the market. Signalling was present throughout the process, though it may have played in detriment to Hyatt. The implementation of kiosks in hotels was lengthy (there was a need to prepare customers), it was brought in from other industries and its development was continuously followed by the media. All this contributed to its predictability and allowed competitors to work on the process themselves, hence reducing surprise. It seems there was no effort to win over the main suppliers so to prevent competitors from catching up, appearing almost like a joint movement to introduce self check-in kioks in hotels.
The development of mobile wireless check-ins and boarding pass printing kiosks could be viewed as a succession of self check-in kiosks; however these are mere developments, lacking surprise and speed, involving significant signalling and therefore negatively impacting simultaneous and sequential strategic thrusts (D'Aveni, 1995). Evidence of these tactics is characteristic of hypercompetitive industries, where companies send blows almost immediately and in sequence so to disrupt the market (D'Aveni, 1995). Comparing hypercompetitive environments to that above suggests perfect competition in the North American hotel sector, as the major players all seem to be in equal advantage, there is no evidence of unusual profits for any particular company, all have access to technological development, compete relatively equally on price and quality within their markets, are globally present, have the capacity to carry-out organizational reforms as needed and break down entry barriers with economies of scale and knowledge. These in turn, relate to and support the presence of co-existence in the hotel sector and North America. Though seeming ideal, perfect competition and co-existence may pose threats to long term survival and growth, as profit margins are very limited and ultimately create an environment where markets are almost 'static' and one small disruption may have heavily detrimental ripple effects. It is therefore vital to prioritize and quickly move between priorities whilst transforming trade-offs into capabilities and tactics. This will assist hotel companies in identifying and exploring competitors' weaknesses, maximizing strengths, hence generating new opportunities. If the above concept is fully exploited, Hyatt will be in a position to temporarily gain competitive advantage. The key then becomes to make this process systematic where the company is always, temporarily, in advantage.
The main patterns of change suggest developments in security, environment and socio-cultural trends as well as the increased involvement of technology in all advancements. A significant determinant of the future of the sector is its mature stage. Indications of a peak of the North American hotel sector in the next 2-3 years (Hotel Executive Insider, 2006; Higley, 2007), suggest a possible decline within the coming 5-10 years. For the next few years the main players will focus on scanning and monitoring the environment so to improve performance, though soon enough, the sector may experience essential changes. The uncertainty of who will take the initiative to disrupt the market and lead the industry, what the potential change will be and how it will affect the sector and hotel groups, generates both a high level of anticipation and latent instability at present time, and a significant threat to long-term sustainability and stability (if these indeed exist). All is left is for one company to take the step and make an innovation, the industry standard.
Increased terrorism fears, the dependence of the hotel sector on innovations from other industries, and the inclusion of technology support the possible incorporation of nanotechnology, biometric security and robotics in the sector (Valhouli, 2004). The hotel entrance will remain a welcoming and open space though subtly including high-tech security, e.g. cameras identifying guests through retina scans or the use of finger-print recognition to open bedroom doors. Nonetheless, technology is available to all, including terrorists, and the sector will need to further develop its tactics (e.g. different hotel layouts and construction material) if it is to protect itself.
At a corporate level, the inclusion of technology may lead to strategic alliances and mergers and acquisitions between hotel organizations and technology-development companies, disrupting the market, shifting the rules of the game and creating hypercompetition-no longer between hotel companies but also amongst technology-development organizations operating with the hotels. Bill Gates' acquisition of a major share of Four Seasons and ownership of Microsoft make credible a merger between the two and the creation of a seminal operating system, which could shape the market and change competition rules. Key players are ever more incorporating technological advances in their corporations, leading to cost reductions, especially labour related, and an improvement of facilities and structures. The most significant development appears to be not that of technological advancements in facilities and equipments but that of manpower replacement with technology. Though seeming progress, this trend may pose significant threats to the industry as evidence suggests a growing demand for human relations, interaction in hotels and a personalised experience, not one technology dominated (Ferry, 2005). Therefore, though the influence and presence of technology is imperative in the improvement of work processes and functioning, a balance should be found between the latter and the extent to which human interactions are affected. The hotel sector is characterised by the interaction of people and to remove this could be heavily detrimental to the success of organizations.
Climate change and the resulting adjustments in government policy already show their effects on the hotel sector. Not only are North American governments taking significant measures towards recycling, the use of renewable sources of energy, composting of waste and supporting hotels to go "green", but these developments are accompanying a wider trend that being ecologically-friendly is not only necessary but also fashionable. This presents the possibility of major players becoming environmentally friendly and adopting measures such as self-generation of energy or inclusion of a waste composing area which could be used to develop and supply part of the hotels' energy. Further, the constant erosion of coastlines could trigger the emergence of destinations and hotel sites in unexpected locations. The combination of technology with environmental and economic concerns could lead to the exploitation of unthought-of locations. In-land deserted regions, plains, mountain sites and deserts could all be maximized to reproduce or create new destinations.
Adapting to social trends is a key characteristic of the hotel sector and the emergence of designer hotels due to increasing demands of younger and educated generations could imply the creation of hotels for senior segments (Appendix 1), created under different brands, according to the financial possibilities of the segments. Changes would include innovative hotel structures (i.e. less floors), room lay-outs featuring visible indications and health monitoring devices, more space, the inclusion of transportation (e.g. in resorts, one buggy per room), more and differently distributed multi-skilled staff (e.g. knowledge of healthcare and tertiary needs).
This scenario proves the North American hotel sector's interconnectedness with other industries and its dependent co-evolution therewith for increasing progress and development.