The practise of Revenue Management (RM) is crucial to ensure that any business is being run to its full capacity and that the maximum revenue is being gained. RM can be defined as;
Airlines were the first to introduce RM with the development of APEX (Advanced Purchase Excursion) and many customers commonly accept it, however it is not so readily accepted in the Hospitality industry and in particular hotels; "charging different prices...[is] not viewed as particularly unfair in the airline industry, but may be seen as unfair in the hotel industry" (Kimes; 1994, 22). This essay will address these issues and find solutions to ensure that all types of customers are kept satisfied whilst RM is still being practised. This is significant for the Hospitality Industry, where customer satisfaction is hugely important and integrating Customer Relationship Management alongside RM is vital. Wirtz et al (2003) supports this view; "...if a firm is to be successful with revenue management, customer loyalty must not be compromised". Kimes (2002) also states; "If customers perceive hotel revenue management practises as unfair, the increased revenue from such practises may only be short term". This essay will address the issues surrounding Revenue Management within the Hospitality Industry, and provide recommendations to ensure that all types of customers perceive the practise to be both fair and reasonable.
Revenue maximisation is greatly important, however customers are equally so, and getting the balance correct between RM and Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is crucial. CRM can be defined as; "the art of using historical, personal, and experiential information to personalize a guest's stay while generating incremental revenue opportunities" (Microsoft Hospitality; 2005). The hospitality industry is vast and a different style of RM is required for each area. What works for the Cruise Lines would be very different for Hotels who can rely on walk-ins and can practise over- booking. Cruise Lines cannot over book, it is very hard to 'walk' customers to another ship, and a different style of RM has to be used. Within hotels there are many different services, the main amount of revenue from the rooms side, but also much revenue gain from other services such as the restaurants/ conferences/ leisure activites. The main revenue source for hotels is shown in app "?". This diversity can cause difficulty when assessing a customers 'value to the hotel'. Valuing customers is greatly important and many hotel chains have implemented reward schemes, for example Marriott's Rewards or Intercontinental's Priority Club; "As a fundamental component of its CRM strategy, an organisation must establish a means of ranking customers to identify the most valuable and then servicing them differently" (Noone et al; 2003, 10). It is crucial that customers perceive to be treated fairly by hotels; this can create major issues when hotels are looking at maximising revenue. Managers that focus on the maximisation of revenue without consideration for CRM can risk offending customers and have damaging effects to the hotels long term success; "Focussing on efficient use of resources may take managerial attention away from service, resulting in a loss of customers at considerable financial cost" (Kimes; 1994, 23).
Implementing RM procedures significantly increases revenue, however the practises used to do this that can cause the controversy. Overbooking is one such RM technique. Acccording to Wirtz et al (2003, 223) "If a customer is involuntarily displaced the costs can be enormous, including the potential of future lost business and poor word of mouth". However in comparison Baker and Collier (1999) argue that overbooking not only helps hotels to reduce potential revenue lost due to 'no shows' but it creates an under sale opportunity cost for the unsold room. Other RM techniques also include, closed to arrival controls, increasing the rack rate and selling at 'discount', and controls on length of stay. These encourage business over quieter periods and prevent lower paying guests staying for numerous nights, displacing higher paying guests. This could be viewed as unfair by loyal, but lower paying customers displaced by a higher paying customer; "Customers believe that the value to the firm should equal the value to the customer" (Kimes, 1994; 24). For this reason revenue managers need to ensure that this practised along with CRM. When implementing RM into a hotel it is important that all types of customers, perceive the practise as both fair and reasonable. Below are recommendations for the hotel;
Lifetime Value Based Pricing (LTV)
The rate quoted to each customer is based on his or her value to the organisation, rather than being quoted different rates each time they stay which can be perceived as unfair. Assessing each customer on a individual basis customers will understand that the more they spend the more benefits they receive; "clear communication of hotel revenue management practises to customers can reduce the possible conflict created by the practices" (Choi, S., and Mattila, A; 2004, 305). However the hotel would need to ensure that provisions have been made to implement this strategy; "the challenge in using LTV lies in the establishment of an appropriate methodology for assigning costs to customers and the estimation of customer lifetime duration" (Noone et al; 2003) with this also comes the aspect of training up staff to use the system effectively.
Offering Packages
Hides the room rate and just shows the price for the entire package; "makes price comparisons between the bundles in its components impossible, and thereby side steps potential unfairness perceptions" (Wirtz et al; 2003, 222). Customers know exactly what they are getting and it is a set price so no price discrimination will occur.
Rate fences
Different priced room rates depending on the flexibility of the customer; "The more restrictions the customer is willing to accept the deeper the discount available" (Wirtz, 2003; 200). Many hotels practise this type of RM (app. ?!!). Some argue that variable room rates can result in perceived unfairness, however if the hotel ensures that the customer is aware of the different rates, with differing restrictions available should reduce this; "providing information on the hotel's pricing practices should enable customers to understand the reasons for differences in prices, and thus increase their judgements of fairness" (Choi, S., Mattila, A; 2004, 306).
Customer perceptions of fairness are crucial to the Hospitality Industry, which is centred on the customer and high standards of service. However along with this is the importance for RM. As discussed RM should not be conducted on it's own but integrated in hotels alongside CRM, ensuring that all types of customers perceive RM practices as fair and reasonable. The recommendations for the hotel are suited to all types of customers. The LTV suiting customers such as business professionals, packages for families, couples, and perhaps even tour groups, and the rate fences for lower paying customers. There are different views on the practise of RM, and businesses must decide which is best both for profit and customer satisfaction.