Hospitality can be divided into three main areas: Social, Private and Commercial and in each area the host can have different reasons for being hospitable. The social and private sectors are generally seen as carrying out genuine acts of hospitality, however commercial hospitality can be viewed as having ulterior motives. As Lashley writes; 'In some cases acts of hospitality can be seen as calculative e.g. the business lunch or office Christmas party are not primarily redistributive or undertaken for reasons which primarily value 'generosity and good behaviour as host' (Lashley, 1999:52).
However all areas of hospitality have similar requirements. For example as King stated; 'Successful hospitality in both the commercial and private spheres include knowledge of what would evoke pleasure in the guest' (King, 1995:229).
Whether or not a commercial host offers genuine hospitality to guests, and the extent to which a commercial host needs to offer 'genuine' hospitality is the question upon which I am going to base this essay.
Commercial hospitality is a diverse and worldwide industry playing a key part in the economic and the cultural development of a country. There are many ways of defining hospitality but I think Lashley's definition is best. 'Hospitality can be defined as services providing food, and/or drink and/or accommodation in a variety of establishments and settings' (Lashley, 1999:49). It is important, however, to note that a big difference exists between social, private and commercial hospitality. For example, social and private hospitality are fundamentally supply led, meaning that the host provides guests with the food he/she chooses. Social and private hospitality is generally provided on a small scale, making it personal and unique. In complete contrast, commercial hospitality is generally large scale making it much less personalised or unique. Nevertheless, it is important to remember that; 'Commercial hospitality is not simply domestic hospitality on a large scale but it is business driven and should not make any excuses about its underlying business ethic' (Lashley and Morrison, 2000:191) Commercial hospitality is demand led, meaning that the experience provided is pre-planned with the customer. The fact that; 'The commercial and market-driven relationship allows the customers a freedom of action an individual would not dream of demanding in a domestic setting' (Dr Johnson, 2000:52) is also an important point when defining the differences between private and commercial hospitality. Below is the Venn diagram, invented by Conrad Lashley to show the relationship between social, private, and commercial hospitality in visual form:
The diagram (Lashley 2000:50) shows that, despite differences, social, private and commercial hospitality are all connected in the sense that they all have similar criteria in which to be able to function properly. An example of this criterion could be that in order to manage all successful hospitality types the host must make the guest feel comfortable and able to enjoy the experience.
In order to find an answer to the title it is important to define 'genuine' hospitality, which is when the host provides for his/her guests out of real concern for their well-being and enjoyment rather than seeking anything in return. Many argue that a commercial host is not offering 'genuine' hospitality to the guests, as they are only being hospitable in furtherance of their business. Others disagree; 'If a commercial host looks after his guests well out of a genuine concern for their happiness and charges them reasonably, rather than extortionately, for what he does, his activities can be called hospitable' (Telfer, 2000:43). In the commercial area, guests can use facilities provided without any mutual obligation to the host other than those demanded of the market relationship. 'This kind of hospitality is not very hospitable' (Telfer, 1999:52). The point is to what extent a commercial host needs to offer genuine hospitality to guests and this is surrounded by many opposing views.
Some believe the commercial hospitality business should simply provide for guests' requirements and that, so long as the guests are happy with the service they receive, it doesn't really matter whether or not the service was genuine. 'It is the hosts role to provide and the guests role, which is voluntary, to receive. The relationship is reciprocal only in that the guest is obliged to pay for the service received and not cause harm or undue disruption to the business, its employees, or other guests' (Shamir, 1978:287). However many others believe that genuine hospitality in the commercial hospitality business is a very important attribute to the company and it's employees. Admittedly a hospitality business' main aim is to increase profits and repeat business, but many believe that the only way of reaching this goal is to ensure that guest satisfaction is top priority and that the only way to achieve this stems from employees genuinely wanting to please and help the guests in any way that they possibly can; 'A well trained employee with a positive attitude toward customers can be one of the companies most important product attributes' (Brown, and Makens, 1999: 95). After all; 'however well planned and designed the hospitality business and however well scheduled the resources, the success of any customer experience will be determined at 'the moment of truth'- the interaction between the customer and the service provider' (Lashley and Morrison, 2000: 103).
Genuine hospitality can be seen in relation to history and religion. For example, in ancient times travel was extremely dangerous and many societies developed an ethic of hospitality to allow a degree of safety to travel (King, 1995: 221). This can be seen as relating to religion as: 'Sometimes, the arriving stranger was thought to be a God, or a representative of a God, a bearer of 'mana', or at least, special knowledge, information and power' (Visser, 1991:222). In this sense the word 'genuine' also relates to the private sector of Hospitality. This is an important point when defining genuine. For example, a waiter has very different motives for serving a guest in a restaurant, than a mother when she serves a meal to her daughter. The mother's motives are out of love whereas a waiter wants to please the guest to ensure continued employment and a salary- but is this wrong? Do you really go to a restaurant and care about the waiter's motives? So long as the service is good does this really matter? In effect you are paying the waiter to be nice. Whilst many may disagree, I don't believe it does matter so long as the service is good and customers leave, satisfied, following an enjoyable experience.
Many believe commercial hospitality should be genuine but it is important to note that this is not always as easy as it may appear because; 'the service employee has a struggle between catering to the guest and maintaining control over the service transaction to perform the required tasks effectively. At the same time the employee must satisfy the companies standards and requirements' (King, 1995:227).
In the Hospitality industry the managers' role is of great importance as they are responsible for all of the establishment's activities. Managers are also responsible not only for the satisfaction of guests but also of employees; 'The Hospitable organisation must extend hospitality not only to its guests, but also to its employees' (Carol King, 1995:231). The reasoning is that to offer genuine hospitality to guests, the hosts must be motivated to offer it. If they are unhappy then the hospitality they offer is unlikely to be genuine or even to the guests' satisfaction. This was proven in a Forte Posthouse study, which revealed that there was 'a close correlation between employee satisfaction and guest satisfaction' (Teare and Owen, 1996:54). It has also been said that; 'employee job satisfaction frequently achieves the highest levels of profitability' (Teare and Owen, 1996:55) This is an example of the Service Profit chain, which links firm profits with employee and customer satisfaction. (Kotler, 1999:49) Therefore, it is vital to ensure that staff are happy in their work and feel valued. Managers can achieve this by creating empowerment in the workforce by introducing the 'Service culture'. This enables employees to solve customer problems and is supported by a reward system based on customer satisfaction. The idea of the 'Service culture' is to focus on serving and satisfying the customer and flows down from top management. Isadore Sharp drives the 'Service culture' as manager of the Four Seasons Hotel. (Kotler, 1999: 45). This is a very good way of ensuring that employees feel needed and improves motivation within the workforce. The manager's objective is 'to create an optimum working environment and to reconcile the demands of the hotel for effective performance and productivity with the needs and expectations of people at work' (Mullins, 1992:133). Below is a visual example of the areas managers have to consider to achieve optimum working conditions within the hospitality industry (Mullins, 1992:133)
The characteristics of the workforce and how this influences their ability to deliver high quality products and services should also be taken into consideration. The hospitality industry has a very diverse workforce with all sectors of society represented within it. This is hardly surprising, given that the industry operates on a global scale. (Mod 3101, lecture 6:Angela Maher). This diversity can create serious problems of its own. Mullins (2002:301) describes the meaning of diversity very well; 'It means relating to, and working with, people who hold different views, bring different qualities to the workplace, have different aspirations, and have different customs and traditions'. Tensions between employees can be disastrous, particularly if there is a language barrier leading to a breakdown in communications.
In order for managers to manage diversity successfully, it is important they understand potential differences in culture and societies between employees and address these issues to avoid workplace clashes. 'Hospitality managers, charged with the tasks of motivating, coaching, and mentoring service employees, must focus on one of the most central, yet neglected, aspects of communication- effective listening" (Brownell, 1996:201) Brownell also states, 'Understanding effective leadership requires perspectives that take into account the dynamic nature of hospitality organisations and that recognize the unique characteristics of each employee'. This is a very important point because managers must recognise that every employee is different. This approach helps make staff feel valued and encourages them to offer their best service to the guests; 'The hotel sector is likely to exhibit a wider and more diverse range of organisational and staffing characteristics that might necessarily be found in other sectors of the hospitality industry' (Mullins, 2001:305)
Other characteristics of the workforce include things such as, full-time/ part-time employment and gender. Whether or not an employee is full-time or part-time can be seen to affect whether a hospitality service is genuine. For example, is a part-time student, trying to pay off a student loan, offering a less genuine service than a full-time employee and to what extent do the student's motives for working really matter? Just over half of the employees within the industry (54%) work part-time (Mod 3101, lecture 7: Angela Maher), which demonstrates the diversity of workforce and highlights the need to ensure good communication exists. For instance, a part- time receptionist in a hotel must insure that everything is order for the full-time receptionist whose shift starts after she has left.
Similarly, gender within in the industry can cause problems. For example stereotyping is very common, we all do it but it should be discouraged. Women are often stereotyped as being the 'caring, mother figure', and many see them in the industry as working in housekeeping or at reception. This could cause problems within the industry when a women manager is in charge of male employees. If employees have stereotypical views of women they may feel reluctant to take them seriously, leading to problems. Numerically, women dominate the workforce with 67% of employees being female (Mod 3101, lecture 7, Angela Maher). After all 'It is the interaction of people in order to achieve objectives, which forms the basis of any organisation. Some form of structure is needed by which people's interactions and efforts are channelled and coordinated. It is through the management that the activities of the organisation and the efforts of its members are directed towards the pursuit of objectives.' (Mullins, 2001:305) All these issues have to be addressed to be able to run any successful commercial hospitality establishment; 'Diversity requires an understanding that there are differences among employees and that these differences, if properly managed, are an asset to work being done more effectively' (Bortz et al 1990: 321).
The hospitality industry is a very competitive and large-scale industry and as a result repeat business is very important. As Carper estimated 'it costs seven times more to attract new customers to a business than to attract existing customers' (Lashley, 1999:53). However, the extent to which a commercial host needs to offer 'genuine' hospitality to guests in order to achieve a base of loyal customer is a debatable issue. From my secondary research I found many opposing issues and views surrounding this topic, from Lashley who believes; 'the commercial hospitality industry could benefit from a better understanding of hospitality and hospitableness' (1999:49), to Telfer who argues the point that; 'To say that a commercial host cannot be said to behave hospitably simply on the ground that he is paid for his work is like saying doctors cannot be said to behave compassionately because they are paid for what they do' (2000:43). Personally I agree with this view. I think that if the guest is satisfied with the service that they receive in a commercial establishment then there can be nothing wrong with that. My view is that so long as the guest believes that he/she is receiving a good service and leaves the establishment satisfied with the service that he/she has received then that is all that is required. As a result motivation seems the most appropriate approach to the word 'genuine' in the commercial setting. For example, a commercial host may decide to reward regular customers with extra benefits. "The trick is to make the giving seem like an act of generosity rather than a formulaic 'give away' typical of many branded hospitality businesses" (Lashley; 1995:53).