Health promotion aims to combat a vast range of behaviours that are deemed to be detrimental to our health. The majority of health promotion tools focus on the problems that can be brought on by our own behaviour, such as heart disease (poor diet and smoking) and type II diabetes (poor diet). My resource (see appendix 1) is concerned with the emotional and physical well being of children, and specifically on reducing the threat to children from their own family. This essay will explain why it is important to give children a safe upbringing, why the resource was chosen, how it was designed, who it is targeted at, where it should be displayed, whether or not it would be successful and examines the government policies that support it.
My health promotion poster does not aim to tackle a disease, but it does promote healthy behaviour. Blaxter argues that 'health can be defined negatively as the absence of illness, functionally, as the ability to cope with every day activities, or positively as fitness and wellbeing' (Blaxter, 2001, in Purdy & Banks, 2001, p185). It is a nurse's responsibility to ensure that all children reach their potential and my poster aims it to create physical and psychological wellbeing by removing a child from the harm that both physical and emotional abuse or neglect can cause (Cloke & Naish,1992).
Why is child protection so important? It is important to protect anyone regardless of age, sex, gender or race but my resource focuses on children. Children should be given the best start in life as what they experience at an early age may affect their adult personality. Kim Etherington (1995) refers to the work of the psychologists who have tried to explain the processes of childhood cognitive development. She argues that as children we must experience various tasks, with the completion of these tasks bringing new values and strength. For example Erikson's (1963) first stage of child development was trust vs. mistrust; we learn to trust or mistrust our care-givers and therefore whether or not we can depend on the world around us. It can be argued that despite criticisms of the research into the consequences of sexual abuse (methodological flaws such as sample group size), if you look at the broad range of work, it can be concluded that 'growing up in an environment which abuses a child's sexuality will be likely to result in some form of childhood, adolescent and/or adult problems' (Etherington, 1995, p45). But it is not just physical abuse that can cause problems. Gibbons et al (1995) identified 170 children who were on a child protection register and paired them with children of the same age from the same school who were not being abused. The results showed that parenting style is the key. 'Children ... whose parents appeared more critical and readier to punish them, had more behaviour problems, were more inclined to be depressed and had greater difficulty making and keeping friends' (Gibbons et al in Bullock et al, 1995, p67). It is for this reason that I did not mention the word 'abuse' in my poster, but simply asked: 'having problems at home?'
Since the publication of the 'Children's Act' in 1989, the government has implemented various political initiatives that tackle child abuse. The act stated that it aimed to safeguard and promote the welfare of children and provide a range of services appropriate to the many needs of abused children. The act was underpinned by a 'no order principle' - courts should not make an order (whereby a child is taken into the care of Social Services for example) unless it is better for the child than making no order at all. (Northants Child Protection Committee, 2004). As the Department for Education and Skills website explains, The Department of Health, Department for Education and Skills and the Home Office jointly issued guidance as to how professional groups and services should co-operate to safeguard children. Local authorities were to ensure that an Area Child Protection Committee (ACPC) covering their area was set up, bringing together representatives of the agencies and professionals responsible for helping to protect children from abuse and neglect. The Northants Child Protection Committee is an example of this and its roles and responsibilities are listed in the document referenced in this essay. The document starts by explaining the legal framework based on the Children Act. The legal provisions such as the 'Emergency Protection Order' or 'Care Order' are listed, followed by definitions of child abuse and then the roles and responsibilities of the Northamptonshire Review and Conference Service.
In 2003 the Department of Health published 'what to do if you are worried a child is being abused'. The document is aimed at anyone who has concerns about a child. It states that you should discuss your concern with a colleague or manager, without necessarily identifying the child. If your concerns persist you should make a referral to social services, the police or the NSPCC. Interestingly it says that you should discuss your concerns with the child (as appropriate to their age and understanding) and their family and seek their agreement before making a referral (Kingston PCT website 2003). Standard 5 of the National Service Framework for Children, Young People and Maternity Services (2004) is entitled 'safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children and young people', and includes the sections; 'the impact abuse and neglect have on children's development' and 'recognising a child or young person who requires protecting from harm'(Department of Health website, 2004).
I decided on the subject matter for my poster whilst on a community placement where I worked with a wide range of health professionals including a district nurse, practice nurse and health visitor. The NHS careers website states that 'The role of the Health Visitor is about the promotion of health and the prevention of illness in all age groups'. During my time with the health visitor I witnessed various aspects of child protection including a child protection supervision and meetings with a mother whose child was the subject of a child protection order. A child protection supervision is when, in this case, health visitors from various GP's surgeries in the local area, got together and discussed any interesting case work or problems that they would like to discuss. Various fictitious scenarios were also discussed that aimed to show when information should be shared and if a health visitor should ever promise confidentiality. The final statement on my poster states 'if you need to chat to someone who can offer advice and support, call your health visitor on 01865 123456'. I purposefully left out any mention of confidentiality as anyone who suspects a child is being abused must report it to someone else. In Northamptonshire it is the duty social worker at the local Directorate of Social Care and Health Assessment Team (Northants County Council website, 2004). I decided to make my poster ambiguous so as to appeal to as many people as possible. The child in the left of the picture appears to be crying into her pillow and displays some sort of emotional distress. This could be brought on by any form of abuse. The Children's Act (1989) section 31(9) CA has four definitions of harm. Significant harm is ill treatment or the impairment of (physical or mental) health or (physical, intellectual, emotional, social or behavioural) development. The other forms of abuse are physical, sexual or emotional abuse (Northants County Council website, 2004). I hope that anyone experiencing any of those forms of abuse would find my poster useful.
The right hand side of my poster shows a baby being weighed with the words 'Did you realise that the person who looked out for you when you were young still cares'. I wanted to remind the viewer what a health visitor does and that they are there to care for people of all ages. I realise though, that in showing a baby I may reinforce the view that health visitors only deal with very young children.
Many health promotion models were considered when creating my poster. My starting point was the work of Naidoo and Wills (2000) who describe five approaches to health promotion. The poster follows the 'empowerment approach' as its aim is for the abused child to identify his or her own needs and act upon them. In the empowerment approach the health promoter is a facilitator and in this case can give the abused child the confidence and support needed to break the cycle of abuse. This support is necessary as the process of removing a child from an abusive home can emotional one, and with court proceedings, a long one.
Ajzen and Fishbein's (1975) 'Theory of Reasoned Action' cited in Taylor (1995) examines what determines whether or not an action will be taken. They argued that behaviour is determined by intention and that that intention is determined by the attitudes of the person performing the behaviour and 'subjective norms'. Subjective norms are the extent to which people who are important to the individual are thought to approve or disapprove of the planned behaviour change. In the case of reporting abuse, the attitude of the abused child is hard to influence. They may have experienced abuse over a long period of time but accept it as normal. They may also be unaware of the fact that there are people who would like to help. Often the subjective norm would be a friend or relative. For example in the case of someone who would like to give up smoking, a girlfriend who thinks it is an expensive and smelly bad habit may exert the pressure needed for a change to occur. In the case of an abused child the parent of family member betrays their position of trust and would obviously be unlikely to encourage the child to seek help. The aim of my poster is to show an abused child that the subjective norm can be a health visitor. It is for this reason that I believe the poster should be displayed in a place inaccessible to parents and where the child feels secure. The poster should be displayed in schools in classrooms, toilets or on information notice boards. By making the phone call a child is accessing a support network of people who have the concern for their well-being that is missing at home.
Prochaska et al's (1992) 'Stages of health Behaviour Change' model, cited in Taylor (1995) describes five stages; pre-contemplation, contemplation, preparation, action and maintenance. A child who is in pre-contemplation can only be helped if someone observes the abuse and reports it. Maintenance is also of little concern to me as once the child is put into care or with an adoptive or foster family, they are unlikely to want to return to their biological family. My poster is aimed at the child who is contemplating reporting their abuse and who needs information (preparation) in order to make the action. The health visitor may then be able to prepare the child emotionally for the massive change that their call for help will bring about.
Beattie (1991) designed a framework that explained the relationship between different forms of health promotion (see appendix 2). He said that health promotion can be authoritative (government led) or negotiated (at a local level - between health professionals and the public). My poster combines both. The poster itself would be the result of government initiatives on child protection. Once the poster is responded to the health visitor would be able to offer personal counselling. I was conscious when examining the behaviour change models that it is hard to reconcile them with the decision to report abuse and also that abuse is quite unlike the addictive behaviours the models are designed to address. I did manage to satisfy myself that there are some similarities. People who have a poor diet and over eat may have poor self esteem due to their obesity and understand that they are at risk of heart disease and diabetes, but persist with their unhealthy habits. They may wish to adopt a healthier lifestyle but not have the will power to achieve this. In the same way, a child who is being abused may understand that the abuse is wrong and causing them harm, but may not report it. This could be because they have never known any other way, or they may be afraid of the consequences. I hope that my poster is a plausible effort at using psychological models to affect change.
The images on my poster were sourced from the Alamy images website. I typed the words 'moody teenager' and 'health visitor' into the search engine and chose the images. I wanted to avoid pictures of violent acts or anything too confrontational. I am very happy with the image of the girl crying into her pillow as it complements the words 'having problems at home?' I was pleased to discover on viewing the Northamptonshire County Council child protection web pages that my choice was vindicated as they have chosen some very similar images. By not being specific about types of abuse the poster shows that any problem can be discussed. The problem with my poster is that it is very specific about who to call. I could have mentioned the school nurse or given the child line number, but decided that I wanted to alert the child to the fact that they can contact someone who they probably would never associate with child protection.
This essay has examined the definition of health, problems that child abuse can cause, the government initiatives that aim to combat it, why and how I chose to design my poster and the health promotion models that explain the rationale. Child abuse is a problem that we must all be aware of. We should be vigilant and report any suspicions we have about the wellbeing of a child. My poster recognises that people are often unaware of the important role that the health visitor has in child protection proceedings and aims to let children know that a friendly and caring health care professional is only a phone call away.