An infinite number of inferences are made throughout our lives whether or not we are consciously aware of it. The process by which we use our knowledge to make these inferences is known as reasoning. We use reasoning in nearly everything - from solving mathematical conundrums to finding the way to a particular destination. It is of no surprise then, that the mechanisms of reasoning are of such interest to psychologists. Previous research has led some psychologists to conclude that inferences are drawn through the means of parallel, associative links while others argue that reasoning is based on the application of systematic rules. In an effort to make sense of the gap between these two perspectives, yet other researchers propose that there are in fact two co-existing systems of reasoning.
Sloman (1996) is one of the proponents of such a dual systems theory. His dichotomy consists of the associative system and the rule-based system. Sloman describes the associative system as one which operates using similarity and temporal relations. Similarities between objects are used to form correlations and inferences are derived based on an underlying statistical structure. Unlike the rule-based system, inferences drawn by this form of computation are quick, automatic and holistic (Stanovich & West, 2000). While most other non dual systems theories concentrate on processes which are based on logic and the application of a hierarchical structure, the associative system stands out as being able to account for preconscious processes which do not seem to involve analytic intelligence (Reber, 1993; cited by Stanovich & West, 2000).
The rule-based system on the other hand, depends heavily on symbols and reflects rule structure. Reasoning occurs by systematically applying a set of given rules to variables in order to arrive at a necessary conclusion. This system of reasoning is not concerned with the actual meanings of symbols themselves. Rather, it only involves the relations amongst symbols (Sloman, 1996).
Generally, these two systems operate interactively. Sloman (1996) depicts the separate systems as two specialists which cooperatively strive towards plausible answers. They both have their own, albeit overlapping, cognitive functions and possess different areas of expertise. However, both systems may occasionally arrive at very different conclusions while attempting to solve the same problem. This phenomenon is of significant interest because it serves as a strong argument for the claim that there are indeed two systems of reasoning.
To support his theory, Sloman (1996) highlighted various judgement tasks which comply with what he terms criterion S. This criterion is satisfied when reasoning produces two contradictory responses which seem equally appropriate. The satisfaction of criterion S reinforces the dual process theory because it implies the existence of two systems which strongly cue different responses. For instance, the rule-based system will tend to cue highly analytical intelligence while the associative system will not direct participants towards the same outcome (Stanovich & West, 2000). This was illustrated in an experiment by Tversky & Kahneman (1983). Participants were given a short paragraph on Linda, stating her age and describing her as "single, outspoken, bright...deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice" and having participated "in anti-nuclear demonstrations". They were then asked to rank eight statements about Linda according to probability. 85% of the time, the statement "Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement" (T&F) was ranked more probable than "Linda is a bank teller" (T). This shows that judgement was made based on the degree of similarity between the descriptive paragraph and the statements about Linda. However, according to rational reasoning, the probability of T&F cannot be higher than T because a conjunction can never be more probable than one of its constituents. When this was pointed out to the participants, most of them seemed to accept this logic. Therefore, there must be two mechanisms of equal psychological force which lead to opposing answers. An associative heuristic picks out T&F as being more likely while a chain of reasoning reveals T as more probable (Sloman, 1996).
This is as apparent in examples of daily life. People frequently come to one conclusion using one method of reasoning only to recognise that another rationale yields a more valid answer. For example, judges are required to ignore what they personally believe to be fair and instead abide by legislation when sentencing offenders. Nevertheless, this is only applicable as evidence for two reasoning systems if the first conclusion remains convincing even if the second response is recognised as more rational. Consider the Muller-Lyer illusion. Despite realising and understanding that the lines are of the same length, one line is still perceived as longer than the other. Perception remains unchanged by knowledge thus making it likely that these are two different systems simultaneously at work. Although perception and knowledge generally correspond rather than contradict, it does not mean there is only one system. Likewise, the derivation of a single response in reasoning does not refute dual process theories (Sloman, 1996).
More substantiation for two systems of reasoning comes from an experiment showing that the extent to which people transfer unfamiliar characteristics between two categories depends on how similar the categories are. Sloman (1993) asked participants to rate how convincing an argument was given that "All birds have an ulnar artery". The results were that participants found the argument "Therefore all robins have an ulnar artery" more convincing than "Therefore all penguins have an ulnar artery". This violates theoretic knowledge because penguins are just as much birds as robins are. Sloman (1993) explains that the participants' judgements were influenced by the degree of feature overlap. Penguins do not share enough features with the normative view of birds to be thought to possess a characteristic that all birds have. As with the "Linda Problem" that was mentioned earlier, participants later accepted that logic dictates that the strength of both arguments should be equal. However, a number of them still believed their first response to be plausible. This suggests that participants had two answers in mind (Sloman, 1996). Sloman's experiment supports the basis for a reasoning system based on similarity and verifies that a theoretic system functions alongside it. In other words, there must be two systems of reasoning.
Other researchers do not accept such discrepancies as evidence for a dual systems theory. Instead, they may see contradictory results as a consequence of performance errors. Such errors occur because of a failure to apply a rule or algorithm a person would normally have no problem with, due to a temporary and random lapse in the supporting processes that are needed to carry them out. This includes the lack of attention, momentary memory disengagement or distraction (Stein, 1996; cited by Stanovich & West, 2000). The most extreme form of this perspective attributes all reasoning inconsistencies to performance errors. If this is so, there should be practically no correlations among any atypical tendencies across tasks. Assuming divergence from normative models is caused merely by carelessness or temporary confusion; one would not expect covariance among biases across tasks because any differences due to errors should not be systematically related (Stanovich & West, 2000). However, Rip and Conrad (1983) found that participants' absolute scores in deductive reasoning tests which showed individual differences, correlated with their performance on other tests. Therefore it is unlikely that these differences can be accounted for by performance errors. Furthermore, Stanovich and West's (2000) findings show considerable internal consistency in judgement tasks which produce responses that do not conform to normative models. Without strong evidence to support the performance errors theory, it still seems more probable that there are indeed two systems of reasoning.
Patterns of individual differences imply that the performance error view is not sufficient in explaining the discrepancies between descriptive models and normative models. Alternatively, these discrepancies may be due to computational biases. Responses in judgement tasks may deviate from normative models because of the resource-limited nature of the human cognitive apparatus and situational constraints - such as limited time - under which the decisions are made (Baron, 1985). Even if reasoning is carried out in an optimally rational manner, there may still be computational limitations at the algorithmic level (Goldman 1978) which cause individual differences in reasoning. Stanovich & West (2000) proposed that this hypothesis could be tested by measuring the relationship between cognitive capacity and performance on a reasoning task. A strong correlation would imply that algorithmic level limitations might hinder those of lower cognitive capacity from producing a normative response. Stanovich & West (1998) calculated the correlation between SAT total scores (as a measure of cognitive ability) and eight different reasoning tasks and concluded that to a certain extent, the failure to conform to the normative model seems to be caused by variation in computational limitations at the algorithmic level. Hence, contradictory responses to a judgement task could be attributed to the inability of participants to carry out rule-based reasoning with their limited cognitive capacity rather than a second reasoning system.
Alternatively, it could be argued that systematic errors in reasoning may occur not because of cognitive limitations on the part of participants but rather due to the application of the wrong normative model by experimenters. According to this perspective, responses to tasks such as those put forward by Tversky and Kahneman (1983) are not seen as non-normative. Instead, Lopes (1981; cited by Stanovich & West, 2000) is of the opinion that when the answers given by normative theories are systematically rejected, it could be a sign that the normative theory is inadequate. As Margolis (1987) argues, in the "Linda Problem" it is Tversky and Kahneman and not their participants who do not understand the logic of the problem. Gigirenzeral. (1991; cited in Stanovich & West, 2000) explained that under some conceptions of probability, the judgements involved in this problem are not subject to the rules of a probability calculus.
Research seems to strongly indicate that there are two systems of reasoning. A dual systems theory not only successfully explains why a reasoning problem may produce such different responses but also why two opposing inferences arising from a single situation may seem so compelling at the same time. This is an area that theories based on a normative model fall short. Attributing the differences between normative and descriptive models to computational limitations is a legitimate strategy. However, this perspective implies that given enough time and cognitive aid, individuals should eventually come to realise that the normative response is the only logical one. Sloman (1996) showed that this is untrue and that people continue to consider their initial response in a given situation.
Besides that, while the alternative perspectives that have been explored are plausible, they do not refute the existence of an additional associative reasoning system and seem far from absolute. They also fail to account for additional characteristics of reasoning such as why some inferences are arrived at automatically, almost instantly, and in a manner that is undemanding of cognitive capacity while others are controlled and highly demanding on cognitive capacity.
One cannot say with complete certainty that there are two systems of reasoning. However, the bulk of evidence seems to suggest so. Furthermore, other theories which have been considered are by no means superior or more successful. Ultimately, the exact mechanisms of reasoning cannot be completely agreed upon until more conclusive research is carried out.