This reflective essay will examine the personal characteristic I identified in my reflective journal (appendix 1). I will evaluate my feelings of anxiety brought on by the overwhelming number of tasks I must carry out as a nurse caring for a group of patients. The essay is structured around Gibb's evaluation, analysis and conclusion stages (see appendix 2). I will begin by examining anxiety and stress and the detrimental effects they have. The rest of the essay will examine time management, its importance (what goes wrong when time is managed badly) and ways of improving my practice.
Howard (1998) in Mallik et al (1998) differentiates between anxiety and stress. He states that anxiety is a response to situations where one feels threatened and stress is a generalised response of the body to any demand. The fight or flight response that humans developed to respond to threats of attack is now stimulated by the more mundane stressors of daily life. Literally speaking, it is stress that I experience when I feel overwhelmed by my case-load. Seeley et al (2003) list the long-term physiological and psychological changes caused by stress. Secretion of cortisol suppresses the immune system and secretion of adrenaline and noradrenaline increases heart rate and blood pressure. Exposure to stress and anxiety over long periods can therefore have very serious physiological affects. One of the psychological responses noted by Howard (1998) is change in cognitive ability. He argues that individuals who are stressed find their concentration span decreases, their problem solving abilities are reduced and they move from task to task but never complete tasks. This is how I feel when I try to juggle meaningful patient interaction, observations rounds, medication rounds, discharge planning etc. I decided to focus on time management and prioritization as tools to overcome my anxiety.
Although this essay is a reflection on the ways I can improve my time management and reduce my anxiety and stress levels, it is important to understand how time management can affect the patient. Bowers et al (2001: 485) interviewed 18 nurses from two American nursing homes and identified time as an important element of work - "The main source of job dissatisfaction was too little time. Nurses emphasised that limited time made it difficult to complete required tasks and almost impossible to spend enough time with residents". In accordance with my experiences on the ward, the nurses in this study felt that interruptions including physician's calls, medical emergencies and demands from other staff members made it difficult to complete their tasks. At the beginning of the study the nurses had stated that establishing and maintaining relationships with patients was the most rewarding task and yet this emotional work was often given the lowest priority. The researchers found that in order to make up lost time the nurses cut corners on all their tasks, at the expense of the quality of care given to the patients. Nurses in the study carried out by Williams (1998) assessed the quality of nursing care given by the extent to which physical, psychosocial and extra care needs were met. From the data collected Williams identified a process used by nurses to cope with their day to day work. The process was named "selective processing" and contained four time related phases. When a nurse was most stretched they were "self-focusing" and tended to be indifferent in their attitude, they ignored the patients and delivered low quality care. With each new phase, more time or better time management saw a better quality of care. One of the recommendations from the study was that effective time management skills should be taught in nursing education. These articles show that bad time management can have a negative effect on the quality of care given.
In contrast good time management can elicit a positive response as illustrated by Fordham and Dunn (1994) cited in Pediani (1998: 693-694) who describe how the act of "being alongside the patient fosters a feeling of comfort, of being cared for, and this in itself has the potential to boost a patient's coping strategies and break the cycle of helplessness and hopelessness which can spiral ever downwards." With better time management I hope to overcome my anxieties and find the time to provide the care described by Fordham and Dunn.
In trying to discover strategies for better time management and prioritization I looked first at the work of Waterworth (2003). The first strategy used by nurses that she identifies is routinization (sic). She argues that routines are beneficial as they decrease the thinking time needed in time management and bring a sense of predictability and familiarity, but also points out that some argue that routines do not promote individualised care. I currently use routines during my working day (medications first then assisting patients with washing etc.) and these will improve with practice. Waterworth then discusses prioritization saying that it is a "pre-requisite for effective work performance" (2003: 436). Castledine (2002) says that there are three levels of prioritization. The top priorities are emergency life threatening and safety situations, the second level includes acute pain, mental status change and acute urinary elimination and the third level is made up of problems that don't fit into the other categories such as lack of patient knowledge. A quote from one of the nurses interviewed in the Waterworth study (2003: 437) has given me an idea to take into practice:
One of the problems I have encountered is when Doctors ask me how someone is and I have barely had a chance to meet or assess the patient they are referring to. The post handover rapport-building session, described in the above quotation, allows you to see how patients are and assess their needs and the idea is supported by Castledine (2002) and Bowers et al (2001). I will make an effort to build it into my routine.
Both Waterworth (2003) and Bowers et al (2001) recommend delegation as a means of managing time better. Unfortunately the examples they give illustrate how delegation can work both-ways. Bowers et al, recommend that tasks can be delegated to less trained staff (such as health care assistants). Waterworth, on the other hand, says that the student nurses are valued as work can be delegated to them. In practice I have delegated work to others and been delegated to by the nurses. One way to swing the cycle of delegation in my favour is to use what Hill (2002: 59) describes as the art of "saying "no" to requests from others if they seem inappropriate or impossible."
"To do" lists are advocated in the work of Hill (2002), Howard (1998) in Mallik et al (1998) and Zimmerman (2002). Hill states that at the beginning of the shift tasks should be put into essential and non essential lists. I currently do this with the tick boxes, but Hill goes on to say that although patient care should be the priority, other duties such as administrative responsibilities should not be overlooked. One of my anxiety-inducing problems is that I am confused by the discharge planning system. Following Hill's advice it may be useful to create a discharge planning check-list that can be put at the front of the discharge section of the nursing notes. This would be of benefit to me and any other inexperienced members of the team.
The anxiety described in my reflective journal was created in part by my lack of knowledge about my patients and the stress that this causes me when people ask how they are. Johns (2000) states that verbal handover is the most significant form of communication and that written notes should be used to reinforce the value of the handover. He then says that the nurse receiving handover should spend a few minutes reading the notes after the handover. In the past I have not written enough during handover, and I will now endeavour to write as much as possible. The time spent reading the notes will save me a lot of stress in the long run.
The main limitation to the quality of this reflection is my inexperience in literature searching. I had hoped to find information specific to student nurses and time management but found nothing. My struggle to find information about time management also meant that I have used opinion pieces. These are not ideal but due to the subject matter and the positive message about the benefits of time management on patient care, I felt they were worth including. One way of ensuring the relevance of the pieces I did include was by trying to use reputable journals and limiting my searches to articles from the last 10 years.
This reflective essay has examined the problems that stress and anxiety can induce, the effects on quality of care caused by bad time management and ideas that I can use in practice that will reduce my anxiety. The ideas explored in the final section will be taken forward into the final stage of this assignment, the "annotated action plan". The work that I have put into this paper and the time management tips I have picked up will hopefully help me avoid the question from the quotation that begins this essay.