In this essay I will examine the decision I made to use bed-rails on the bed of one of my patients. Gibbs' (1998) reflective cycle is used as means of structuring my reflection. In the essay I will explain what a decision is and how evidence can and should be used to support decision making. I will describe my decision, how I made it at the time and consider what type of decision I made with reference to the literature. In researching this essay I have collected various journal articles that examine if bed-rails are ethically justifiable, why bed-rails are used, the pros and cons of their use, other ways of managing falls and alternatives to their use. The evidence will be critically appraised using the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) guidelines and I will review how I found the evidence and how I limited my search. Finally I will draw conclusions from the research that will be used to improve my clinical practice.
Before I examine the decision I made I will explain what a decision is, and why evidence should be used to support nursing decision making. The Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary (2005) defines a decision as "a choice that you make about something after thinking about several possibilities". Muir (2004) states that decisions are made in an environment of uncertainty and that if there were a clear relationship between problem and outcome no decisions would be required. So if decisions are made by examining several possibilities, how are we to choose the correct one? Thompson et al argue that a culture of evidence based care delivery has evolved in recent years, and that "evidence based practice and the development of solid and transparent rationales for decisions are not optional extras for doctors, nurses, allied health professionals and managers..." (2002: 30). Nurses are compelled by their professional body to use evidence based practice. The Nursing and Midwifery Council's code of professional conduct sub-heading 6.5 states "You have a responsibility to deliver care based on current evidence, best practice and where applicable, validated research when it is available." (2002: 8).
My decision was to use bed-rails on the bed of one of my patients. I decided to use them as the patient had vascular dementia, had been admitted to hospital following a fall, had had a previous cerebrovascular accident resulting in a left sided weakness, was unsteady when walking and had fallen already on the ward. I used the bed-rails as a means to discourage the patient from getting out of bed at night and in the periods of rest in the day, in order to reduce the chances of him falling. I made the decision in conjunction with my mentor and now realise that my decision would be classified as a peer-aided judgement on Hamm's (1988) cognitive continuum (cited in Thompson et al: 2004). Peer aided judgements are intuitive as opposed to being based on analytical research (see appendix one) and Thompson et al (2004) argue that the lack of time nurses have for decision making results in intuitive decisions. However, Muir (2004) states that pattern recognition - comparing new decisions with previous cases and stored knowledge - is used in both intuitive and analytical decision making. Thompson et al (2002) use a study carried out by the University of York that examined how nurses used information in clinical decision making. The report discovered that the only text based resources used by the nurses were the British National Formulary (BNF), medical and nursing notes and local guidelines and protocols. The nurses in the study found human sources more accessible and the people viewed as most accessible were the specialist nurses and link nurses who bridge the gap between the clinical nurse specialist's knowledge base and the ward. The research utilised in this essay will help me draw conclusions and recommendations that I can use in practice and pass on to others.
I began the search for literature relating to the use of bed-rails by considering possible search terms. I considered other names for bed-rails and decided to use "cot sides", a term that now appears out of fashion due to the infant related connotations. I accessed the CINAHL, Allied and Complementary Medicine and British Nursing Index databases via the Oxford Brookes Library website and using an advanced search typed "bed-rails" and "cot sides". I used an exclusion criterion by limiting the database search to journals from 1995 to the present day as I felt up-to-date information is the most relevant and that any important work done before 1995 would be referred to in the modern journals. My search brought up 77 journal references (see appendix two). Then next inclusion/exclusion criterion was forced upon me. Many of the journals listed were not accessible via the Oxford Brookes journal catalogue and to see them, I would have had to pay a charge to get hard copies made. I decided to focus on journals that were either accessible on-line, via the Oxford Brookes library website or printed journals kept in the Oxford Brookes library. I also tried to use only British journals as to consider journals from other countries, although beneficial, would not be feasible within the constraints of a 3000 word essay. I ended up with 10 journal articles and a piece of policy from the Northern Ireland's Health Estates department, which was referred to in Hughes (2002).
The journal articles I have read have highlighted the complexities that surround the issue of using bed-rails. This section of the essay will examine why they are used, the reasons for falls, various treatments and preventative measures, whether or not they work, and the alternatives that should be considered. The Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) guidelines were used and the value of every article and opinion piece was considered.
Before I examine why bed-rails are used I will consider whether they are ethically justifiable. Horsburgh (2003) argues that cot-sides are a form of restraint as they deny a person's autonomy. Autonomy is a prima facie principle meaning "that, at first sight, the principle appears to be one that should be respected by others" (Horsburgh: 2003: 26). However, it can be argued that one must possess insight in to the consequences of their actions before being considered truly autonomous. My patient's dementia interfered with their rational thought processes and it could therefore be argued that I was using the principle of non-maleficence (preventing harm) in overriding their autonomy. On the other hand Strumpf (1988) cited in Hamers et al (2004: 250), states that the views that "the old should be restrained because they are more likely to fall and seriously injure themselves" or that "the moral duty to protect from harm requires restraints" are myths. Akid (2002) in his Nursing Times special report highlights the unethical use of restraint. Akid quotes an independent consultant in nursing home registration and inspection who argues that bed-rails are used to reduce the numbers of staff - "if there are two staff on night duty in a home with five wandering residents, they cannot cope" (2002: 11). It is evident that the ethical implications of bed-rail use are far from straight forward.
A well designed and thorough but relatively small point prevalence study carried out by Hamers et al (2004) in three Dutch nursing homes discovered that by far the most common reason for the use of restraint (including the use of bed-rails) was poor mobility. This was one of the reasons I decided to use bed-rails on my patient, as I wanted to reduce the chances of a fall. Hughes (2002a, 2002b) and Kelly and Dowling (2004) list both intrinsic and extrinsic factors that increase the risk of fall related injury. Intrinsic factors relate specifically to the individual and include acute illness, changes in vision, changes in balance, cardiovascular changes (such as postural hypotension), neurological disease, polypharmacy, osteoporosis, a history of falls, poor diet, and incontinence. Extrinsic factors are those outside of the individual, such as environment hazards or footwear. As I was trying to prevent my confused patient from wandering I found Hughes' (2002) guidelines helpful. Hughes is a falls prevention adviser and recommends many measures to manage wandering clients starting with the identification of falls risk factors (using an assessment tool), producing a care plan (in conjunction with the next of kin), liaising with the multi-disciplinary team, fitting non slip foot wear, applying hip protectors to prevent fractures, and regular toileting of incontinent patients. Hughes states that bed-rails should be avoided due to the risk of injury caused when the patient climbs over them and falls to the floor.
The American Hospital Bed Safety Workgroup (HBSW) (2003) report does not explain how or why it came up with it's recommendations and lists at least two bed rail manufacturing companies (raising the question of bias) in the list of organisations that signed on to the clinical guidance provided by the report and therefore should be ignored. But the fact that the report recommends how to reduce the dangers that poorly fitted and incorrectly sized bed-rails cause warrants the inclusion of the manufacturing companies. The report is included as it is extremely thorough in its recommendations and examines all aspects of the bed rail use from correct fitting to the assessment of risk factors to clinical interventions that can prevent accidents (such as asphyxiation) from happening. The HBSW adds some well thought out alternatives/additions to Hughes (2002) list of wandering-management guidelines. In their sleeping environment assessment they consider the proximity of the patient to the toilet and whether it is in view. My patient would regularly wander to the toilet, having forgotten that he had only recently been, and was catheterised at one point and still went to the toilet to "spend a penny" despite my exhortations that he was catheterised. Perhaps if the toilet had not been in view he may not have wandered so much. The HBSW also recommend that diuretics are not given at night. One of the best recommendations is that if bed-rails are to be used, then their efficacy and continued relevance should be reviewed and evaluated regularly.
The Department of Health (2001) estimate that 14000 people each year die after suffering osteoporotic hip fractures. If bed-rails could reduce the numbers of deaths then that would be a good thing. But many of the articles I have read show that bed-rails cause not only injury but even death. The Medical Devices Agency (2001) and Nursing Times (2004) give examples of patients who died when their heads became trapped between the bed-rails and were asphyxiated. The Hospital Bed Safety Workgroup (2003) acknowledges that bed-rails pose a risk of entrapment and a risk of falls when the patient climbs over the top of the bars. The report goes further by saying that "agitation, delirium, confusion, pain, uncontrolled body movement, hypoxia, faecal impaction and acute urinary retention ..... may also contribute to the risk of entrapment" (2003: 246). Unlike the above reports Everitt & Bridel-Nixon (1997) carried out their own research to discover the injuries caused by bed-rails. They rightly identify that there is not much research into falls from beds with bed-rails but do identify some small studies and a large study carried out in America in the 1950s. These showed that of the total number of falls from bed, a large number (63 % in the American study) were from beds with bed-rails. Unfortunately, having identified the need for further research, Everitt and Bridel-Nixon proceeded to carry out a very poorly planned and executed trial. They obtained all the accident printout forms (which included special reference to bed-rails) from Seacroft University Hospitals in Leeds over a 15 month period. The authors acknowledge that the data was limited by the inaccuracy of the accident reporting and found that of the 273 falls only 8% were from beds with bed rails. The data is pretty meaningless as the total number of beds with rails is not recorded. The report is included as it shows how CASP guidelines can be used, and does show that more research is needed into the affects of falling from beds with bed-rails.
A very well researched qualitative paper produced by Gallinagh et al (2001) examined the perceptions of the families of patients in beds with bed-rails. The researchers used a previously used interview guide, the Family Interview Guide (Strumpf and Evans: 1988), achieved ethical approval and clearly state their aims and reasons for carrying out the research. The participants in the study emphasised the perceived protective value of the bed-rails, but the researchers point out that their acceptance was largely based on the influence of staff. Although the relatives accepted the use of bed rails, a majority of them did express negative feelings. Their descriptions of distress included "entrapment, discomfort, inadequate assembly of the device and the fear that the patients would go over the side of the rails to get out of bed" (Gallinagh et al: 2001: 398).
The evidence has so far painted an overwhelmingly negative view about the use of bed-rails. Hamers et al (2004) argue that not only do bed-rails not prevent falls, but cause both somatic (pressure ulcers, incontinence) and psychological (depression and aggressive behaviour) damage. Kelly and Dowling (2004: 37) cite Dunn (2001) who found that "when a restraint free period was instituted in a long-term care facility, there was a significant decline in the number and severity of injuries". If bed rails don't work and worse, actually cause harm then alternatives must be considered. Both measures to reduce the risk of falls and alternatives to the use of bed rails must be considered. Hughes (2002a) suggests that adequate nutrition should be maintained with calcium and vitamin D supplements given to promote bone strength, the use of door alarms, and the use of a safe and supervised wandering area. Kelly and Dowling (2004) suggest an alarm called the Ambularm that is attached to the leg and is activated when a patient moves to a vertical position, although they acknowledge that this would not be a cost effective measure. They also suggest skid proof strips near the bed and placing commodes by the bedside at night. Using rolled up blankets and pillows under the mattress is suggested as an alternative to bed-rails. The Hospital Bed Safety Workgroup suggests that if bed-rails are to be used than the underlying reasons for their use should be treated and reviewed. For example if the patient is confused because of hypoxia or a urinary tract infection then these should be treated and if the patient improves the use of bed-rails can be reviewed and possibly removed.
Despite the fact that the evidence highlights that bed-rails are a form of restraint, can cause harm as well as prevent it, and are perhaps ethically unsound, they are still widely used. As Kelly and Rowling (2004) point out, few studies have investigated nursing attitudes to restraint use. It is my opinion that they are necessary. There will never be enough staff to keep and eye on all the patients all the time. Falls will always happen, but by trying to treat the causes, monitoring if bed-rails are correctly fitted, and reviewing the need for them, nurses can reduce their negative affects. I have learnt a lot in researching this essay, and my clinical practice will benefit. I now realise how important it is to monitor their use, and will not use them without correctly and thoroughly assessing the patient. I will question whether they are necessary, consider alternatives, ensure they are safely fitted, and discuss the findings of this essay with my mentors and colleagues.
The main limitation to the quality of this essay is my inexperience in literature searching. Since writing this essay, I realise I could of defined my search terms better. I could also use the reference lists of the journal articles I read to find more material. My sources come from a wide range of texts, including literature reviews, opinion pieces, clinical guidance, and qualitative and quantitative research, but feel that I did not find as much good quality researched data as I should. However, many of the authors did point out that more research is needed and that in some areas there is very little research (e.g. nursing attitudes to bed rails).
This essay has raised my awareness of the implications of the use of bed-rails. They play a valuable safety roll, but can also cause harm and distress. I have looked at the ethics of their use, the reasons for use, their dangers, and alternatives to their use. I have critically appraised the research and drawn conclusions that will improve my clinical practice. The use of bed-rails deserves greater consideration by nurses, and I hope to raise awareness in my clinical practice areas.