How do patients view their current exercise and splinting treatment regime?
Do patients follow the advised regime suggested by their therapist?
Do patients attend clinic appointments and why?
A qualitative method of analysis will be used as it will enable the researcher to gain an understanding of individual's feelings and experiences about their treatment regime. Rich data will be gathered that will be used to develop new knowledge that can be used to change health care provision for treatment of RA of the hand. Semi-structured interviews will be used as they are appropriate when new information is been gathered that is somewhat abstract in nature (Domholdt, 2000).
Participants will be recruited from a hospital based rheumatology hand clinic that runs exercise and splinting treatments regimes for patients with RA of the hand. This setting has been chosen is it is accessible to both the participants and research team. Permission will be obtained from the hospital before the study is carried out. The researcher is not employed at the hospital.
Approximately 10-20 participants aged between 35 and 50 will be recruited from a hand clinic. This age range was chosen as it is the common age of onset of RA (David & Lloyd, 1999). The exact number of subjects involved will be determined when saturation point is reached. This is defined as 'the point at which an investigator has obtained sufficient information from which to obtain an understanding of the phenomenon (Deploy & Gitlin, 1994). Participants will be recruited by means of letters, which will be sent to the senior physiotherapist at the hand clinic, which will then be forwarded onto possible participants; if interested they will need to pass on their details to the researcher. The participants will also have to fit the following inclusion criteria recommended by the American Rheumatism Association (Arnette et al, 1988): morning stiffness of >1 hour lasting > 6 weeks; RA of the hand joints [radiocarpal, ulnacarpal, metacarpophalangeal joints (MCP) and proximal interphalangeal joints (PIP)] lasting > 6 weeks; radiographic changes of the wrist and hands; rheumatoid nodules as observed by a physician. Participants will be excluded from the study if they have had previous wrist of hand surgery, or pathologies that affect the wrist and hand, or have been receiving treatment for RA in the last 6 weeks (other than the exercise and splinting) as it may affect their view of their current treatment regime. All participants will have to have been participating in an exercise and splinting regime for the RA of the hand for at least 4 weeks prior to partaking in this study to allow for time to get used to the exercise and splinting regime.
This study will be using non-probability sampling. The key to using non-probability sampling is to attain the greatest degree of representation as possible and to clearly identify to your readers the limitations of your findings (Depoy & Gitlin, 1994).
All participants will receive information about the study in the letter, stating the aim if the study, what will be required and methods of assessment. This will enable the participant to decide if they wish to partake in expressing their views in this study. If they are willing they will be required to sign a written consent form.
This study aims to investigate participant's feelings towards their treatment regime for RA of the hand; a qualitative approach in the form of a semi-structure interview will be used. The semi-structured interview has predetermined questions, but the order can be modified based on the interviewer's perception of what seems more appropriate. Question wording can be changed or explanations given; particular questions which seem inappropriate with a particular interviewee can be omitted, or additional ones included (Robson, 2002); to gain the relevant data to answer the research question. All interviewers will have received training in interviewing techniques to ensure consistency in interviewing style to increase the study reliability. The interviews will be carried out face-to-face, one-on-one within a small, private, quiet, comfortable room within the hospital. This will provide a setting in which privacy is assured and neither the participant nor interviewer will be distracted. A full record of the interview will be taken. Each interview will be tape recoded to allow the entire conversation to be replayed for analysis. Notes will also be made, in case there is a problem with the tape recording. Aspects of the interview that will not appear on the tape such as body language and paused will also be recorded, making the interview more reliable (Silverman, 2001). An interview diary will also be kept where the interviewer will note any occasion where he/she might have influenced the results, to increase validity.
To eliminate any power aspect the interviewer will not have had any previous contact with the participant. The interviewer will introduce themselves to the participant as a researcher; not giving a specific occupation e.g. physiotherapist. The interviewer will wear casual clothes. This will help to reduce the Hawthorn effect, where the participant gives the response that he/she thinks the research wants to hear. The interviewer will aim to put the participant at ease so that the participant will feel comfortable to openly express their thoughts and opinions about their current treatment regime. The interviewer will follow a schedule during the interview. The same interviewer will conduct all the interviews so that the style of interview will not change (standardised); adding to the reliability and validity of the study. An example of the schedule can be found in the Appendix.
A pilot study will be performed on some patients with RA of the hand who attend the hospital. The aim of the pilot study is run two or three trial interviews to eliminate any problems which may have been overlooked. The pilot study may also suggest additional questions that should be explored (Robson, 2002).
the analysis will begin immediately while the information is still fresh in the researchers mind. No real names will be used in the transcribed text to ensure participant confidentiality. A thematic analysis will be used; the tape recordings will be transcribed; the transcripts will then be read through repeatedly to pick out recurring themes relating to the research question. The themes will then be coded so that they can be compared to those in other interviews. Reliability is greatest when the themes are clearly stated and do not overlap (French et al, 2001). Once the themes from each interview have been identified the researcher will check with the participant that they have the correct interpretation of what they said. The themes will be compared to generate a theory to answer the research question. The data will be analysed independently by three researchers to establish recurring themes. This will help to eliminate personal opinions when the data is interpreted and promote truthfulness.
Triangulation, member checking and audit trails provide strategies that will help to rule out threats to validity, however there is no fool proof way of guaranteeing validity (Robson, 2002). In quantative research threats to validity are dealt with in advance as part of the design process; in qualitative research they are dealt with after the research process is in progress.
'Triangulation' refers to an approach of data collection where evidence is deliberately sought from a wide range of different sources (Mays & Pope, 1995). In this study oral testimonies will be compared with written records.
Member checking will be carried out; this will involve giving a copy of the transcript to the participant to ensure that what has been transcribed is an accurate reflection of what was said; ensuring truthfulness.
To further promote truthfulness an audit trail will be kept allowing the analysis to be traced. This reduces the threat of interview bias (Robson, 2002).
The researcher will examine 'negative cases', where the researchers analysis contradicts the study findings the researcher will identify these findings and try and explain why the data may vary (Mays & Pope, 1995), in order to increase reliability and validity.
As previously mentioned written informed consent will be gained prior to interview. To ensure confidentiality all participants will be allocated a number and all data will be stored under those numbers. All data will be stored in a password protected computer or in a locked cabinet. Once the data has been analysed the key findings of the study will be made available to the participants.