A randomised control trial (RCT) has been chosen to evaluate treatment effectiveness. RCT design is accepted as proving a robust approach to determining treatment effectiveness (French et al, 2001). Hypothesis will be tested; depending on the study data the null hypothesis either will or will not be accepted.
Null Hypothesis: there will be no difference in muscle strength and range of movement between participants receiving exercise alone and exercise and splinting.
Alternative Hypothesis: there will be a difference in muscle strength and range of movement between participants receiving exercises alone and exercises and splinting.
The IV is the influencing variable being manipulated in this study; the IV is the hypothesised cause of the DV.
70 participants aged between 35 and 50 will be recruited from a hand clinic. This age range was chosen as it is the common age of onset of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (David & Lloyd, 1999). 70 participants will be recruited as Kraemeer & Theinman (1987) stated that group sizes of 30 participants are considered to be the minimum size needed to make valid generalization of study findings to a larger population. A power calculation will be carried out to ensure group sizes are large enough. Of the people who reply to the letter those who fill the following inclusion and exclusion criteria will be accepted into the study. The following inclusion criteria will be utilised, as recommended by the American Rheumatism Association (Arnett et al, 1988): morning stiffness of >1 hour lasting > 6 weeks; rheumatoid arthritis of the hand joints [radiocarpal, ulnacarpal, metacarpophalangeal joints (MCP) and proximal interphalangeal joints (PIP)] lasting > 6 weeks; radiographic changes of the wrist and hands; rheumatoid nodules as observed by a physician. The following exclusion criteria will be utilised in order to reduce confounding factors: previous wrist/hand surgery; physiotherapy or any other treatment including medication for RA in the last 6 weeks; previous stroke resulting in weakness of the wrist/hand.
Written informed consent will be gained from all participants before taking part in the study. This will involve giving details of the study to each participant stating the aims of the study and methods being used and what will be required by the participant.
participants will be randomly selected from the hand clinic and randomly allocated to one of two groups: exercise alone or exercise and splinting. There will be no 'control group' receiving neither exercises or splinting as it is not ethical to withhold treatment in a clinical setting (French et al, 2001). All participants will follow an 'exercise programme' designed to put each joint through its full range of movement and improve the strength of the muscles around the hand. The strength exercises will be performed using an elastic band and resistance ball. Passive stretches will be taught to take each joint through its full ROM. The exercise programme will be taught to all the participants by the research therapist. The participants will then be instructed to undertake the exercise programme daily at home. Information sheet which included diagrams and written instructions of the exercises will be given to each participant.
Paddle splints will be individually designed for participants in the exercise and splinting groups. The paddle splint aims to position the wrist in 20-30 degrees of extension avoiding radial and ulna deviation, the MCP and interphalangeal joints in maximum extension and the thumb in abduction and extension (David & Lloyd, 1999). The participants will be given verbal and written instructions stating that the splint should not be worn at night, be removed to carry out the exercise programme and during activities of daily living, but be worn during day-time rest periods. The participant will be asked to return to the splinting department 1 week after having the splints made to ensure that it is fitting correctly.
ROM will be assessed with a goniometer; both the right and left hands will be assessed. Flexion and extension of the MCP and PIP joints, flexion, extension and abduction of the thumb carpometacarpal joint; three measurements will be taken at each joint and an average recorded. Goniometer measurements will be taken on the lateral aspect of the joint to allow for swelling. Consistency of instrument placing is vital; the goniometer will be placed on each joint as stated in Clarkson (2000). Clarkson (2000) states that goniometry will provides a valid reliable measure of hand strength.
Muscle strength will be assessed using a hand held dynamometer. Both hands will be assessed to account for any increases in strength of the dominant hand. The standardised position suggested by The American Society of Hand Therapists (Fess & Morgan, cited in David & Lloyd, 1999) will be used when assessing muscle strength. The assessment will be standardised; the participant will be seated with the shoulder abducted and neutrally rotated, elbow flexed to 90 degrees and the forearm and wrist in neutral. Three measurements will be taken on each side and an average recorded. The Oxford scale of muscle power was chosen not to be used as it involves a high degree of subjectivity on the part of the assessor.
Baseline measurement will be taken at the hand clinic; the measurements will then be repeated fortnightly for 8 weeks. The two groups will attended on separate days. All measurements will be taken by the same research therapist.
Each outcome measure has been standardised to make it repeatable and will be performed by the same research therapist increasing the reliability of the study.
Participants will be randomly selected from a hand clinic and then will be randomly assigned to one of two groups: exercise alone or exercise and splinting via a computer generated list. Block analysis will be used to ensure two groups of equal numbers. The groups will be stratified by age and gender to ensure an equal spread across the two groups. This ensures there is no bias to a particular group adding to the reliability and validity of the study.
Single blinding will be achieved as the research therapist and research will be blinded to the group allocation. The exercise and splinting group will be requested to not wear their splints during the measurement sessions to ensure the research therapist remained blinded, increasing validity.
Double blinding cannot be achieved as it is not possible to blind the participants to their allocated treatment programme of exercise or exercise and splinting.
All the data from the study will be inputted into a spreadsheet. The mean and standard deviations will then be calculated for each DV. An unpaired t-test will be performed for each IV to determine if the two sample means differ reliably from each other. The t-test scores will then be compared with the critical values at a 0.05 level of significance. The Null hypothesis will then be accepted or rejected.
An unpaired t-test has been chosen as: This study aims to compare differences between two groups of data: exercise or exercise and splinting. There is one variable, splinting; there are two experimental conditions, exercise or exercise and splinting; there are different subjects in each group. The data will be in the form of real numbers (interval data). An unpaired t-test will determine if there is a significant difference between the two groups. The t-test will give a p value, which is the probability that the any differences occurred by chance. To be statistically significant the p value must at the greatest be 0.05, which shows there is a 1/20 chance of the results being due to chance. The lower the p value the less the probability of the results being due to chance.
As previously mentioned informed consent will be gained. To ensure confidentiality all participants they will be allocated a number and all data will be stored under those numbers. All data will be stored in a password protected computer or in a locked cabinet. Ethical approval will be gained prior to the study commencing. To reduce the risk of harm to the participants the splints were checked after 1 week and the participants were given exercise advice sheets.
The setting also needs to be controlled. Confounding factors need to be taken into account. These are factors other than the independent variable that may influence the depending variables (Domholdt, 2000). It will be necessary to control the temperature of the room and the time of the day for recording the baseline measures and the outcome measures to rule out these factors as possible explanations for any changes in the dependent variable.
Once the data has been analysed the key findings of the study will be made available to the participants.