The essay firstly discusses what consumer behaviour is, as this is the first aspect tourism managers must understand in order to offer a suitable tourism product and service and thus satisfy specific needs. Subsequently with the help of literature review there is a discussion about the chosen tourist segment of young travellers and students. Next their behaviour is described from different points of view. Then a consumer behaviour model is being looked at, namely the Middleton model from 1998. Analysing the elements of this model intends to help to improve the understanding of individuals in the chosen segment from a tourism manager approach; specifically the Holyrood Project Adviser (HPA) and Visitor and Outreach Services Manager (VOSM) in the Scottish Parliament (SP) in the historic city of Edinburgh. Lastly a likely change in the tourist behaviour over the next ten years and future forecasts are being considered and there is a summary of why the author believes that this change will happen.
Consumer behaviour in tourism can be described as a process during which people search for and obtain information then decide on purchase with no hope for 'material or economic return' (Moutinho, 1987); experience the travel and evaluate afterwards the products and services. Majority of people willing to travel arrange their holidays very well in advance and save money for it during a long period of time.
Marketing challenge is to understand these behaviours in order to offer people what they are looking for. There are various factors that affect tourist consumer behaviour. Moutinho (1987) believes that economic and social development affects different types of tourism in a way that some destinations or vacation activities might be more popular than others because of these factors. He states (1987, p.5.) that there are four main forces which influence the travel decision: 'role and family influences, reference groups, social classes and culture and subculture'. Looking at the market segment of students one can assume that all these aspects play part in decision making. The families of the students and their social class, their colleagues and tutors in the school environment, the culture of the country will all determine in a sense the way they opt for a vacation type.
Segmentation can be defined as a division of the whole market of visitors into subgroups with similar needs and characteristics (Middleton and Clarke, 2001); for marketing purposes in order to deliver cost-effectively the most appropriate product to achieve satisfaction. The selected market segment is: young tourists and students. In order to have an obvious image of the segment there is a need for clarifying the age of people belonging to it. It is generally believed that young people are anyone under 26. The Federation of International Youth Travel Organisations (FIYTO) is their representative institution since 1951 (Bywater, 1993). The scale of the students' age is very broad and varies from country to country; yet the end of the scale is usually the early thirties. Students' international institution is The International Student Travel Confederation (ISTC) and all the principal youth and student travel consultants are members of these organizations.
Research has shown that there has not been much written about this particular visitor sector (Bywater, 1993, Gherrissi-Labben and Johnson, 2004) and there are no exact statistical and reliable data about the size of this market. However it can be estimated that young tourists count for as many as 20% of all international travellers. Foremost markets of origin for the segment analysed used to be the UK, Germany, the USA, Spain, Austria and Ireland according to Bywater (1993) and there was and still is a growing demand from the Eastern European countries. Nonetheless there is a significant change in the primary target origin market. There is a growth of arrivals from East Asia and the Pacific, including China and Africa (WTO, 1999) and these markets will count for majority of international arrivals to Europe by the year 2020. The latter data is not specified for the youth segment but can be assumed that will affect it in the same way as it has been already predicted by Bywater (1993) that in the future the rising markets will be Eastern Europe, South America and Asia Pacific, including China.
Gherrissi-Labben and Johnson (2004) state that one of the reasons that this market sector has not been well researched might be that the centre of attention is the aging population in many western economies however generally the young people are essential for the society from commercial viewpoint. Another reason for the lack of attention might be that there is a slightly negative picture of them in the mind of the tourism trade. The general image of young and student travellers is that they are 'a stereotype of budget traveller, staying only for a short period, unreliable by nature, and behaving irresponsibly' (Carr, 1998, Horak and Weber, 2000 cited in Gherrissi-Labben and Johnson, 2004, p. 26). Nevertheless the reality appears to be different as stated by number of researches. According to Horak and Weber (2000 cited in Gherrissi-Labben and Johnson, 2004) young travellers have average or above-average expenditure habits, stay for a rather long period, they are much likely to try new tourism products, they are very familiar with information technology and use it easily, their behaviour is sophisticated and most significantly from commercial perspective they could be a potential clientele for the coming fifty or more years. They might possibly be a tremendous supply in the future for the tourism industry as loyal customers if their expectations are met. If they have a good experience about a destination or an activity during their vacation or trip and they leave with a positive memory they are very likely to return as they will be present at the market for many coming years. On the other hand youth tourism is mostly connected with education and willingness to learn (Gherrissi-Labben and Johnson, 2004). In the case of the Scottish Parliament this fully applies as students are more than welcome to experience the parliament on a business day or non-business day depending on what exactly they wish to gather information about and which part of the Parliament they want to learn more about. There is a wide range of interest fields that can be experienced by young visitors in the Scottish Parliament: history, architecture, politics, art, various activities for all age groups.
As soon as the tourism managers understand what the demand is and thus the expectations are met, there is a high possibility of success.
Examining the behaviour of the segment through a behaviour model might be helpful and could lead to a better understanding and effective marketing.
A stimulus-response model of buyer behaviour created by Middleton in 1998 is being analyzed. It is a simple, descriptive micro-model based on input-output information.
The model is divided into six processes of which the first [Stimulus input] and second [Communication channels] can be highly influenced by marketing managers. This is where they can have an effect on the buyer behaviour, thus they have a chance to stimulate potential customers in direction of purchase. The main body consists of process number 3 [Communication filters] and 4 [Motivation] that is the 'buyer characteristics and decision process' where the personality of the individual is being involved and all the factors that affect and form their mind-set. Finally the out-put part consists of process number 5 and 6 which are the 'Purchase outputs-responses' where the consumers decide on the purchase [Choice of: Product, Brand, Price, Outlet] and afterwards form an opinion about the experience [Post-purchase and post-consumption feelings]. The tourism marketing managers must have an understanding of these processes in order to work effectively.
Translating the module to the case of students and Scottish Parliament the following suggestions are being made. Starting with the input there must be a wide range of products and activities offered to students at the Parliament and that should be promoted in an effective way.
There is a wide range of competitive products and services offered at the SP. Services and facilities offered are guided tours, free access to public gallery on business days, exhibition, education centre, caf, shop and crche which is a new facility and 'first of its kind in Europe' (SP, 2005). However it is free and assures a safe environment for children, the website of SP advises visitors that it is not open on the weekends.
SP has an attractive website where one can get information and follow the happenings in the SP. 'This week in the Scottish Parliament' section gives the program of the week and 'Visit, Learn, Interact' page describes the services and facilities offered by SP. An attractive website is of a significant importance regarding young people and students. This leads to the second part of the model where communication channels are being discussed. The World Wide Web is widely used by the targeted segment on an everyday basis. The website of the SP would be the most effective tool as a formal communication channel to promote itself and its programs and events targeting students. It must be regularly updated and maintained in order to attract visitors and give a positive idea about what visitors can expect when visiting the SP. There is clear information about visiting the SP at the moment and Public Gallery Tickets can be booked online via e-mail which is a good feature.
On the other hand thinking of students and their education the reference groups and role of families as informal communication channels must not be ignored either. Visits to SP organised by the schools and teachers as incentive tours will have a great significance in visitor numbers arriving to the Parliament. Marketing managers should build strong and long-haul relationships with schools of all range (primary, secondary, further and higher institutions) and create a visitor database and a mailing list and regularly update members with the latest programs and events happening at the place in order to attract them all year round and thus create a regular clientele. This relationship would work most successfully if there was a meeting organized between the two parties on a regular basis in order to meet each other's needs. This is how the Holyrood Project Adviser (HPA) and Visitor and Outreach Services Manager (VOSM) could work together with professors from various schools; both on a national and international basis.
They do work together on general matters like 'MSPs [Member of the Scottish Parliament] in Schools Project' (SP, 2005) also issues about needs and rights of children and young people on a general social basis. These are so called Cross-Party Groups taking care of general issues rather than matters connected with young people and students who are visiting the SP in order to learn about its running itself and maybe they are calling with the idea or goal to work there in the future. The SP is in touch with colleges, universities, students' associations, adult and community education. Education Outreach Office organises the sessions at an appropriate level where students can get an idea how the SP works and also how can they engage and take part in its work.
According to the model of Middleton one must take into account all the consumer characteristics and reasons for motivation, which form the core component of the model, in order to understand the needs and behaviour of the targeted segment. There are four main components (Middleton and Clarke, 2001, p. 77) which establish consumer's action by stimulating motivation or control buying decision: 'needs, wants and goals, socioeconomic and demographic characteristics, psychographic attributes and attitudes'.
Motivation arises when one's need has been triggered and there is a tension suggesting that the need has to be satisfied (Solomon et al. , 2002, p. 94) and the tension reduced. The higher the tension the greater the motivation for fulfilling the need. Whether they are 'utilitarian' or 'hedonic' needs the desired result is the goal of the consumer. Wants are created through personal and cultural influences and are expression of needs. Needs, wants and goals might be quite similar within the sector examined as a group of students in a sense that they are willing to learn and thus achieve a good career.
Demographic attributes influence motivation and consumer behaviour. In case of students it is a perfect stage of the family life cycle for travelling or going for short breaks as they do not have any family commitment yet, they have relatively large amount of free time, summer holidays and weekends; all giving them a great opportunity for travelling. Moreover visiting the SP might be incorporated in their studies which is considerable by VOSM when promoting offers.
Psychographic characteristics are dependent on the individual and their personality. They determine the choice of the purchased product however from VOSM and HPA point of view these features apply to a group of students rather than individuals. Group of students might be described as adventurous, risk taker, well-balanced, open minded, relaxed and happy in general, and managers should design and market their products considering these characteristics.
Attitudes are very subjective matter. Middleton and Clarke (2001) stress that they are 'attributes of individuals' nevertheless they still have to be taken into account, be understood and monitored in a way by marketing managers. Improving modern techniques will enable measurement of these attitudes in the future.
Communication filters are being discussed next: perceptions, learning and experience. Perception can be described as an insight, the way students see and understand things and according to Middleton and Clarke (2001) it is formed through learning and experience and is influenced by reference groups and age. The information exposed by marketing managers might be understood by consumers in a different way from the initial intention. That is why Visitor and Outreach Services Manager at SP has to understand motivation of students and all elements of process number four from the consumer behaviour model described earlier in order to achieve positive perception. Learning is of high importance in case of students and SP is indeed offering products at different curriculum levels (SP, 2005) which is a huge advantage.
Purchase outputs link to all the processes discussed earlier. Process number five is the action, the purchase itself-visiting the Scottish Parliament. Process number six links to experience that is the feelings and memories, the outcomes from the visit. The purchase is highly influenced by motivation and thus links directly back to consumer characteristics. If presentation of the SP and its design is appealing to students they will have a high motivation for visiting it. Furthermore if they enjoy their learning experience and will have positive feelings they will return to SP and will recommend it to their friends and families by 'word of mouth'.
Linking this idea back to the services offered there is an issue of the crche that should be revised by Visitor and Outreach Services Manager. Students after having a positive experience at the SP might encourage and motivate their parents including smaller members of their family to revisit on a weekend and one could assume that they would appreciate if the crche would be open.
Challenge for both HPA and VOSM in the Scottish Parliament is to gain loyalty of existing visitors and attract new potential segments.
Next the popularity of the destination itself is being examined and the advantages of the services offered at the SP. Scotland is a beautiful part of United Kingdom and Edinburgh is commonly called "The Athens of the North" (Visit Scotland, 2005), a beautiful historic city with a lot to offer. Festivals and events attract visitors from around the world all year round. The ancient castle is overlooking the city and is the most popular attraction (visited by 82% of tourists) according to Edinburgh Visitor Survey carried out by Lynn Jones Research Ltd. (May2004-April2005); an independent market research agency based in Edinburgh specialized in tourism and hospitality. Second most popular attraction is the National Gallery of Scotland (27%) followed by the Palace of Holyroodhouse (24%). The new Scottish Parliament gives Edinburgh a modern feel (Visit Scotland, 2005) and its central location and closeness to the already popular Palace of Holyroodhouse will facilitate it to become a popular venue at the foot of the famous Royal Mile.
There is a free entrance for the visit and exhibitions in the Scottish Parliament (2005) and depending on visitor interest there is a possibility of visiting on business days (usually Tuesday to Thursday) or on non-business days (Monday and Friday and weekdays of Parliamentary recess) as mentioned earlier. Thinking of young tourists and student market targeted in the essay this flexibility can be considered as a great advantage especially for those studying in the subject area like politics, law, architecture etc. If young visitors intend to see the Parliament at work they should visit on a business day to fully experience a Committee meeting or a meeting of the entire Parliament happening at that time. If students wish to learn more about the Parliament in general, the building itself and its architecture, it is advised to call on a non-business day.
Nevertheless there is a finding that should not be missed out. On the Audit of Digital Media Services in Scotland's Tourist, Sporting and Cultural Organizations (Government, 2005) the Cultural Commission recommended for Scotland to implement the use of Global Leap Video conferencing with museums and galleries. This is a programme that facilitates interaction between school lessons in the UK and museum education executive. It has been working for the last two years in the UK adding value to the education; 'however it appears that there are no Scottish cultural institutions are yet involved yet in this project'. This is an issue concerning the SP as well. Electronic learning systems need to be used in the future in primary, secondary and tertiary educational establishments and the Scottish Parliament needs to consider this matter.
Finally it is predicted that visitor numbers to Edinburgh will increase. This idea is supported by the following reasons.
The Scottish Parliament building at Holyrood should be a magnet for attracting students and visitors of all age to Edinburgh. Designed by Enric Miralles (who was one of the world's leading architects) won the Sterling Prize on 15 October this year which is one of the most prominent architecture award in the world (Scottish Parliament, 2005). Moreover this was not the first award the building received. It can be rightly proud of other seven architecture prizes during the year of 2005. A Parliament is always an exciting and unusual place to visit. SP offering free tickets and the opportunity to 'take part in the real business' might be a great motivator for students along with its outstanding, award-winning architecture and modern, innovative image.
According to WTO (1999) short breaks and especially extended weekends will increase in the future in the UK; a short break in Edinburgh might be a popular idea. Among increased demands there are learning and cultural holidays predicted within family members on vacation independently. At the same time flight prices are decreasing which opens another possibility for more travelling at national and international level. These predictions might suggest that visitor numbers in Edinburgh will increase specially from the student market sector.
Overall the future for tourism in Scotland looks promising:
In addition Frank McAveety, tourism minister publicized in March 2004 a 17m raise in the marketing budget over the next three years, who is also working closely with local tourism authorities on the Tourism Network Scotland (TNS) project.
Ideas from the Middleton model might help Visitors and Outreach Services Manager and Holyrood Project Adviser in the Scottish Parliament to design and market their products and services taking into account the quality and quantity of demand of specific target markets and thus work in a more in a more cost-affective way.