The author will consider the likelihood of becoming an entrepreneur drawing on her environment, traits and personal life experiences but believes the key lies within her and whether the environment can stimulate her attributes (Kirby 2003).
Entrepreneurial endeavours occur around the globe; in the UK entrepreneurs are seen as legends and 'economic heroes' increasingly held in high self esteem and a 'role model to be emulated' (Cannon 1991 cited in Burns p96). Results from the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor UK 2005 support the 'high status' view of entrepreneurs because although levels of total entrepreneurship activity (TEA) have remained similar to 2004 of 6.3%, opinions have changed. People aged18-24 was most positive in attitudes towards entrepreneurs with 69.7 % regarding it a 'good career choice'. The author lives in a culture where entrepreneurs are seen as mavericks of society providing a perception of glamour which increases the likelihood of her becoming an entrepreneur in a society captivated by entrepreneurial spirit (McElwee, Al-Riyami 2003). The GEM report (2005) also indicates that 13.4% of those aged 18-24 expect to become their own boss within 3 years compared to 9.3% for 35-44 age groups. Enterprising behaviour is encouraged through education for example Brookes has introduced a 'flying start' aimed to help students fulfil their dreams, awards are given as an incentive for best ideas . National young enterprise opportunities are also available with Government intending to create wealth (). Babson College has required universities to 'consider the scope for encouraging entrepreneurship through innovative approaches to programme design' (Neal Thornbury ). There is progressive youth movement towards incorporating entrepreneurial activities into education. The author's degree modules have equipped her with skills that heighten the likelihood of her becoming an entrepreneur, revenue and profit management being one. The author has to be practical as well as creative and handling finance is vital with P& Ls and cash flow practised whilst handling her self-employed neighbour's statements in his mechanic business (Davis 2005). .
Hofstede's (1991) cultural dimensions (Appendix 1) of the UK support enterprise. In the 'individualist' society people act according to their own interest so the author's work will prevail over personal relationships (Hofstede 1991). Where as in a 'collectivist' society the family is paramount and non-conformism and liberalism is scarce (McElwee, Al-Riyami 2003). The UK has 'low uncertainty avoidance' meaning society are likely to stimulate innovations and have tolerance towards deviant ideas and opinions so the author is more likely to take risks compared to if she were living in a country of 'high uncertainty avoidance' which is rule governed (Hofstede 1991). The UK has 'low power distance' meaning society de-emphasises the differences between citizen's power and wealth promoting equality and opportunity for everyone, respect is given to those who achieve, motivating the author to advance with ideas (Hofstede 1991). The UK has a 'masculine' culture meaning that generally business people are assertive, decisive, and aggressive. Facts are sought rather than a group discussion that might occur in a 'feminine' society meaning the author is able to act on impulse rather than gaining consensus (Hofstede 1991). 'Long term orientation' ranks the lowest indicating change in England can occur more rapidly compared to other countries providing the author with the chance to change things and do things better (). The assessment of Hofstede's cultural dimensions result in spirited surroundings enabling entrepreneurial activity.
On one hand the author lives in a culture that promotes enterprising behaviour but men are twice as likely to start up a business as women (GEM 2005). Gender could be seen as an obstacle.
According to (Southern and West 2005) the entrepreneur's classic traits include 'energy, arrogance, hurriedness and obsession with work'. If the author measures herself against these characteristics then it's unlikely that she would be a successful entrepreneur.
Having conducted the 'Am I am Entrepreneur Quiz' (Appendix 2) the author is commented on as being 'moderately energetic' at times feeling a lack of energy resulting in unhappiness from current circumstances (). This is true, imaging the authors' feelings, because sometimes workloads are too much. The author is not a hurried person and does things at her own pace in an organised manner and doesn't talk about work constantly. The outlook is dismal whilst considering these traits but the author has other characteristics that are believed to increase the likelihood of her becoming an entrepreneur.
Typologies have developed to distinguish entrepreneurs from the remainder of the population (Morrison, Rimmington, Williams 1999). These stereo-typical characteristics can be criticised for being confined and relying on personalities that are not static but evolve over time (Fleming C 2004). Ambition is a crucial requirement of an aspiring entrepreneur (Southern & West 2005, Morrison, Rimmington, Williams 1999, Wickham 2004, Crainer 1995). A strong desire for success has been found to have a positive impact on growth (Lee, Tsang 2001). The author is ambitious because she sets herself goals and conquers them. The author was the first in her family to attend University and to obtain a place had to work hard in her A-Levels. The author believes that she controls her own destiny and if she wants something has to fight for it. This is expressed in her fitness regime; she has a vision of being slim so sticks to her routine of going to the gym every morning to turn her fantasy into a realistic goal (Davis 2005). This links to the author displaying an 'internal locus of control' and its expected that individuals who have confidence in their abilities to control the events in their lives will be more motivated to seek new business opportunities rather than waiting for them to come ( Brockhaus 1980 cited in Lee & Tsang 2001). The results of the 'Am I an Entrepreneur Quiz' (Appendix 2) support the authors self determination by stating 'luck has nothing to do with it and she controls what happens in her life'. The author wanted to be promoted so always went the extra mile whilst serving customers; this was noticed by employers resulting in promotion from waitress to supervisor at the Grim's Dyke Hotel.
The entrepreneurs ambition isn't enough, it's about wanting to change things (Southern and West 2005). One needs to see a 'gap in the landscape' (Wickham 2004). The author demonstrates this quality because she exploited an opportunity. Bar mitzvahs were taken place locally and quality catering was in demand but not being provided so the author satisfied consumer needs whilst making a profit on her weekends. Managing and dealing with change is central to her character and central if she is to be successful (Burns 2001). The author enjoys altered circumstances and gets bored easily; she displays her love for change by travelling in the summer to avoid stability, demonstrating 'openness to experiences' (Crainer 1995). Last year travelling around Morocco on a bus and camping may have been seen as a risk of safety or financial loss but the author was cautious and prepared to respond positively to uncertainties. This experience can relate to a business context because risk to finances and reputation involves measured calculations of the risk elements (Morrison 1999). An entrepreneur 'identifies, assesses, evaluates, manages and transfers risk. The author believed she could overcome the challenge of hot weather, long drives, insects and bad conditions and she did.
The author idealistically sees herself as an entrepreneur sometime in the future and it's been proved that optimists are likely to be more successful (Raj Mehta & Cooper 2000).
Entrepreneurs are more likely to see strengths versus weaknesses, opportunities versus problems and potential improvements versus deterioration (Raj Mehta & Cooper 2000). The author moved into student accommodation, she lived with others from Asia whom was already friends. Firstly the author felt lonely and isolated and had to make great efforts to be included. The situation could have deteriorated but the author saw a strength which was to make friends at the same time ceasing an opportunity because she now has International contacts. The cultural barriers could have been detrimental but she was positive. This example can relate to the entrepreneurial environment, committing energy and time, being positive persuading customers, employees and resource suppliers to commit to ventures (Baron and Markman 2000).
Social skills are also vital (Hyatt 2004). Social skills and adaptability have been demonstrated whilst the author worked as a front desk clerk in America firstly in the North- Pennsylvania and then in the South -Kentucky. She adjusted to the different situations handling customer queries and complaints in a tactful manner. She displayed outstanding interpersonal skills satisfying customer needs and winning employee of the month awards on numerous occasions. The author also works well with people from diverse backgrounds because she is a voluntary advocate for Oxfordshire Mental Health Matters working with distressed clients at Warnford Hospital. She would describe herself as a social chameleon able to exhibit emotional stability (Morrison 1999). Social capital provides access to an entrepreneurial world through venture capitalists and potential customers (Baron & Markman 2000).
The author's mother is her role model having started her own small business in the travel industry arranging trips for foreign students staying with host families. There's strong support for the argument that self employed parents positively affect the probability to engage in a start up attempt (Delmar 2000). The author has a relative as a role model but the media also provide role models with publications such as Local Heroes (Scottish Enterprise 2005, ). The BBC series Dragons Den provides the audience with ideas and real life examples of those who have succeeded (Davis 2005, ). It appears that entrepreneurs' whose parents had themselves owned a business have greater preference for an entrepreneurial career (Scherer et al 1990, Delmar 1996). The author would agree with this, lending credibility to the social learning theory (Hill 2001). Seeing her mother provide for her family through innovation has lead the author to believe that starting a business herself is attainable. It's debatable whether the passion was pre-determined or resulted from social experience (Morrison, Rimmington, Williams 1999). The Levin's state 'entrepreneurs are not born, they are inspired '(Levin 2005). This belief could become a lens for advancement through Maslow's hierarchy of needs, the author saw her mother providing financial means to achieve basic needs but it can also provide a vehicle to obtaining self esteem and advancement towards 'self actualization' (Carland 1997). The author is driven by the motivation of satisfying personal goals and a need for achievement (McClelland 1961 cited in Morrison 1999).
Its evident the author realises her potential which increases her confidence leading to 'self efficacy' (Noel 2000), once rewards are visible expectations increase displaying the 'self fulfilling prophecy' (Banyard & Grayson 2000).
The author does have strengths but one main weakness is her indecisiveness. Being decisive and able to decommit or commit quickly is a desirable behaviour (Timmons 1994 cited in Morrison 1999). The author wanted to buy a motorbike for her brother's birthday, and couldn't decide between 2, she thought she made the best choice so put down a deposit. The author then changed her mind, losing her deposit, having to borrow money to make up for what she had lost in order to purchase the other bike. The 'Am I an entrepreneur Quiz' (Appendix 2) supports this stating 'you find it hard to reach decisions or act upon them' (). . The Levin's are successful and 'passionately believe they are efficient because they make decisions quickly' (Levin 2005 p11). Being decisive is a quality that the author has to develop to improve her chances of becoming an entrepreneur (Beaver 2002).
In conclusion the author does possess some entrepreneurial qualities such as ambition, enthusiasm and social skills which can offer a partial analysis of entrepreneurial behaviour but with support from her culture; education and mother one day her aspirations can become reality (Beaver 2002). It's immaterial whether she initiates change or simply responds to it (Herbert and Link 1988 cited in Kirby 2003). She feels that fulfilling her dream will flourish more once she has gained the experience to run a thriving business. Currently barriers are lack of experience, no financial means, no contacts and not enough knowledge (Ben Smith case study). The author has already attended 2 job interviews to gain a supervisory position in the Hospitality industry to build on experience and gain access to resources because it is evident that being in the workplace helps to gain 'resources, ideas and social capital'. (Minniti, Langouitz, Allen 2005). Once these barriers are conquered the author knows she has the potential to be entrepreneurial. Taking into consideration her indecisiveness intrapeneurship may be a more suitable option because she can work within the established dynamics of an existing organisation meaning her decisions will be more structured in terms of processes, procedures and corporate culture providing a framework for her entrepreneurial activities to grow, developing feelings of competency (Morrison 1999).