The forecast of realistic view of final demand for Wednesday 25 th May shows that there are 345 rooms forecasted but the Edinburgh hotel only has 300 rooms available so there is more demand than capacity with predicted room occupancy of 100%.
The aim is to maximise room revenue and room occupancy on Thursday predicted at 55% and Friday at 45%.
Conference bookings would have already been taken so planned market mix is 115 as 115 rooms are already booked. As Revenue Manager I would not look for demand from this segment.
Independent business travellers have the advantage of highest room revenue but on the other hand only stay for 1 or 2 nights. There is demand of 130 but I have chosen a planned market mix of 111. It is important not to let too many clients down because relationships will suffer and affect customer loyalty, there is higher demand than rooms left to sell so I know that they will definitely be filled. Rate B is of preference but rate C will encourage a longer stay. Rate D is for loyal customers so that they do not turn to competitors.
Independent Leisure travellers have lower room revenue but the hotel can encourage a longer length of stay to their own advantage in order to maximise capacity and revenue on Thursday and Friday, bearing in mind that leisure guests are likely to spend money in other departments such as restaurant, shop, bar and room service because they are relaxing and will have a care free attitude and want to enjoy themselves. Reservation clerks will not be able to take bookings for 1 night stays but rate H is offered for 2 nights and a further discounted rate I for 3 night stays because demand decreases at weekends the leisure market is therefore targeted using special offers. I have chosen a market mix of 74 and there is demand of 100 so again I know that rooms will definitely be filled. The 25 th May 2005 is a hot summer day and the hotel is in a tourist area so it can be assumed that the 100% occupancy will be reached.
Write an essay that identifies, explains and evaluates two important issues reported in the academic literature concerning the effective application of revenue (or yield) management in hotels in terms of their relevance to the management of this hotel.
Revenue Management is a method which can help a firm to sell the right inventory unit to the right type of customer, at the right time and for the right price (Ingold 2000). This definition has been developed by (Jauncey, Mitchell and Slamet 1995) as an integrated, continuous and systematic approach to maximising room revenue through the manipulation of room rates in response to forecasted patterns of demand. As Reservations manager of the Edinburgh hotel I have made planned marketing mix decisions based on the 'forecasted patterns' of the final demand situation for Wednesday 25 th May 2005 and in effect have 'manipulated room rates' by closing rate A, offering different rates according to length of stay and closing 1 night stays of the leisure traveller.
It is an underlying assumption that staff strive
to meet the needs and expectations of customers and hopefully exceed them but revenue management is objective and puts the customer secondary to the hotel (Ingold 2000).
As Reservations manager I made decisions not in accordance with satisfying the customer but instead about how I can gain maximum room revenue for that particular day. For example regarding the business traveller, there is forecasted demand of 130 but I have a planned market mix of 111, to make space for the leisure traveller consequently 19 guests will be left disappointed. Of course there is the fear that these guests will turn to competitors due to inflexibility and intransigency over room rates and availability. There are obvious concerns that need to be addressed when it comes to revenue management and the impact on the guest.
When different market segments are competing for rooms during periods of high demand the revenue management approach gives preference to high paying segments. This means that those who are price sensitive and unable or unwilling to pay may deem this to be unfair especially if they are loyal customers. In reality guests prepared to pay the high rate will receive accommodation they require at the time they require it and at the same time the hotel achieves a higher level of revenue. This may be seen as unethical because selective bookings means lying to customers and the Hotelier Proprietors Act 1956 states 'a hotelier must offer food, drink and sleeping accommodation to any traveller who is able and willing to pay a reasonable sum and is in a fit state to be received.'(Huyton et al 1997). Regular guests should be identified through guest history records and offered exceptional rates so that dissatisfaction is kept to a minimum.
The integration of customer relationship management with revenue management is the key to the future of the hospitality business. Hotels need to establish the long term value of each customer relationship by means of ranking them to identify the most valuable and then servicing them differently (Haley and Watson 2002). This approach is evident in the Industry in Radisson International, Rosewood Hotels and Resorts and Harrahs Entertainment is the current industry leader of CRM.
Short term goals will be achieved but loss of customers and straying attention of service will result in considerable financial cost.
Regarding the 'customer' RM system does have its limits being the assumption that historical trends will continue which may be deemed narrow minded. Identifying and adjusting to external events which has an impact on previous data is needed. To introduce competitive data in a meaningful way is a difficult problem. This problem relates to the staff which are important in analyzing demand. Employees usually live in the local area and are aware of public issues, read local newspapers and gain views from friends and relatives about events and competition so are an asset in predicting demand.
Revenue management is not an extension of the past because the supply side is shaped by plans and strategies of both the hotel and its competitors and the demand side is shaped by human nature as shown by Jones and Hamilton 1992. It provides sophisticated ways to support reservations but responsibility for final forecast decisions must be with the management team and as noted by Lefever (1988) technology has not reached a point where it can totally replace human intuition.
The 'people element' is stressed by Lee-Ross and Johns (1997) and how the implementation of revenue management systems impacts on work roles, mindsets, communication between departments and customer relationships.
Jones and Hamilton 1992 research puts emphasis on the role 'people' have on making the system work and especially a 'yield culture'. This helps people to clearly understand the concept and secondly that people do not heavily rely on new technology and as a result become de-skilled. Computers generate intelligent information but do not discriminate between relevant data and make consequential final decisions.
Okmus and Hemmington (1998) cited in Brotherton and Turner 2001 highlight that successful yield management depends on a highly trained and motivated team.
In relation to the Edinburgh hotel, staff will have to respond appropriately to customers in order to decline a number of them and explaining why a given rate is not available on the requested date of 25 th May 2005. Skills in negotiation are appropriate and reinforce the 'yield culture.'
Training will produce better average room rates and add to job satisfaction of employees and incentives will show that staff are recognized and rewarded for their efforts which will boost morale. (Ingold 2000) Staffs at the Hilton get a monetary reward for every 5% over the estimated occupancy.
The Hilton underwent a change in the way bookings were taken having to teach the reservationists to say no, the 'hold out' policy was introduced to staff. Hotels adopt many policies, one being overbooking which can cause problems with a lack of training and can make the employees life difficult. If a wrong decision is made and just 1 predicted no-show shows then the hotel incurs charges of walking the guest and a bad reputation. This policy is a prime example of one that effects staff and has a knock-on effect to the customer as it can be perceived as unethical. From the guests point of view is it fair for the hotel to take a deposit from them knowing that they have sold rooms that they don't have. On the other hand hotels do this to avoid a loss from no shows and cancellations.
In the future internet technology will play a major part in revenue management through integration not only with customer relationships but also channel management and building relationships with customers via the internet into loyal brand customers. ().