Wyatt's 'Forget Not Yet' is laced with various poetic techniques, some quite clearly recognisable, yet others more hidden. Nonetheless, all these diverse poetic devices culminate to assist in the understanding of the poem as a whole.
The poem's rhyme scheme follows an almost constant regular pattern, comprising aaab, cccb, dddb, eeeb, fffg, (though some of these are pararhyme). In effect, this imitates the form of a song, which is further reiterated by the repetition of the line 'Forget not yet,' mimicking what would be the refrain; however a certain irony lies in this predominant line of the poem. The regularity achieved through the repetition of 'Forget not yet' builds up an anticipation of continuance, yet the line itself perhaps implies departure; hence, a fitting sense of closure is achieved through the break in the regularity of this repetition in the final line of the poem, where 'yet' becomes 'this. ' In addition, it could be suggested that the internal rhyme used in the line  'Forget not yet' seeks to emphasise the word 'forget' and thus bring about a further sensation of closure. Essentially, in the same manner as the routine and regularity (achieved through the use of rhyme) of the poem have changed, the relationship between the lovers has also changed.
Collectively, the upbeat rhythm combined with the repetition of 'Forget not yet' seems to make the poem one of contrasts, where we see a paradoxical irony between continuation and departure. Seemingly, the buoyant rhythm, maintained by the iambic tetrameter present in the majority of the lines (apart from the 4 th, 8 th, 12 th, 16 th and 20 th) creates an air of jauntiness, yet at the same time, as mentioned the notion of departure is emphasised.
Wyatt also uses figurative language in order to perhaps create an image of labour, which is clear by the lexical cluster consisting of laborious type words such as 'travail,' 'service,' and 'assays.' In fact, in the first stanza, 'travail' is placed with 'tried' and 'truth,' thus Wyatt effectively uses the rule of three in order to fully stress the strife faced by the lover who encounters 'cruel wrong' and  'scornful ways,' regardless of rejection. Despite the invocation of the concept of hard work and strife, it seems that the lover remains resilient and we are also made aware of the lover's steadfast commitment, as demonstrated in the third stanza, through the use of the phrase 'painful patience.' In addition, it is made clear that the lover's 'great travail' is 'gladly spent.' Despite 'denays,' the lover continued to display a 'steadfast faith' which 'never moved,' and the alliteration of the letter 'p' accentuates the harsh consonant sound and thus mimics the painfulness of perusing a loved one despite rejection.
Wyatt's poem clearly depicts an unfaltering love which is resilient towards various tests. The main tenets of love, faith, commitment and labour are readily depicted through the use of alliteration, internal rhyme and the effect of masculine end rhyme, which gives a somewhat definite and concluding feel to the poem. In turn, this illustrates the closure the lover wishes to seek with the relationship.