Wilmot's 'Upon his Leaving his Mistress' and Armitage's '[I am very bothered when I think]' seemingly both portray differing viewpoints with regard to relationships and love and the various implications of these notions. Indeed, at times similar linguistic devices are employed by the poets, yet they are utilised in different ways in order to create rather quite unique effects.
Armitage's poem takes the form of a sonnet, which is immediately indicative of love, yet the way in which the poem is written is certainly far from the traditional sonnets of Shakespeare and such like, and lacks the romantic aspect of the traditional verse. Instead, Armitage's poem is rife with colloquial language at its simplicity from the very beginning with 'I am very bothered when I think', not to mention several monosyllabic and polysyllabic words as opposed to the longer more extravagant expressions which one would expect to find in a sonnet. The only deviation from the simplicity of Armitage's language is in line eight, where he declares: 'O the unrivalled stench of branded skin;' his use of hyperbole creates a stark contrast with the clear-cut diction of the rest of the poem, however it could be interpreted as sarcasm, as in fact, so could the first line. In effect, Armitage's general divergence from the conventional form emulates the atypical way in which he sought to win the affection of the girl he was in love with at the tender age of thirteen; this coupled with the simple language mimics the inability of a child at this age to display their affections appropriately as well as dealing with such emotions. After all, it is symptomatic of a child to often be nasty to someone that they admire.
On the other hand, Wilmot's poem incorporates a regular rhyme scheme, iambic tetrameter and masculine rhyme. Effectively, the use of these poetical features makes Wilmot's poem more regular in the traditional sense, yet like Armitage, his subject matter isn't necessarily reflective of the general consensus nor traditional. Seemingly, Wilmot is an exponent of the debauched lifestyle with regard to relationships, demonstrated firstly by the clear distinction he makes between himself and his mistress,
Wilmot's gulf between himself and his mistress reveals a lack of commitment; in addition, he seems to make a further distinction between his mistress and other women, deeming them 'meaner spirits of your sex.' His somewhat mocking reference towards 'meaner spirits of your sex'-  which is enhanced through the alliteration of the 's' consonant - serves to validate Wilmot's view that it is better to enjoy oneself rather than seek fidelity within a relationship. This mockery of women who are not adulterous, who instead of "dispensing favours" remain loyal is further reiterated by the sarcastic way in which Wilmot utters how they  'Contrive to make one happy Man.' The italicisation of 'one' coupled with the above illustrates quite clearly how Wilmot looks down upon committed relationships and is perhaps an advocate of free love. Again, as with Armitage, Wilmot's poem reflects an air of sarcasm thus making them similar in this respect.
Armitage, as already mentioned, keeps the language in his poem simple and diverges from the use of elaborate diction; in fact, he uses no similes or metaphors, but instead seems to rely upon tapping into the reader's senses, through the use of tactile, visual and auditory imagery. For example, the visual imagery of 'the naked flame of the Bunsen burner' perhaps evokes feelings of fear due to the fact that the flame is 'naked' and therefore untamed and potentially dangerous. On a different note, 'flame' could be a reference to his love for the girl and the way in which it burns brightly; when considered within a lexical set consisting of 'flame,' 'branded,' 'rings,' 'eternity,' and  'marry me,' this becomes more evident and although Armitage's poem isn't necessarily conventional, inadvertently, his commitment is unmistakable through his reference to nouns and adjectives that suggest infinity. It is here that we see a clear distinction between the commitment evident in Armitage's poem - albeit demonstrated in a peculiar fashion - and the lack of commitment expressed in Wilmot's poem. Furthermore, tactile imagery such as the image of her slipping her 'thumb and middle finger in' and 'branded skin' are again quite powerful, as well as the auditory imagery of calling upon her name. Armitage's sensory imagery seems to replace any complex poetic language and is effective due to the fact that it is in keeping with the simplicity of the poem as a whole.
Armitage's simplicity couldn't be further from Wilmot's perhaps superfluous diction; however this isn't to suggest that Wilmot's poem is a normal love poem at all. His references to 'Joy,' 'happy' and  'willing' demonstrate a hedonistic facet, thus reflecting the subject matter of the poem, that being that one should not 'be confin'd' and as already mentioned, advocates a sense of free love; the juxtaposition of fidelity and Wilmot's opinion of the merits of infidelity further reiterates this.
As already mentioned, Wilmot's poem benefits from an identifiable structure, incorporating rhyme and thus rhythm; effectively this gives the poem an air of jauntiness which is parallel to the approach Wilmot seems to be taking with regard to love and sex, where one should not be confined and restricted but free and hedonistic. The lines of each stanza are insured to follow the tetrameter of the poem given that Wilmot uses elision to shorten longer words, such as 'em'all.' This is somewhat similar to Armitage's colloquial language, yet unlike Armitage, the majority of Wilmot's poem consists of more opulent language on the whole.
Unlike Armitage, Wilmot does use more linguistic devices, such as the personification of the Earth's 'willing Womb,' which also incorporates alliteration. Furthermore, Wilmot uses simile to describe the 'Favours, like Nature' that the Mistress bestows. Again, this echoes the idea of liberated love due to the reference to nature and the connotations that such an allusion would evoke. In fact, this image of nature is extended due to the lexical cluster relating to the 'Seed-receiving Earth,' 'Grain,' 'Show'rs,' 'Womb, and  'Mankind.' All of these references are natural, especially the Earth, seeds and grain; this simply serves to further reiterate the notion of free and liberated love for the pleasure of mankind, and how Wilmot sees it as natural.
Although both Armitage and Wilmot share similarities, a comparison of their poems seems to serve the purpose of intensifying the effects of the other and makes evident the lucid difference between their views. In fact, the ending of both poems bears witness to this. The finality of Wilmot's last few lines comes to a clear conclusion in that his mistress should be the 'Mistress of Mankind,' in answer to his own question; Armitage on the other hand creates a slightly ambiguous ending where we are unsure whether he wants to be believed or not as he revisits the possible idea of sarcasm already witnessed earlier in his poem.