'Cabinet government is dead - it has no function to play' whilst the Prime Minister acts 'like a US president'. These were the remarks of the late, former Northern Ireland secretary, Mo Mowlam when she left office in June 2001. Her assessment reflects increasing debate within British politics regarding the style of Britain's current Prime Minister and the apparent phenomenon of 'creeping presidentialism'. An analysis of the validity of such concerns requires definition of the concepts of 'Prime Ministerial' and 'Cabinet' government whilst this apparent trend must not be considered a product of Blair's premiership alone. Much evidence of a growth in Prime Ministerial power at the expense of Cabinet government can be drawn from the Thatcher era. In addition there remain examples of when Cabinet government has flexed its political muscles and limited the executive strength of the Prime Minister. Some commentators have argued that the recent public Cabinet furore over a ban on smoking and education reforms illustrates the vibrant health of Cabinet government. It seems that the predominance of either Prime Ministerial or Cabinet government depends largely upon the context in which the government must operate e.g. the size of its parliamentary majority. The varied conclusions of this debate have led some political scientists to focus instead upon a wider network of power relations that spread both beyond Downing Street and the Cabinet room and constitute the so-called 'Core Executive'.
In theory, the practice of Cabinet Government operates through a dual role. The Cabinet should meet regularly to propose legislation through informed debates and supervise administration. More specific functions include the control of parliament's agenda, dealing with unforeseen crises, allocating government expenditure, formulating policy and ratifying policy made elsewhere e.g. in Cabinet Committees. The convention of Cabinet collective responsibility states that all members of the Cabinet are responsible for decisions made and should adopt a public stance of unity. The Prime Minister's power to dismiss ministers who fail to abide by collective responsibility certainly strengthens his/her position. In 1962 Harold Macmillan dismissed almost a third of his Cabinet in his 'Knight of long knives'. The constitutional convention of individual ministerial responsibility holds that a cabinet minister bears the ultimate responsibility for the actions of their ministry. One could argue that in recent years the weak application of this doctrine may in part account for the decline in the perceived credibility of Cabinet government. Prime Ministerial government refers to the theory that the office of the Prime Minister has become so powerful that he/she is no longer merely a 'first among equals' but forms a political executive similar to that of a President.
Critics of Prime Ministerial power have often accused Thatcher of being the instigator of the decline in Cabinet government. As a self proclaimed conviction politician Thatcher was well known for starting her Cabinet discussions by stating her own views - 'the very forcefulness with which Thatcher projected her views and style separated her from the Cabinet'. She reduced the frequency of Cabinet and Cabinet Committee meetings - just 35 Cabinet meetings were held annually in comparison to Wilson's 59. Between the years 1981 and 1984 she removed rebels and dissenters appointing close allies such as Norman Tebbit and Cecil Parkinson in their place. Nigel Lawson suggests that for Thatcher, Cabinet meetings were in fact the least important aspect of Cabinet membership. She preferred to make policy decisions in smaller Cabinet Committees and preferred further still to make use of informal groups made up of her closest allies. The role of the Policy Unit within the Prime Minister's Office was of great significance under Thatcher. Thatcher's decision to ban trade unions from the GCHQ in 1984 is notable given the absence of Cabinet policy discussion. However there were instances even before Thatcher which suggested a decline in the prominence of Cabinet government. In the 1950s Eden failed to consult his Cabinet and even ignored his advisors during the Suez Crisis which was to have a fatal impact upon his premiership. White argues 'Thatcher's unique contribution was an abrasive, sometimes arbitrary, leadership style that constrained the choices that might have been made... Lady Thatcher invented presidential politics'. The Thatcher era had a profound impact on the practice of Cabinet Government.
Blair's premiership has certainly advanced the decline in Cabinet government. Weekly Cabinet meetings have been known to finish within 30 minutes and often lack a structured agenda. Blair has continued the trend of making greater use of Cabinet Committees to formulate policy (five of which he himself chairs). In 1997 newly formed Cabinet Committees discussed devolution and constitutional reform. Yet perhaps more significantly the frequency of informal groups has increased under Blair. Bilateral meetings between Blair and senior ministers have commonly been described as 'one way traffic'. In 2001 The Commons Public Administration Committee expressed concerns regarding the increasing significance of special advisors within Downing Street. 'Since Labour came to power, there has been growing concern about the role of special advisers, most of whom are political appointees paid for out of the public purse, and often act as personal 'spin doctors''. Rawnsley argues 'Ministers have been regularly heard to moan about the constant meddling in their departmental affairs by Downing Street'. The more recent Butler Report in 2004 criticized Blair's 'sofa style' decision making. Butler stated that the 'informality and circumscribed procedures' marginalized the cabinet role in decision taking on Iraq. 'No previous Labour leader...has adopted such a personal style of control' writes Seldon. Holliday concludes 'what is being witnessed under Blair is yet further reinforcement of the PM's position at the heart of the executive domain'. Yet whilst Blair is seen by some as a 'control freak' it should be recognized that Blair has allowed senior Cabinet colleagues much autonomy notably Gordon Brown regarding economic matters. Lord Butler was right to concede that there never will be 'an ideal or unchangeable system of collective government'. In addition, it can be argued that Prime Ministerial power is often determined by context according to which the power balance fluctuates.
It can be argued that the prominence of Prime Ministerial or Cabinet government largely depends upon the context within which a government must govern. Seldon writes 'many of the harsher criticisms leveled against Major are intellectually limited because they have little regard for the circumstances under which Major served his premiership'. With a much reduced parliamentary majority, Major was forced to adopt a far more collegial and consensual approach within his Cabinet although such a style correlated with his personal preferences. The Cabinet itself was dogged by infighting and division notably over the issue of Europe. Young argues that today 'no modern government has contained ministers more puppet-like, more politically anaemic, more lacking in self-respect, or more cravenly submissive to the leader' thus suggesting Ministers themselves are in part responsible for the decline in Cabinet government. In marked contrast to Major, Thatcher and Blair achieved successive parliamentary landslides enabling Prime Ministerial government in accordance with their personal preferences. The Presidential thesis of British PMs has been boosted by the advent of mass media attention given to PMs and the 'personalization' of politics. For example The Independent's intensive focus on Blair concerning the tragic kidnapping and murder of Ken Bigley was noticeable from the early days of the hostage crisis. On the 27 th September 2004 the front page article read - 'The Shadow over Blair' making reference to Blair on no fewer than 20 occasions in contrast to 'the Cabinet' made reference to only once. It is perhaps inevitable Blair himself is to be heavily associated with the action taken in Iraq. His attempts to persuade an uneasy public that conflict was necessary were numerous in the form of newspaper interviews, television appearances and frequent press statements - Blair's is the 'communicating premiership' argues Kavanagh. Yet it remains difficult toe establish cause and effect in the relationship between apparent 'creeping presidentialism' and increasing media attention. Blair has also been seen to extend the role and size of the Prime Minister's office. He introduced a Strategic Communication Unit and has made full use of the Press Office. Blair's notorious ex-Press Secretary Alistair Campbell even attended Cabinet meetings, the first non-Minster ever to do so. It can be argued however that a weaker government in parliamentary terms would see a return in prominence of Cabinet government. The permanency of any apparent trend should not be exaggerated whilst politics remains so unpredictable.
Despite evidence to support the thesis of 'creeping presidentialism' Mrs Thatcher's downfall serves as a powerful note of caution to PMs who look to exert disproportionate power. Thatcher's dominant style and increasing disregard for the opinions of Cabinet Ministers - as seen over the implementation of the Poll Tax, proved the ultimate cause of her downfall as she lost the confidence of several allies. Most recently some commentators have argued Blair's Cabinet is beginning to reassert itself as division has appeared over the forthcoming ban on public smoking and on education reforms. Rawnsley argues that this is the consequence of Blair's decision to announce his intention to stand down before the next election - a decision which ironically, many of his supporters advised against. Seldon refers to Blair's 'hubristic belief in his powers of persuasion and the rightness of his own 'principled' course of action'. Whilst there remain powers at Blair's disposal to silence disloyal, quarrelsome and scheming colleagues, notably the ability to hire and fire through reshuffle, it remains to be seen whether Blair's dominant style will threaten his ability to decide the moment of his departure.
The actions of previous Prime Ministers, in particular Thatcher and currently Blair have indeed led to a decline in the role and powers of the Cabinet. Yet the Cabinet does retain the ability to remove its leader as it has shown in recent history, whilst it remains to be seen how its role may change in the event of a government being elected with a much smaller majority or if the media's obsession with personality declines. Frustrated by endless controversy regarding this debate some political scientists have argued both Cabinet and Prime Ministerial government exist within a wider network of power relations beyond Downing Street and the Cabinet room. The political executive now controls many other influential bodies, agencies and committees in both Whitehall and Westminster. This network has been termed 'the Core Executive' whilst this change of focus is said to avoid outdated arguments and inconclusive debate.