The aim of this report is to compare and contrast the management of Bath and Oxford. It will compare and analyse both tourism destinations (Bath and Oxford) in terms of the range of their respective markets; the way they are managed as tourism destinations and the range of facilities that they have to offer the tourist. Therefore, basically, this report will firstly consider the destinations - Oxford and Bath in terms of the visitor's origins, length of stay and how these meet the aims of the management plans employed. Then, it will compare and analyse about how tourism is managed by the City Councils between Oxford and Bath and the range of tourist facilities, attractions and services available. Finally, it will compare and analyse the impacts of tourism on the local economy, society, politics and physical environment between both places.
Bath and Oxford have a good transport location. They are not too far away from London and Heathrow Airport. Both of them are within 2 hours drive of London. Hence, they are very convenient and easy to be accessed. They have a good transport system; we can reach both places by different kind of transport mode easily.
Oxford and Bath are similar in many ways as they are all historical cities. There are many age-old buildings in both cities. Tourism is a major industry to them. It brings more than 2,700,000 visitors per year to Bath. Bath is also a sub-regional shopping centre; there are about 3,800,000 shopping visits annually (Audit Commission, 2002). Oxford is famous throughout the world as an historic university city. It attracts more than 1.5 million tourists each year and is the third most popular tourist destination in Britain (Oxford Green Party, 2002a). Although the tourism in these two centres has the potential to bring major economic benefits to destinations, we can't ignore the collusions carried by tourism to society, politics and physical environment.
Tourism is the world's largest industry and predicted to double in size in the next 20 years. It has the potential to bring major benefits to destinations, but can also be damaging to the people living there and to their environment. Oxford and Bath are two similar places, both are the famous destinations within the UK, as they are the historic cities and they contains thousands of treasures like cultures, histories, buildings etc. Although the tourism industry in Oxford and Bath is prosperous and brings with lots of economic benefits, there are still many problems like social and environmental issues which would affect both the tourists and the local residents. The government has imposed many policies in order to reduce the pressure on these issues, but simply writing a responsible tourism policy is no longer enough. It is a must to show practical action, so that the tourism destinations can become long lasting, and get more advantages in the industry without affecting the environment and local residents.