(See attached charts in Appendices A, B & C)
Objective: MAXIMISING ROOM REVENUE
Yield management (YM) is recognised as a successful short-term method for adjusting prices to market conditions (Dunn and Brooks, 1990). According to Kimes (2000, p3), she suggested that yield management is 'a method which can help a firm to sell the right inventory unit to the right type of customer, at the right time and for the right price'. It utilises the historical data and current levels of booking activities to forecast demand for different market segments in order to maximise room occupancy and average room rate, and thus the revenue. However, Kimes (1989) believed that focusing solely on room sales leads to neglecting other revenue opportunities in hotels. Meanwhile, the profitability of a hotel does not depend exclusively on the revenue. Cost is also another crucial factor to determine whether a hotel is in profit or loss. Therefore, the identification of costs is necessary as it can help optimising the hotel profits. As the traditional approaches merely focus on revenue maximisation, hence, this essay is going to look into the techniques proposed to improve decision-making from optimising room revenue to maximise the overall profits, with the explanation, comparison, and the evaluation of those techniques.
The main responsibility of revenue managers is to maximise the overall revenue as well as the profit. They are dependent on using particular accounting methods to yield the conclusive data for helping them to answer some thorny questions and making yield management decision. However, some scholars pointed out that traditional accounting methods failed to determine the long-term pricing decisions, and those techniques even could not answer the most fundamental questions (Dunn and Brooks, 1990; Nordling and Wheeler, 1992). Yield management is an example of those traditional approaches, and it is defined by Donaghyal. (1995, p140) as 'a revenue maximisation technique which aims to increase net yield through the predicted allocation of available bedroom capacity to pre-determined market segments at optimum price'. In the early stage, yield management addressed only the room revenue (Burgess and Bryant, 2001). The information provided could only help the managers to decide how many rooms can be sold and how much a room should be sold to the customers, but they were not clear about the allocations of rooms to the appropriate segments at the right prices. Therefore, the segmentation factors were included later on. Nevertheless, the yield management approach is still regarded as an ineffective for long-term pricing decision tool because it bases on revenue maximisation rather than profit maximisation. If YM is to effectively enhance profit, costs and other revenue sources must be included. Market-Segment Profitability Analysis (MSPA) and Customer Profit Analysis (CPA) are two approaches which both involves the identification of revenues, costs and profit by individual customer or customer groups (Dunn and Brooks, 1990; Noone and Griffin, 1997).
Market-Segment Profitability Analysis is proposed by Dunn and Brooks (1990) who are 'the first to consider a full market-segment approach' (Burgess and Bryant, 2001). They agreed that the market-demand pricing technique is an appropriate short-term strategy; however, in long-term view, they asserted that hoteliers should base decisions on profit maximisation rather than revenue maximisation by adopting MSPA approach (Donaghy et al., 1995). The principal of the MSPA is the assessment of costs incurred to support the sales to each market segment (Dunn and Brooks, 1990). The cost distribution from cost centres to market segments is spilt into two stages. The first step is to distribute the expenses from the cost centres like various departments (for example, Food and Beverage, Rooms, etc.) to activity centres in which activities take place (for instance, reservations, check-in and check-out, etc.). The next is to dispense the activity costs to the proper customer groups (Dunn and Brooks, 1990). After identifying both revenues and costs to each segment, revenue managers are able to recognise the profitability of each type of customers and then make long-term decisions based on the information provided by MSPA.
Similar to the MSPA approach, Customer Profitability Analysis is another method of allocating costs to customers and it reports revenues, costs, and profit by market segment (Noone and Griffin, 1997). In respect of analysing customer costs, it is necessary for CPA to select an appropriate costing method. Noone and Griffin (1997) have stated two types of costing techniques in their study, one is conventional costing methods and the other is activity-based costing (ABC). Basically, the difference between these two costing methods is the manner the overheads assigned to products. The ABC approach does not allocate costs by using an index of volume but based on the activities that cause them to be incurred, and overhead costs can then be precisely assigned to those customers to whom services are provided (Noone and Griffin, 1997). Therefore, activity-based customer profitability analysis can then be able to provide revenue managers with the important information regarding their customer base and help management to solve some of the major issues that YM approach fails to answer.
Both of the MSPA and CPA have the similarities and differences between each other. In terms of the similarities, activity-based costing is adopted in both methods as a means to categorise costs derived from the activities rather than the product. Besides that, their focuses are both on the maximising the profit rather than the revenue. However, in relation to the difference, MSPA has an attempt to back up the YM decisions while YM is in turn forming a basis to support the CPA approach (Burgess and Bryant, 2001). The developments of the approaches have been widely accepted but little practical progress has been achieved (Burgess and Bryant, 2001). The main reason is that many managers found it difficult to carry out because of the complexity of the data required for analysis (Burgess and Bryant, 2001). Nevertheless, according to Burgess and Bryant (2001, p148), 'the opportunity is now emerging to utilise modern technology to identify the relevant costs, by customer, and then to produce market-segment based information in order to achieve a full analysis'. And the information provided by the analysis offers revenue managers the clearer insight into the actual profitability of market-segments and enables them to improve their decision-making for the short-term, as well as the long-term.
Revenue managers cannot rely on yield management system exclusively and revenue maximisation is no longer to be the main objective of their tasks. In order to maintain the long-term profitability and growth of hotel, allocation of costs must be included in the decision-making to optimise the overall hotel profits.