As the UK's next European Capital of Culture, Liverpool will see its profile rise. During the field trip, it is easily to discover that Liverpool is working hard on the infrastructure in order to rebuild the city's image and the confident of the Liverpool's local resident.
As a winner city, Liverpool can surely gain benefits from the title economically in the way of increasing in tourism, boosting local business and creating more jobs. As one of the stakeholders/businesses in the Liverpool tourism industry, Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel must make good use of its resources and capabilities to gain competitive advantage among the rivalries and minimise the negative impacts.
Apart from focusing on the economical benefits, it is also the responsibility for all the stakeholders/businesses, not only the Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel, to pay effort into the sustainable tourism. The first and the most important thing they need to do is "No Do Harm" to the environment and to minimise pollution, waste, energy consumption, water usage, landscaping and chemical exercise. If tourism industry is managed poorly, it can ruin the place, however, if the tourism industry is handled well, it can provide an incentive to preserve the best things a destination offers for us. This is what the sustainable tourism is.
European Capital of Culture, which is originated in Athens in 1985. It is designed to "contribute to bringing the peoples of Europe together". European City of Culture was held every year among different countries within the European Union. It has become ever more popular with the citizens of Europe and has seen its cultural and socio-economic influence grow through the many visitors it has attracted.
It is the second time for the UK's city to be awarded as the European Capital of City. The first time was held in the Scotland's largest city of Glasgow in 1990. This accolade made a huge change to Glasgow. Before Glasgow won the title, it was perceived as grim, crime-ridden and violent. But today's Glasgow is "the coolest city in the UK". As the next European Capital of Culture, Liverpool has shared a similar history as Glasgow, and follow by a negative image. Thus, it is believed that, through the European Capital of Culture in 2008, Liverpool can take the advantage of the designation to build up a positive image and become a fantastic city for tourists.
In attempting to promote the Liverpool tourism industry, the authorities of Liverpool like the Liverpool Culture Company and Liverpool City Council must cooperate to rebuild the city so as to put up a excellent place for tourists. If the tourism industry in Liverpool is become prosperity, the stakeholders in Liverpool can also get the benefits through the regeneration.
In this report, Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel, one of the stakeholders or businesses in the Liverpool tourism industry, will be used to evaluate the effects under the designation of European Capital of Culture by utilising some models.
Nowadays, tourism business is the largest industry among all of the different kinds of industries and it is one of the fastest growing industries all over the world. The faster it grows, the more the destructive power it possesses and the life is become shortened.
If it is well-planned and well-managed, tourism can be a positive force, bringing benefits to destinations around the world; in the reverse, if it is poorly planned and managed, tourism can be an engine for degradation. It is clearly in the interest of the tourism sector to maintain and sustain the basis for its prosperity, thus sustainable tourism should be promoted in every corner.
In this report, one stakeholder/business is included for analysing its operating environment in the Liverpool tourism industry by applying some theoretical models of strategic management and then finding out how the stakeholder/business do to maintain the sustainability.
Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel is one of the stakeholders/businesses in the Liverpool tourism industry. As an up-scale 4-star hotel, its primary role is to offering food, beverage and sleeping accommodation with a superior quality to its customers and tourists. Through the name of European Capital of Culture, Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel is certainly able to get benefits from the "08 project". However, in order to access the opportunities for Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel to expand their achievement to get more chances offered by the event.
As one of the Stakeholders/businesses in the Liverpool tourism industry, and possessing strong resources and capability, Marriott Liverpool City Centre must utilise its strengths and opportunities provided by the European Capital of City 2008 to gain the competitive advantage among its competitors and hence to minimise the negative impacts appear in the industry.
Besides enjoying the benefits the designation offer, it is a must for Marriott Liverpool City Centre Hotel to bear the responsibility on the sustainability. They should protect the destination in order to make Liverpool become a lively and exciting city since 2008, but not only during 2008.