The 31 st G8 Summit was successfully hosted in the Scotland in the summer of 2005. However, the recent figures shown that there is a drop in numbers at two attractions in the Capital (Scotsman, 2006). Apart from the declined in the number of visitors, other reports also estimated that around 6.5 million of potential tourism expenditure was lost in July (BBC News, 2005), together with the images of protesters rioting with police would have a negative impact on Scotland (Sunday Herald, 2005). Based on the reporting of a series of negative news, many people would have doubts about the decision of hosting the G8 Summit in Scotland in the last summer. It then induces to an issue that whether hosting an event is beneficial or harmful to a place. Therefore, the aim of this article is to discuss the interrelation between events, place image, and destination marketing from a number of perspectives.
According to Janiskee (1996), 'this is the age of special events'. The events can be added to the city's range of tourist attractions and thus attract more tourists' visiting. Meanwhile, they often actively seek media coverage as a promotional strategy, hoping more people will be encouraged to visit the city in the future (Brown et al., 2002). This is the main purpose of hosting the G8 Summit in Scotland.
According to the Scottish Executive (2005), it pointed out that the G8 Summit has bought immediate economic benefits and opportunities to Scotland. Firstly, the findings indicated that a net profit of 5 million by hosting the Summit was made for Scotland. Secondly, as the Summit is a world-class event, this would catch the attention of the international media. The value of the worldwide media coverage during the Summit has been calculated at over 66 million and the financial benefit of the media coverage in the six months leading up to the event was estimated at 618 million. In addition, the most important impacts will occur over the next few years as increased profile that Scotland generated takes effect and further benefits for Scotland's tourism in long term (Scottish Executive, 2005). By comparing the advantages and disadvantages, it is obviously to realise that benefits outweigh the harm do to Scotland. Similarly, it is the reason why there is a fierce bidding competition among candidate cities for international events like Olympic Games or regional events such as European Capital of Culture. Thus, the relationship between events and tourism has become inherently linked. Brownal. (2002) believed that image is one significant element of this relationship hooking up an event to the destination and the destination brand may be strengthened, enhanced or changed during the process.
Image is a crucial component in marketing places. As the competition among destinations is fierce, a clearer understanding of destination image becomes a fundamental to enhance the market competitiveness. Morgan and Pritchard (1998) defined that 'image is commonly held to refer to the organised representation of an object, a person or a place in an individual's cognitive system and embraces both a definition of that object, person or place and a recognition of their attributes'. An image is not what tourists 'know', but what they 'think' or 'feel' (Font, 1997). The image of a tourist destination affects the potential tourist's preference, motivation, behaviour and attitude, since people's behaviour 'depends to a great extent on how they perceive the world around them' (Kotler, 1994) cited in (Font, 1997). Therefore, a tourist destination image is one of the most important strategic tools to help destination develop its positioning strategies for creating and sustaining a tourist destination (Font, 1997). Meanwhile, it is also identified as a powerful factor within the decision-making process for potential travellers in the anticipation stage (Gartner, 1993). Hunt (1975) even claimed that "images are more important than tangible resources". As a consequence, the Scottish government would like to give an image which show their peaceful and express their concerns on the issue of global poverty and climate change. This can create a positive image for Scotland; on the other hand, by referring to the previous experiences, most of the scenes witnessed that protesters were rioting with police and thus affected the image of the host countries. However, in this G8 Summit, many people gave an appreciation on their performance. Therefore, this can also illustrate to the world that Scotland is a safety place for visiting.
Recently, marketing has become fashionable and has taken a core stage in the tourism industry. Due to the intrinsic features of the tourism products - intangible, inseparable, variable, and perishable (Morgan and Pritchard, 2000), customers cannot test-drive or examine the tourism product beforehand, as well as not knowing exactly what the product entails at the moment of purchase. In other words, people are buying expectations instead of something immediately evaluative. In essence, they rely much more on their preconceived image (Font, 1997), and tourist destination image often bases more on perceptions than reality. Therefore, destination marketing is essential for the image control (Connell, 2005). According to Ashworth and Voogd (1994), they defined the place marketing as 'a process whereby local activities are related as closely as possible to the demands of targeted customers'. Marketing is not just about selling people products but satisfying customers' needs. In relation to the G8 Summit last summer, Scottish Executive had set up the Scotland Village as to show visitors and more than 2,500 international journalists based at G8 Summit, in which Scotland was promoted to throughout the world by the 'free advertising'.
Despite the significant role that events have come to play in tourism, Scotland definitely cannot rely solely on its events-based tourism. Meanwhile, the advertising during the G8 Summit can only increase awareness of Scotland, but not increasing the knowledge of Scotland or changing attitudes towards Scotland. Therefore, Scotland executive must focus on enhancing its image building and boost its marketing campaigns in order to catch the world's eyes on Scotland.