My essay intends to explore the friendship between James Joyce and his Italian friend Italo Svevo (pseudonymous for Ettore Schmitz), during the years that the Irish writer spent in Trieste.
Svevo was a businessman that wanted to improve his English, and Joyce was his teacher.
In this way begun a lifetime relationship, based on mutual respect and sympathy, but broken by the premature death of Svevo in a car accident.
On one hand, this reciprocal friendship inspired Joyce, who described his friend as one of the Ulysses' character; on the other hand, thanks to Joyce, Svevo's novels were successfully published in France before than in Italy.
Svevo has been considered the writer who introduced Freud's psychoanalysis theory in the Italian Literature, and often his work has been studied under the eye of Joyce's model.
First of all, my intention is defining the time and the place where this friendship was born, and secondly, I consider in which way Joyce helped Svevo.
James Joyce and Italo Svevo met the first time in the 1905 in Trieste.
Svevo was a businessman, manager of an anti-corrosive paint for ships company owned by his wife's family, with factories in Trieste, Murano, and London. Since 1901, Svevo used to travel to England for business, but also for pleasure. It was his wife Livia who suggested he'd take private English lessons by Professor Joyce, an Irish teacher, well-known as "Professor Zois". In Trieste, an Italian free port city at that time under the Austrian control, Joyce was not only a teacher, but also a journalist for the local newspaper; there he wrote several of his novels for Dubliners and main part of the Portrait of the Artist as Young Man.
Between the two men there were about twenty years of difference, but the friendship that began was not only humanly, but also artistically related. Between 1905 and 1915, the only artistic contact that the two writers received was each other's company.
Not only did Joyce give English lessons to Svevo and an introduction to the Contemporary English Literature, but also a deep and unconditional encouragement to keep writing, highly appreciated by his old friend. Svevo and Joyce shared the idea that a writer need to be highly satisfied by his work, not thanks to the success or the audience. Nevertheless, both hardly fought to be appreciated by the public.
"What is surprising is that Svevo never realized that literary 'success' is produced in literary circles; that a writer had to go to Rome or Florence to seek success by cultivating celebrated or influential men of letters." As matter of fact, Svevo was not a very courageous man, unable to leave his established life to follow his literary dreams. At the same time, his nature wanted to be always approved and encouraged by others, and this is why, after the ruinous critics on his second novel, he decided to give up his literary aspirations. For Svevo, Joyce was a sort of alter-ego, somebody that had the courage of doing what he could not do. Their friendship was a sort of father-son relationship, where the father was played by Joyce.
Only after many year, Svevo let Joyce read his two novels, Una vita (A life) and Senilit 
(As a Man Grows Older), he was happily surprised about the prose, so much to say that some pages could not have been better written by the greatest French novel masters. Svevo was so amazed that that day he could not leave Joyce, and so he accompanied him to his house, telling him about his bitter literary experience so far.
In 1912, in an article for Il Piccolo della Sera, Joyce wrote that Triestines did not recognize what an excellent novelist they had in Italo Svevo. It was generous, but vain.
'There is no unanimity as perfect as the unanimity of silence', Svevo told Joyce after that, and Joyce found he could not disturb the silence.
They shared so many thoughts that each one took something from the other, not just in style characterization or irony, but also some of their book characters look like the friend.
Moreover, in the close Triestine society, they always had to keep in mind their own position as a rich businessman and as an English teacher.
Italian was the second language for Italo Svevo.
His father wanted for him a business career, so he was fluent in German, French, Italian and English. In everyday life, he used to speak Triestine dialect.
Svevo's writing was devoted to the literary Florentine language, as Manzoni taught. Living in a city as cosmopolitan as Trieste, it was an ongoing pity his 'scriver male
' in Italian. This was something that affected his literary career all along, especially because it was almost always the first criticism moved against him in reviews. But mostly, critics nowadays agree that it was a sort of 'polymorphic use' of Italian language, because Svevo was a man with a real passion for the language uses and a devote student.
His characters use to speak a language that in some way reproduce their own intimate dialect. He shared this love for languages with Joyce, who was always very curious about dialects and their expressions: he loved speaking Triestine, the language spoken in his household even after he moved away from Italy.
Under the pseudonymous of Italo Svevo, three novels had been published, and every time at the author's expenses.
In 1892, the Vrem Editore in Trieste published "Una vita". The book was printed in 1,000 copies, paid by the author. The first title of the novel was 'Un inetto' (A useless man), but the Treves Publisher judged it too ugly, and refused to publish it, against the warm recommendation of Mr Dall'Oro, an editor.
Subsequently, Svevo changed the novel's name and offered it to the effective publisher.
The book received quite good reviews, especially one in the Corriere della Sera, an Italian leading newspaper.
After that, an inexplicable silence surrounded the book, with Svevo's great disconcert.
In 1898 "Senilit
" come out in episodes on the Triestine newspaper L'Indipendente, and then was published by Vrem Editore in 1,000 copies, again at the author's expenses.
The newspaper also produced a review, that stressed on "youthful naivety of language and style and found the title baffling and inappropriate, but appreciated Svevo's observation of the inner working of mind." The novel receive a total of six reviews, all negative but one, that just wanted to excuse him for writing in a too German way.
After the flop of Senilit
, Svevo accepted to work for the Veneziani Painting industry, owned by his wife's family, and since that moment his life was a sort of compromise, except on paper. Writing became for Svevo a way of escaping reality, especially the one that other people had sewn on you. At the same time, it was impossible to stop writing down notes, comments and letters, where he could fix the world around him.
Indeed, Svevo was a very curious observer of human being, with a great sense of wits, and more importantly, he started to have interest also in psychoanalysis, thanks to his German skills.
This innovative knowledge is highly reflected in his last novel: La coscienza di Zeno.
Svevo wrote his third novel in the autumn of 1922.
For the third time, Svevo could not find a Publisher, so he published the novel at his expense.
Licinio Cappelli, a publisher from Bologna, who opened a bookstore in Trieste and was interested in publishing Triestine authors, agreed with Svevo to published about 2,500 - 3,000 copies of the book. However, after having read it, he sent Svevo a contract for 1,500 copies. Obviously, Svevo was deeply upset with such a criticism, but Cappelli reckoned that the work was really good, and he offered to copyedit for some linguistic mistakes and small cuts needed for fluency. He also thought a way of publicizing the book, with a paid review on a Florentine newspaper.
La coscienza di Zeno appeared at the end of May 1923, priced 10 lire, with a really bad marketing timing. Indeed, it was the wrong season, because critics could not have the time to read it before the summer holidays, with a negative effect on the public.
The book had nine reviews in six months, but none of the Italian critical opinion leaders read it. These reviews were not sufficient to make the book a success.
In this mood, very close to desperation, Svevo asked Joyce to help him.
After having left Trieste in 1915, Joyce moved to Paris, where he became a member of the most world famous literary circle, with acquaintances as Pound, Gide, Valry, Eliot.
Finally, he was recognized as a literary master, thanks to Dubliners and the Portrait.
The Ulysses was published in 1922, and critics unanimously agreed to consider Joyce the most original living writer.
The contacts between the two men had always been quite active. Joyce always remembered to send cards for major festivities, with a mix of Italian, Triestine and English language.
Svevo sent Joyce a letter with a copy of the book in the January of 1924, discouraged by his last work deception. Joyce, sincerely impressed by the novel, reassured his friend: "Perch si dispera? Deve sapere ch' di gran lunga il suo migliore libro."
Now Joyce was able to break the silence about his friend.
In the answer, he suggested a list of people of his entourage, to whom Svevo had to send the book mentioning Joyce's name: Larbaud, Crmieux, T.S. Eliot, M. F. Ford and Gilbert Seldes. Joyce himself spoke with Larbaud and Crmieux, telling them that "the only modern Italian writer who interested me was Italo Svevo".
The 1 st of April, Joyce wrote to Svevo that Larbaud read his novel and he liked it so much to plan writing a review for the Nouvelle Revue Franais. Joyce also wrote to Sibilla Aleramo, an Italian friend of his, for a review on the Tribuna. But two months later there were not any reviews. Svevo wrote again to Joyce, and the same day he received it, he wrote again to Larbaud, pressing for the review and the translation of La Coscienza for another journal.
In June-July 1924, Svevo went to London for business, but we do not now if he met Joyce there, because the writer had an eyes surgery operation. Larbaud was so involved in other different projects to take care of it.
The 10 th of August, there was a review on a Trent newspaper, La libert
, by Ferdinando Pasini, an intellectual associated with the literary journal  La Voce. He was slightly pleased by the novel, but his review did not change anything.
Three months later there was another review on Il popolo di Trieste, against the prejudice, very strong in Trieste, that Svevo could not be considered an Italian writer because he had not an Italian writing style and because of the chosen subjects for his novels.
To reply to that, Pasini wrote another article on La libert
, 14 May 1925, revealing that everyone in Trieste tried to dissuade him from reviewing Svevo's novel.
Without any news from Paris, Svevo bitterly started to believe that Larbaud did not exist at all, and Joyce made fun of him.
One morning in January 1925, Svevo absentmindedly opened a letter from Paris and began reading it loudly when his voice failed. It was a letter in Italian from Larbaud, which called him 'Stimato Signore e Maestro', and about his propaganda of Svevo's novel amongst the Princess Margherita Caetani Bassiano literary circle. Svevo thought that the letter was a fake and checked the information on Larbaud before believing it. Then, without any delay, he answered that he would send him a copy of his two previous novels.
After a month, on the 16 th of February, without any answers, Svevo wrote to him again.
Larbaud replied immediately, a bit less enthusiastically this time, but suggesting publishing also an extract from Senilit
. The French writer let Svevo know that some of his friends compared his novels to Proust's that only the title was wrong, but the material would surely appear on the Commerce journal in October.
However, Svevo could not wait until October. He felt old and without time to waste; so he tried to push for an early launch.
On the 19 th of March, the Triestine newspaper La sera published an article about Crmieux by Dora Salvi, in which there was the statement that Triestine people did not know that amongst them was living a fine author. Without even thinking about it, Crmieux was preparing the ground for the 'Svevo affair'.
In May, Svevo and his wife went to Paris, to meet the French artists in a dinner organized by Joyce.
Svevo found himself in his youthful dream. His behaviour from now on would be that of a sixty-four-year-old-baby, unable to wait for the natural way of things: he felt too old to wait, and was afraid to not live enough to see success.
Comnne persuaded him to sign a contract with Giuseppe Prezzolini's literary agency for the translation and the publication abroard of his novel. Then, Crmieux's article was chosen to be published on Le Navire d'Argent.
Giuseppe Prezzolini was a well-known critic, in Paris as exile, however he often returned to Italy, because of his collaboration with a cultural circle in Milan, directed by Enzo Ferrieri, editor of Il convegno. Prezzolini joined one of the meetings, telling an astonished group of Italian intellectuals that, before leaving Paris, during a night at the Pen club in honour of Pirandello, Joyce told him that Italians had not realized yet that they had a great novelist among them. Obviously, nobody knew about Svevo, but after that, Ferrieri wanted to publish an article about him immediately. Among them, there was Eugenio Montale, the one who had found the books before everybody else, thanks to a Triestine friend. Beating on time also the French, he wrote 'Homage to Italo Svevo', which was published in the December issue of L'Esame, followed by 'Introducing Italo Svevo' on Il Quindicinale. Montale was quite amused by the modernity of Svevo's world and writing, so close to contemporary men's spirit and psychology. Writing these articles, he cleared the way for the understanding of Svevo in Italy.
From the 30 th of January 1926, Italian newspapers reported how the French discovery came thick and fast.
Le Navire d'Argent published an issue about Svevo on the 1 st of February, written by Crmieux, which called him the 'Italian Proust', and emphasized his isolation as writer in the Italian literary tradition. Crmieux was leading Svevo's fame through the Italian critical storm, still divided but at the same time afraid of looking ignorant in front of the French enthusiasm.
The Italo-French rivalry only helped Svevo's cause.
With his sense of wit, Svevo called this new interest in his works as the "miracle of Lazarus".
According to many critics, Svevo's readership was raised only after his death, in Italy and also aboard, but the success of esteem that he received in the 1926, placed him in the European literary consciousness. At the same time, Svevo was always mindful that this was the 'effect of the whim of a great man', that was James Joyce.
Now Svevo could consider himself as an 'almost famous' novelist.
But this was not enough for being published in Italy.
On the 24 th of February, Svevo was again in Paris, discussing with Prezzolini and Crmieux about the new edition of all his novels. Quite surly, he also met Joyce, who introduced him to the Publisher Adrienne Monnier, his new acquaintance.
On the 27 th he was in Milan, where Montale set an appointment at the Treves Publisher to see Mr Dall'Oro, who, after the episode in 1889, hoped to publishing the new edition of Senilit
. But once more, Treves refused the novel.
After that, other publishing houses as Enrico Samar, Mondadori and also Cappelli refused to re-print Senilit
, not trusting the Italian readership's interest. Only in 1927, the small Milanese Morreale Publisher re-printed the novel in 3,000 copies with an expenses contribution by Svevo.
On the 14 th of March 1928 Svevo, as a dream come true, was celebrated as writer, at the Pen club in Paris, surrounded by his friends Joyce, Crmieux, Shaw and others.
On the 13 th of September, Svevo died in a car accident.
After Svevo's death, his wife Lidia asked Joyce to write an introduction to the English edition of Senilit
. He refused, adducing that he never wrote on other work.
In a letter to his brother Stanislaus, Joyce remarked that the relationship with Svevo was quite formal, that he had visited him only as a teacher, that Mrs Schmitz had always snubbed his wife Nora.
What is the truth about Joyce's refusing? Were Svevo and Joyce truly good friends?
Did Joyce help Svevo as a revenge on his behaviour during his poor Triestine years? Or against Svevo's snob wife?
It is really hard to say. Many critics are debating if it was a real friendship.
It is true that their letters always show a certain formality, but also a deep respect, for the man and for the writer behind him. Without Joyce, Svevo had never had the opportunity of shining in the Italian or even the European literary scene.
In one of his last interviews, Joyce said: 'We travelled a long way together and Svevo is to my mind the first Italian novelist to introduce the technique of the interior monologue... He was the Italian novelist with whom the generation born at the dawn of the new century can identify.'