All primates, no matter which family they belong to, share certain traits and anatomical features that set them apart from other mammals. Anthropologist Robert Martin has defined primates according to nine traits by which they can be identified, including features of dentition, gestation and olfaction. Three important traits he identifies are the presence of an opposable pollex and hallux (with the exception of humans who only have an opposable pollex), the dominance of the hindlimb during locomotion and the location of the eyes in the head. It is these three features which have provided anthropologists with much material in the study of primate origins. It is widely agreed that primate traits arose in response to the domination of an arboreal niche, but more specific information is needed about exactly what features of an arboreal habitat led to the last common ancestor of all primates to develop these features. Anthropologists have focussed on different primate features in the search for answers and here I will try to draw the research together and assess which theory provides the fullest explanation.
Most living primates are arboreal and it is generally agreed that it is this fact which led them to develop many of their physical traits. Their stereoscopic vision, enabled by the positioning of the eyes in the head, gives primates great depth perception which allows them to carry out complex tasks in the tricky environment of fine terminal branches. Their grasping hands and feet are also well suited to this purpose and it is for this reason that most anthropologists agree that the domination of an arboreal niche led to the development of many primate traits. Schmitt (2003) supports this with findings of a study in which he examined limb mechanics of primates, particularly small species. Because of the dominance of the hindlimb during locomotion and the consequent location of the centre of gravity, the forelimb's weight bearing role is minimal. However it does show increased mobility and Schmitt studied its mechanics in order to find out if the forelimb is suited to a fine terminal substrate more than any other branch. Findings of the study showed that elbow flexion of forelimbs was helpful in lowering the centre of mass which in turn aided balance. The study also demonstrated that the degree of protraction made possible by the high mobility of forelimbs was important for reaching and also meant that stride length could be increased. This decreases the number of strides necessary and stops dangerous oscillation of fine branches when the primates travel along them. These results seem to indicate that fine terminal branches are the reason behind primate traits but when studying differing substrate sizes, forelimb protraction was not affected. Rather than indicating that substrate size is insignificant in primate evolution, this perhaps suggests the degree to which travel in terminal branches has shaped primate anatomy. Also indicative of this is the evidence from a study by Pontzer and Wrangham (2004) which sought to explain why chimpanzees, who are mainly terrestrial travellers, incur such an energy cost when walking by retaining characteristics adapted for climbing and arboreal travel. The study found that chimpanzees clearly do not have these adaptations to minimize locomotor costs, as they spend far less time climbing than they do walking. There must be another reason why the characteristics have remained and not been weeded out by negative selection; it was suggested that this could be the difficult task of travel in a terminal branch niche, especially because the chimpanzee is a large primate. Therefore, the energy cost incurred walking is justified by the ability to climb safely and have manoeuvrability in terminal branches.
Another study which gives evidence for the arboreal hypothesis also looks at locomotion. Raichlen (2005) studied limb mass distribution in baby baboons and monitored them through ontogeny as limb mass distribution became more proximal. Accompanying this he found a slight change in kinematics; baboons exhibited shorter strides and hence a higher stride frequency. The change was small but significant enough to suggest that limb mass distribution, which is responsible for the ability to grasp with hands and feet, is the reason for kinematics specific to primates. This supports the theory of the small terminal branch niche; early primates would first develop grasping hands and feet and the other features of locomotion (long strides, long stance duration) would follow as a result. Raichlen also cites other instances where primate kinematics indicate adaptations for the arboreal niche; large limb angular excursions, also caused by the distribution of limb mass, leads to long stride lengths. One last piece of evidence which lends support to the arboreal hypothesis is convergence. Other species living in arboreal environments also have similar characteristics which have evolved simultaneously so they must have some advantage. Grand (1983, cited in Raichlen, 2005) points to Caluromys (possums) as an example of this.
It seems fair to say that the evidence points towards an arboreal niche as responsible for many primate traits. But to be more specific and say what features exactly of this environment helped shape primate anatomy is less straightforward. There are two main hypotheses, one of which is the visual predation hypothesis, based on the theory that traits have developed because approaching and capturing insects for food on fine terminal branches requires flexibility and agility. Think of the grasping hands and feet which primates possess, and their convergent eyes which provide them with great depth perception. The second hypothesis is the angiosperm co-evolution hypothesis. Angiosperms are fruiting and flowering plants which appeared and spread during the Cretaceous era, providing sweet nectar and fruits to attract animals which would then act as pollinators. Angiosperms and primates have a deep evolutionary relationship; some kinds of seeds will not germinate unless digested and passed by certain primates. The main difference between the two hypotheses is the question of what primates ate on the terminal branches - did they prey on insects or choose the fruits of the angiosperm? Ravosa and Savakora (2004) studied the location of eyes on both living primates and euprimate fossils to try and get some evidence either way. The level of orbital convergence (how far forward the eyes are in the head) was recorded along with details of diet for each primate. The findings by no mean draw a line under the debate but they do give more support to the visual predation hypothesis, as they show a lack of visual convergence in frugivores. This suggests that increases in stereoscopic acuity were functionally linked to visual predation. However there were some exceptions to the rule as frugivores like adapids and some large nocturnal pteropodids were found to have high levels of visual convergence, and the deep rooted relationship between primates and angiosperms should never be underestimated. Nekaris (2005) studied the slender loris and found yet more evidence that supports the visual predation hypothesis. Loris lydekkerianus lydekkerianus has often been identified as possessing many primate traits in an extreme form and used as support for the theory, so the purpose of the research was to observe foraging behaviour and establish to what extent the loris is a visual predator. If the loris was found to use a sense other than vision as its main method of predation, then it would not lend support to the visual predation hypothesis as the extreme characteristics it displays should surely be derived from a faunivorous diet and visual predation technique. It was found that the loris carried out 49% of its food acquisition in the terminal branches, using visual predation, and food was eaten in situ. On the small number of occasions when a sense other than vision was used to locate prey, vision was always used to catch it. The evidence supports the visual predation hypothesis; this 'extreme' primate is almost exclusively arboreal and uses visual predation on the majority of occasions. However, both Nekaris and Ravosa mention the discovery of a Paleocene plesiadapiform fossil that should care characteristics with euprimates, which possesses grasping hands and feet but no visual convergence - this is in line with the angiosperm hypothesis.
It is evident that the debate is not over. Evidence from research studies is never definitive or beyond criticism, and from studying different aspects of primate anatomy different conclusions can be drawn. There is no doubt that an arboreal niche accounts for many characteristics specific to primates, but evidence divides itself between the two hypotheses. The co-evolution of primates and angiosperm should never be ignored, but this theory cannot account for levels of visual convergence found in some faunivorous primates. There is a suggestion that the two hypotheses are not exclusive. Perhaps angiosperms drew primates into the arboreal environment and once there, primates with certain characteristics were favoured by natural selection because they could also exploit the animal prey in the terminal branches. This theory seems likely but we should never forget that new fossils which complicate the debate are found all the time, and it only takes one new discovery to cast doubt on a widely believed theory.