Religion. What sort of practices do you think of when confronted with this word? People gathered in a special building, in silent prayer or worship. Particular clothes for members of the religion, or those who hold some power within the organisation. Objects of worship; gods or goddesses. People aiming to please celestial beings by living their lives according to rules, usually of kindness and kinship. Maybe even people denying themselves pleasures or living in isolation to demonstrate their faith.
So what if I were to show you people wailing, screaming, pummelling the ground, covering themselves with earth? People rubbing grass between their hands? Waiting expectantly to see if an animal will urinate at the entrance to their land? Would you call apply the word 'religion' to these practices? They are all practices or religious rites carried out by the Lugbara people of Uganda, as observed by John Middleton during his fieldwork there from 1949 to 1952. At first observation, these actions seem completely irrational, even if we are told they have a religious context. However, we only come to these conclusions if we look at the behaviour from a 'Western' viewpoint. When the behaviour is observed in the context of the Lugbara's society, it makes perfect sense.
This goes some way to illustrate that the study of religion is often a victim of classification systems where anthropologists are concerned. If one enters a society with a preformed belief of what religion should look like or what it should consist of, one closes down paths of study by excluding religions which do not fit the pattern. It is here that we need to consider the issue of cultural relativism, as suggested by Franz Boas. He stated that because cultures are based on their own world views they can only be understood by their own cultural values. That is, if we try and impose ideas we have gained from our own culture through socialisation on another very different culture, these ideas will not translate and the observer will gain little or no insight into the world of those under study.
This topic also concerns Thomas D Raverty in his article which examines how terminology can confine study. In fact, in the English language the term 'religion' means something very different to what it means in other languages. The word excludes things like magic and witchcraft, which some people certainly would see as their religion. In his article, Raverty deals with the term 'supernatural' but his comments are very relevant and can be applied to many terms anthropologists make use of. He argues that a generic term such as 'supernatural' or 'religion' which is a social construct can be useful to begin with when the anthropologist has little knowledge of the group they are to study but that we must be willing to be flexible in our definitions and expand the boundaries of what we had first considered to be in the realm of the term. In other words, we cannot avoid the use of terms such as religion as all study needs a starting point but the danger is when one is dogmatic in one's idea of what constitutes religion and excludes other possibilities.
This text also raises the point that distinctions between religion and magic were constructed to clarify areas of study for anthropologists. Let us examine some such distinctions as they influence classification of practices into the religious or magical. In his book Magic, Science and Religion Malinowski references Frazer's definitions of magic and religion. Frazer states that whilst magic is man taking control by taking advantage of naturally occurring events, religion is based on the idea that superior powers direct or supervise human life. Religion has both a theoretical side and a practical side taking the form of rites and rituals. It is here that anthropologists may have difficulty applying their ideas of what religion is. Some practices carried out at important rites of passage in other religions may seem so alien to us that we find it hard to believe they are considered part of religion in that particular community. Take for example the peoples living in Kiriwina in the Trobriand Islands, studied by Malinowski. Harvest time there is a cause for great celebration and there are various practices that have to be carried out. Malinowski describes how the harvested yams are brought into the village with a great deal of ceremony; there is a call and response chant between the harvester and the assembled crowd, many of whom will have run into the village to witness the event. At various stages throughout the festivities the yams are placed in piles of a specific size and shape. There is much dancing throughout the period during which the men wear elaborate headdresses made from feathers, or carry shields.
Arguably, many so called 'world religions' also celebrate the bringing in of crops, for instance many Christian churches in Britain hold a harvest festival, sometimes inviting members of the church to bring food to be donated to the needy. These festivities invariably involve an element of retrospection; thanks for the good harvest and abundance of food, and prayers for the harvests to come. The Trobriand islanders, according to Malinowski, involve no element of thanks in their proceedings. Upon seeing this spectacle for the first time, one would have a hard time placing it within the realm of religion. In fact to a casual observer the proceedings may appear to be a series of pointless exercises; the piling of the harvested yams, the display of the crop. Surely the food is there to be eaten? This only goes to demonstrate that our perception of religion can be clouded by classification. These rituals may not fit into our typical idea of how a religious practice should appear, but there is no doubt that they are part of the Trobriand Islanders religion; the yams are displayed to please spirits of the dead. Here we can see a similarity with Christianity; the purpose is to gratify a higher power, no matter that one is a singular god and one is the spirits of dead ancestors. At first glance we may have dismissed the actions of the Trobriand Islanders as non-religious but in fact they are deeply rooted in strongly held religious beliefs.
Moving on from classification, methods of research themselves are discussed in Robert Shanafelt's 2004 article 'Magic, miracles, and marvels in anthropology'. In reponse to rising interest in witchcraft and magic as alternative religions, the article discusses how we should enter into research about these topics without any preconceived ideas or elements of doubt in our minds because this can only serve to hinder research. He states how whilst a questioning mind is obviously imperative to insightful research, the mind should be open to all suggestion as one only classes things as 'impossible' or 'miraculous' because they do not fit into our current Western belief system; that is, science. This viewpoint is supported by Frazer, who suggested that there have been ages of both magic and religion and that we are currently in an age of science. Science, like any other belief system, is only one possible explanation of the world around us,could well be superseded by another series of beliefs in years to come. Therefore, dismissive treatment of others' religious beliefs or practices is entirely unfounded as we are judging it from our own cultural values which are not only moulded by our social setting but also by the belief system which makes the basis of our culture, and we should realise that this is, perhaps, one of many.
Religion is a difficult subject area to study as we need the term as a starting point for any research, but the concept itself can hinder study. Definitions of religion will keep being revised for years to come, and it is doubtful if ever there will be a definitive one with no exceptions because not only is each person's definition rooted in the culture of their upbringing, new religions are formed every day, and we can be certain that many of these do not fit the pattern we are accustomed to.