The poem, or song, concerns a Lady's indecision about whom she will choose, Alexis or Damon. The poem is written mainly in iambic tetrameter, though there are some inverted feet which stop the poem falling into monotony. An example is the spondee in 'How strongly...', which starts the poem. The stress on the questioning word emphasises the fact that it is a dilemma; the writer is asking us a question. Later in the poem, 'Cure then...' also has two stresses, this makes it sound more like a command than a request and the reader is encouraged by the punctuation to pause after this, which makes it more prominent. The obvious advantage of the metre is that English speech is usually in iambs, so the metre does lend itself to be sung, although the use of masculine rhymes stops the tone becoming too whimsical and draws our attention to the dilemma at hand. On line six of each stanza there is an extra iambic foot which has the effect of slowing down the speech of the reader and forces them to further contemplate the last few words of each verse. This is especially effective in the second stanza, where we pronounce the words 'languish', 'sigh', and 'die' more slowly than the others; it feels almost like a heavy sigh of indecision in itself.
The word 'die', indicates strong heartfelt feelings and brings a a more serious tone to the poem, along with the use of the word 'blood', which makes us think of the colour red, the colour of passion. It links us back to the first line where we are asked the question 'How strongly does my passion flow...'. Of course passion, an emotion, cannot be said to physically flow but we traditionally link passion and strong feelings with blood, as it is innate and these feelings, like our blood, cannot be changed. The reader imagines passion coursing through the veins and the 'restless fever' indicates action not passivity. We are left with the feeling that this is not girlish indecision, but fierce love for both parties and a true predicament for the woman concerned.
Sibilance is used in the second stanza; the name Alexis lends itself to this. Sibilance in 'Alexis present is...' and 'Alexis I do miss...' makes the reader pronounce speak softly at these points. This contrasts with the plosive consonance of 'pow'rful prove' and the commanding tone of the third stanza. The effect of all this is to reflect the ups and downs of argument and indecision. The poem is not commanding the whole way through, and neither is it soft and quiet. The fluctuation in tone caused by the use of both soft and forceful rhyme emulates the way the poem goes back and forth between Damon and Alexis.
The conclusion of the poem bears no answers, in fact we look to Cupid to make the decision which is evidently too much for the writer. The poem ends on 'I am lost.' which offers no inkling as to which man has been favoured.