The poems 'The Kaleidoscope' and 'Underworld' both concern grief at another's death, but the ways in which they deal with it vary greatly. Whilst 'The Kaleidoscope' describes Douglas Dunn's overpowering confusing feelings surrounding his wife's death, 'Underworld' is a theoretical poem ('What if...') in which Lavinia Greenlaw implores another not to die. Form plays an important part and clearly the two poems differ enormously, Dunn choosing a sonnet and Greenlaw deciding to write in free verse, which calls our attention to the grammatical breaks as they do not fall at the line breaks. The caesura in line three of the first pentain stops the reader dead in their tracks, the half rhyme of the first two lines perhaps having made us anticipate a more neat and structured form. Sibilance (swallowed/swallowed/six/seed s/split) adds rhyme and structure to the first pentain, which considers the possibility of the person in question dying and not returning, evident in the reference to the path 'freezing over'. Greenlaw uses the Greek myth of Persephone's kidnap by Hades and life split between the underworld and the living world as an analogy throughout the poem. These references to ancient mythology contrast with Dunn's use of the mundane activity of carrying a tray up the stairs but both are used to inspire these musings on death. In fact the images become almost apocalyptic in the second stanza of 'Underworld' when Greenlaw says that the 'sky will crack'.
Dunn's sonnet is included in a collection of poems on the death of his wife, 'Elegies' and appears in the book grouped together with three other sonnets, a particularly appropriate form as traditionally the sonnet's subject is love, often unrequited. At first it may seem an unsuitable form to choose when writing about such an all-consuming grief, and perhaps a free verse form like Greenlaw's would allow more of a free reign but we find that the struggle to contain grief within the neat form actually intensifies the emotional impact of the poem. This is demonstrated in the hypercatalectic lines seven and fourteen where we find an extra syllable escaping the form, symbolic of the social restraints put on Dunn's outpouring of grief. Enjambement stops the poem from becoming too sing-song, too lyrical, as well as some inverted feet such as 'Might be...' at the start of line two. The emphasis on 'might' and its repetition later in the poem demonstrate that part of Dunn still lives in hope, in the past, and this is made all the more poignant by his realisation at the end of the poem that she will never again be there in bed where he expects to find her. The image of Dunn at the door of the room is perhaps even more affecting than the hyperbolic language used in 'Underworld'.
This difference between past and present is separated in the octave and sestet. Although the rhyme scheme follows more closely the pattern of a Shakespearian sonnet, the turn is after line eight where Dunn is jerked out of his imaginary state and back to reality, and this is a feature of the Italian sonnet. The conflict between these two forms highlights the confused state of Dunn's feelings. End rhyme in the poem is mainly perfect masculine with the exception of books/frocks, and this crack in the rhyme scheme reflects the cracks caused in Dunn. Assonance in the first line (st airs/ag ain/b earing/tr ay) draws out speech and gives a feeling of weariness; it also echoes the sound of Dunn's footsteps upon the stairs, an action he became so familiar with whilst his wife was ill in bed, and he now repeats.
Language is used to great effect in 'The Kaleidoscope', for example 'pillowed with your books' in the second line suggests some kind of comfort taken from these books which we later learn are lists of legacies in the form of clothes to be given away to friends before her death. These practical arrangements have made his wife's death no easier for Dunn and he seeks comfort by sinking down into a different kind of 'literary pillow' by writing down his feelings. The progress of the poems throughout 'Elegies' is evidence of this kind of cathartic effect. The 'holiday' alluded to in line four links to 'France', the preceding sonnet but it is interesting that Dunn has drawn a parallel between death and a holiday, and this could indicate that he believes he will go on to join his wife in a 'better place'. The kaleidoscope is obviously an interesting concept for Dunn as he chooses it as the title of his poem. It could be a literal reference to mirrors though if we look more closely at the origins of the word a different meaning becomes apparent. The word has Greek origins and translates roughly as 'beautiful form watcher' and suggests that that Dunn is talking about his wife and her attitude; she saw beauty in everything and was positive until the end. The 'redesigned husbands' reflected in the kaleidoscope could be a reference to the husband Dunn wishes he had been and feelings of inadequacy, that it should have been him, not her, and this is followed up by his desperate act of self sacrifice by 'Offering me, my flesh, my soul, my skin.' The anaphora in these phrases affirms his emotive offer. However he expresses the realisation that these feelings of guilt are 'absurd' after he makes the gross understatement 'Grief wrongs us so'. This short statement and the caesura that follows it makes the reader stop in their tracks and consider the inadequacy of words in describing the situation.
Interestingly in contrast to this the whole of the second stanza of 'Underworld' is one sentence and the lack of punctuation is as much of a feature as the use of it in 'The Kaleidoscope'. Enjambement creates a sense of rushing along, increased by the twice used 'and' which gives a plaintive air to the second stanza, a feeling of hope that the persona will join the dead in another world, where it is summer. The myth of Persephone and the underworld was used to explain the changing of the seasons and their use in the poem indicates that to the persona, life without this person is winter, is barren, is iced over. The hyperbole indicates vehement, unwavering feelings of love, the persona is almost saying 'without you, nothing matters, when you are there, nothing can be wrong'.
In conclusion the poems both express the same emotions but do it in very different ways. 'The Kaleidoscope' stirs our emotion by showing how feelings of grief encompass every action whereas 'Underworld' shows us the earth shattering way that the death of a loved one could change everything.