Nonsense poetry comes in many shapes and forms. Sometimes the words are nonsense, the plot is absurd, or maybe the point of the poem is unfathomable. Nonsense poems may creep up on you from a seemingly standard poetic form, or they may jump out, instantly recognisable on the page as nonsense. They may seem touchingly simple, inexplicably complex, dark and mysterious or light and fluffy, perhaps all at the same time. But hopefully, one thing all nonsense verse has in common, is it elicits a smile. And as I hope to demonstrate with the following selection of poems, nonsense also challenges the way we think about language. Nonsense is only described as such because it does not fit into a recognized system in our minds, or it subverts a system we are familiar with. That is not to say it is chaos, rather, it operates under its own rules and within its own system so that something understood as nonsense in a wider field of literature may make perfect sense if we address it as nonsense.
Nonsense verse originated as parody, and this tradition has continued. Carroll's The White Knight's Song is a parody of Wordsworth's Resolution and Independence and Tolstoy even created Kozma Prutkov, a character who wrote nonsense verse as a satire on imperial bureaucrats. Nonsense itself has been parodied; W.S. Gilbert is credited with writing a limerick without rhyme as a parody of Lear, and a short search on the internet throws up dozens of parodies of that most famous nonsense poem, Jabberwocky. Although the masters of nonsense are generally regarded to be Carroll and Lear, some experts believe that the first exponents of nonsense were the 17th century poets John Taylor and John Hoskyns. Theirs was a time of great exploration and travel writing became popular; their satire was a response to this. Hoskyns' Cabalistical Verses and Taylor's Mockado, Fustian and Motley both effectively poke fun at the contemporary attitude of noble voyage and discovery by twisting accepted forms of the time. Taylor's use of the sonnet leads us to expect love poetry, when in fact we find the poem jammed full of Greek mythological figures. This overuse of symbolic figures carrying out nonsensical acts ridicules the false pomposity of the age. This is echoed in the title; mockado being an imitation velvet, fustian a description of pretentious or pompous language, and motley bringing it all together in a haphazard mish-mash. Hoskyns also uses iambic pentameter and this use of rigid form helps to structure the nonsense into something readable, rather than plain gibberish.
In fact, form plays an important part in nonsense verse. The limerick instantly comes to mind when discussing nonsense verse, having been popularised by Lear and later used by Ogden Nash. The one limerick included in this anthology is a great example of how form contributes to the overall effect; that is, of comedy and absurdity. Because of its strict form and metre, words often have to be twisted to fit into the rhyme scheme, for example 'tearance' in the limerick included. These forced rhymes are very playful, though we would not include these words in the category of nonsense words which are further discussed below.
Nonsense, however, does not just use accepted forms. Christian Morgenstern's poem, The Funnels, is set out like a funnel and the enjambement, especially as the lines get smaller, means the rhythm trips along like the 'white moonlight' running down the funnels. The commas that interrupt the third line break up the rhythm to sound like the dripping moonlight, and all these details of form and metre lead the reader to become involved in the poem, and forget that the situation is completely nonsense.
So the language in the above poem is not nonsense, but the situation it describes certainly is. How does this challenge our views on language? The structuralist Saussure asserted that language constitutes our world; it does not just record or label it. So if language makes our reality, can the situation in The Funnels, or in any other nonsense poem be said to be nonsense? This idea applies also to the creatures we encounter in nonsense verse. T.S. Eliot's Jellicle cats, for example, are described in much detail. Not only their physical attributes, but also how they spend their time, and even details of their toilette. Similarly, Lear's Jumblies are defined, though the constant repetition of their name throughout the poem itself and throughout all of Lear's poetry, is affirmation in itself.
If we extend this structuralist idea that language creates our world and think of nonsense verse as a structure with its own rules and system, we can begin to make sense of nonsense. We can begin to see, for example, why we can read nonsense words and feel we almost know what they are talking about. Words like 'frumious', 'borascible', 'flumpetty' and 'brillig'. These nonsense words are usually associated with Lear and Carroll but the first example can be found in Cabbalistical Verses; where Hoskyns describes himself as a 'gymnosophist'. In a footnote he says that the word is made up of two Greek words, in the same way that Carroll's so-called portmanteau words are made up of different words all melded together to create a new one. I argue; how can we call this nonsense? Are not many words we use day to day formed in this way? Much of our language is stolen, poached from other cultures and so who is to say that 'slithy' is a nonsense word but 'hysterical' is not? If nonsense verse is its own structure with its own set of rules, then 'slithy' exists in that structure not as a nonsense word, but as a perfectly valid, if you like, portmanteau word.
Another thing which portmanteau words achieve is a certain amount of ambiguity. Let us take, as an example, the word 'frumious' from Jabberwocky. Humpty Dumpty states that this word is a perfect balance between 'fuming' and 'furious', yet say it yourself, and without having to think about it a multitude of possibilities come into your head. It is this ability of the words to open up endless possibilities that makes them so understandable despite, of course, being considered nonsense. And because the train of thought which leads to the formation of portmanteau words is so entirely logical - well, it's not nonsense at all. Is it?
This view of the nonsense poem as its own system is sometimes rather self defeating. Surely if we treat nonsense in this way, there can be only one aim - to find meaning or to explain. But as Michael Holquist points out in his essay What is a Boojum? the purpose of rhyme is to align the two rhyming words together and create an association which produces meaning. However, if we take nonsense as a system which has no meaning, there can be no meaning in rhyme. This seems to be a valid point but I would argue that the creation of meaning is not the sole purpose of rhyme, and that nonsense poetry, like any other genre, is still subject to the same examination in terms of rhyme and metre. Internal rhyme, for instance, plays a large role in much nonsense verse. In W.S. Gilbert's Sing for the Garish Eye there is assonance in 'bratticed/wracker' and 'braddled/sapster' which makes the reader say the poem loudly, and with confidence, which only serves to make it more absurd since its contents are nonsense. Spike Milligan's ever popular On the Ning Nang Nong depends on its rhyme; without it the poem would seem like gibberish. It is interesting here that the words we do not recognise are onomatopoeic; according to Saussure, this is the only instance where language is not apart from the word and its meaning is very clear, rather than arbitrary. Could we then say that, according to Saussure, these 'nonsensical' onomatopoeic words ('ning', 'nang', 'nong', 'bong') are in fact the only words in our language which actually make sense?
It is beginning to seem that nonsense verse has brought us into the realm of philosophy, and indeed it appears that sometimes the lines do blur. Morgenstern's poem Philosophy is Born makes an interesting point. Morgenstern is satirising his contemporaries' complete faith in language as their medium and it is not until the last line that the poem slips into nonsense, or philosophy. However, we must always remember that nonsense is there to be enjoyed. The pulling apart of nonsense to discover its structures may serve us to understand it better, but no greater enjoyment can be taken from nonsense verse than that which comes from simply reading it. As Lear himself said, his aim was 'nonsense, pure and absolute'.