In 1945 Europe lay exhausted after six years of warfare. Physical ruin was combined with the collapse of coherent political and economic structures. Churchill described the region as 'a scrap heap, a mortuary, a breeding ground for scourges and hatred'. With the German army all but defeated, the Allies met at Yalta in February 1945 in order to restore stability and ensure recovery. The emergence of the Cold War however meant Europe's security for the second half of the twentieth Century was anything but guaranteed. Before we can begin to establish to what extent Europe was 'secure' in this era, it is necessary to establish the context within which the new Europe would be shaped. It is also necessary to define what is meant when one refers to the 'Cold War' and to establish a coherent definition of 'security' for the latter in particular remains a concept subject to various interpretations. It is necessary to examine the policies of Containment and Stalin's expansion in any assessment of the security of Europe in this era. It can be argued that the victor's division of Germany did more to threaten European security than ensure it. The emergence of international organizations and military alliances can be interpreted as means through which world leaders sought to establish European security. Catudal argues that the doctrine of deterrence, which fuelled the nuclear arms race, did little to contribute to the security of Europe. Protest activity within Eastern Europe must also be highlighted as it contributed to political insecurity within the region. Thus it seems that despite the absence of direct military conflict, hostile relations between the US and the Soviet Union meant Europe's security was anything but assured in this period.
The Cold War was the open yet restricted rivalry that developed after the Second World War between the US and the Soviet Union. The struggle has been labeled the Cold War because of the absence of direct superpower conflict. What was to develop instead was a conflict of ideologies, involving the appliance of economic pressures and propaganda, fought through proxy wars throughout the world. The context within which post-war Europe emerged must be given some consideration. Europe was now a very different continent to that of 1939. Aside from the sheer economic devastation and human casualties, the most significant point for our discussion is that 'the legacy of the war had left the Continent, and with it Germany, divided in two'. In an unprecedented development, West and Eastern Europe would evolve into two separate political entities and become a battleground for US-Soviet relations. Thus in our discussion of European security it is important to emphasize to which side of the 'Iron Curtain', as Churchill imaginatively described the division, we are referring. The post-war security system which would be sought was for a new Europe, with a new set of political and economic relations, and was to involve different protagonists and institutional arrangements.
The concept of security in international relations has been subject to much academic debate. Baylis argues that there does exist a consensus that security implies freedom from threats to core values but there is major disagreement over whether the focus should be on 'individual', 'national' or 'international' security. During the Cold War, security was largely referred to in a national and military sense. This view arose out of realist assumptions which perceive the international system as anarchic, given the absence of a central authority. Drawing on theoretical perspectives of Hobbes, Machiavelli and Rousseau, Realist doctrines perceive states to be the primary actors on the international scene and given the absence of trust between states, survival is considered the most basic driving force of state behavior. An analysis of how 'secure' Europe was in this era must therefore assess the extent to which Europe felt secure militarily. However as Buzan has argued, this idea of security is criticized as ethnocentric and 'underdeveloped'. Ullman states 'defining security merely in military terms conveys a profoundly false image of reality'. Buzan argues security includes political economic, societal, environmental as well as military aspects defined in broader international terms. Thus civil unrest within Eastern Europe and economic circumstances must be considered. It should be noted that our concern lies not with the national security of individual states but with the overall structure of Europe.
The initial policies of both the Superpowers were to have a profound effect on the security of post-war Europe. Into the power vacuum which emerged stepped the US and the Soviet Union who would become the decisive arbiters within Europe. Stalin's post-war expansion combined with the US policy of Containment ensured the division of Europe, a division which would become a symbol of hostility and tension and install feelings of insecurity throughout the continent during the Cold War. Kuniholm argues Stalin's expansion within Eastern Europe originated primarily out of defensive concerns. The Soviets had suffered far greater causalities and destruction than the Western allies. Some 20 million Russians had been killed whilst vast amounts of industry were destroyed. However it remains difficult to justify the coercive and intimidating methods with which Communist regimes were enforced. In 1945 Stalin was willing to accept coalition governments in Eastern Europe but was to intensify his campaigns. By 1947 much of Eastern Europe was modeled on the Soviet state. Poland witnessed rigged elections whilst Bulgaria and Romania were the subject of particularly coercive campaigns. The Communist parties, directed under the Cominform, went about purging opposition members and in August 1947 Bulgaria's opposition leader was hung. In other countries key opposition figures were either killed or imprisoned. Churchill commented in his famous Iron Curtain speech that 'whatever conclusions may be drawn from these facts - this is certainly not the Liberated Europe we fought to build. Nor is it one which contains the essentials of permanent peace'. Thus implicit in Churchill's justified remarks was that Stalin's actions did not encourage a sense of security within post-war Europe.
Let us now turn to assess the implications of American foreign policy on the security of Europe. Following British warnings in February 1947 that they could no longer support government forces in Greece resisting Communist opposition, America took action upon its wish not to see Europe fall under the domination of any one power. The policy of Containment was founded upon the views set out in George Kennan's Long Telegram published in 1946. Kennan set out what he believed to be the motivations behind Soviet expansion and his recommendations for US policy. 'There can be no permanent modus vivendi' with the Soviet Union wrote Kennan; the US must pursue 'long-term, patient but firm and vigilant containment of Russian expansive tendencies'. The announcement of the Truman Doctrine in March 1947 made it US policy 'to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures'. The subsequent Marshall Plan announced in June, pledged $13.2 billion in aid to European countries willing to open their markets to US trade and investment. What Churchill labeled 'the most unselfish act in history' was rejected by the Soviets as 'dollar imperialism'. Booth argues that when states believe they are behaving reasonably, as in preparing to defend legitimate interests, few have the imagination to appreciate how dangerous their actions may appear. This common ethnocentric bias, he argues, meant 'there was a general failure to understand the other's hopes and fears'. Whilst Marshall Aid did enhance economic security within those European countries who accepted assistance (industrial production rose by an average 35% above pre-war levels), grand American rhetoric fuelled hostile relations with the Soviets. The implications for Europe were entrenched division and an international atmosphere of mistrust and suspicion. Nowhere was this more evident and concentrated than in Germany.
At Yalta, Britain, America and the Soviet Union agreed upon the division of Germany; a division which would come to symbolize hostility and be the cause of much military and societal insecurity within Europe. The future of Germany loomed large in the minds of other European states given that she had occupied much of the continent three times in seventeen years. It was 'the struggle over Germany which shaped the character of the two alliance systems' writes Hyde-Price. Germany was to be the site of the first 'hotspot' in the Cold War when in June 1948 Stalin cut off road, rail and canal links into West Berlin. The capital lay deep inside the Soviet occupied zone but had been similarly divided at Yalta. The result was a huge Western effort to supply the population of West Berlin by airlift. Stalin conceded defeat in May 1949 and so ended the first major point of tension in the Cold War - the tactics were designed not to kill but to threaten and thus this incident, at the heart of Europe, set the pattern for how future hostility would be expressed. Berlin would continue to be a cause of military and societal insecurity within Europe throughout the Cold War. West Berlin existed as an island of capitalist prosperity within a depressed East German economy. This eventually led to the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 as the Soviets sought to halt the flood of skilled refugees crossing from East to West Berlin. The wall not only prompted a tense superpower military stand off with regards to Allied access to Berlin, but also contributed to feelings of societal insecurity given that it physically divided friends and families. Security within Germany was however enhanced during the period of Dtente in the 1970s. Under Chancellor Brandt, West Germany pursued the policy of 'Ostpolitik' which involved an acceptance of the East German borders and increased trade. Brandt spoke of 'two states but one nation' and sought a 'European peace order' through Dtente. Unresolved border disputes with Poland were settled whilst both states became members of the UN. In 1969 Brandt signed the Non-Proliferation Nuclear Treaty and a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union. Such diplomacy led to increased feelings of military security within Germany and within Europe in general. France and Romania sought a restoration of amicable relations whilst in 1963 the Elysee Treaty between France and FRG symbolized a new spirit of friendship between these two long-term enemies. The Helsinki Accords of 1975 enshrined the principle of inviolability of frontiers in Europe thus further enhancing feelings of military security. Let us now turn to assess how institutional arrangements within Europe sought to establish security during the Cold War.
The post-war context gave way to unprecedented efforts to ensure military and economic security through institutional institutions. Nugent argues there was a 'widely shared optimism' that the creation of organizations could break down mistrust and enhance feelings of security. The UN's foundations were laid at Yalta whilst in 1949, ten Western European states signed the North-Atlantic Treaty Organization with the US and Canada. Article 5 states that 'an armed attack against one or more of them in Europe or North America shall be considered an attack against them all'. Mason argues NATO 'threw a nuclear cloak over the US's half of Europe enabling recovery and resistance to Communism'. The Soviet's response was the formation of the Warsaw Pact in 1955 between the states of Eastern Europe coordinating any future military action. Whilst both developments further entrenched European division they did encourage a sense of military security for both spheres. Meanwhile the creation of the FRG and GDR in 1949, despite perhaps proving unsatisfactory for German citizens, also helped stabilize Europe. Hyde Price argues these developments 'gave the post-war order a growing sense of stability and predictability'. A sense of economic security within Europe was also enhanced through the establishment of the IMF, which aimed to alleviate currency instability in countries suffering economic difficulties, whilst the World Bank provided long-term loans for schemes that required substantial investment. In April 1948 the OEEC was established to manage US aid and coordinate the economic policies of European states. The Soviet's formation of the Cominform in 1947 enhanced Soviet control in Eastern Europe whilst the establishment of Comecon in 1949 prompted coordination between the economies of Eastern Europe. Institutional arrangements and economic cooperation did help to achieve greater feelings of military and economic security within Europe. It can be argued however that such feelings were undermined by the impact of the arms race throughout the Cold War.
Despite the absence of direct US-Soviet conflict, what continued to give the Cold War its potentially destructive edge was the substantial build up of nuclear arsenals of both superpowers. Khrushchev referred to the possibility of 'the most destructive war in history' if 'peaceful coexistence' was not maintained. Reagan later argued that 'nuclear war cannot be won and must not be fought'. Why then did the superpowers (and to a lesser extern Britain and France) proceed in an unprecedented build up of arms and what were its effects on feelings of security within Europe? Deterrence theory was the driving force for the build up of nuclear capability. Catudal writes 'Deterrence refers to the policy of preventing or discouraging an action by confronting an opponent with risks he is unwilling to run'. Whilst the avoidance of nuclear war has for some proved the effectiveness of deterrence, its critics argue the policy is fraught with dangers which continuously threatened the security of Europe. Jervis's 'security dilemma' serves to highlight how actions a state may believe to be defensive e.g. the acquirement of nuclear weaponry, may be interpreted as aggressive by the enemy. The Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962 provided a chilling example of the crises and subsequent dangers nuclear weapons can cause. Catudal argues that the primary reliance on nuclear deterrence made it very difficult for policy makers to consider alternative approaches. He concludes nuclear deterrence served as a 'convenient rationalization for the development of weapons made available by military technology' and that 'there is little evidence to show that it actually works in practice'. The superpower's nuclear weapons threatened the military security of Europe simply because of the global nature of their effects if used. In 1955 strategically placed American nuclear weapons in West Germany ensured Europe would be at the heart of any potential nuclear war. If we are to adhere to Buzan's notion of security one can also argue that the arms race led to feelings of societal and environmental insecurity within Europe. The CND movement organized its first protest in 1958 in response to growing fears of nuclear war and growing concerns for the environmental damage caused by atmospheric tests. The movement reached its peak in the early 1960s in response to the crisis at Cuba. Thus despite some confidence in the doctrine of deterrence, the destructive potential of nuclear weapons served as an ever present source for feelings of insecurity in Europe.
Political instability within Eastern Europe must also be highlighted as it serves as evidence of societal insecurity during the Cold War. Given that much Communist control over this region was enforced with Soviet assistance it was perhaps inevitable that opposition movements would surface. The Hungarian uprising of 1956 resulted in the deaths of some 50,000 Hungarian rebels and 7,000 Soviet troops. Thousands more were wounded, and nearly a quarter of a million left the country as refugees. Again in 1968 Warsaw Pact forces invaded Czechoslovakia to put an end to the political liberalization and reform which has occurred under Dubcek. Such political instability illustrated insecurity within Europe which could only be silenced by brutal Soviet force.
Thus it seems that there is much evidence to suggest Europe was far from 'secure' during the Cold War. Whilst institutional arrangements did go some way to stabilizing the superpower's spheres of influence economically and militarily, the post-war foreign policies of the superpowers charged with aggressive rhetoric, the threat of nuclear weapons and political instability ensured a situation in which European security was often in doubt. Whilst some of the greatest achievements of Dtente were seen within Europe, this era was essentially temporary because, as Hyde Price argues, 'there was no consensus on what dtente meant, or what codes of conduct it involved'. To label the Cold War as the 'long peace', as commentators such as John Lewis Gaddis and Mearsheimer do, is to adopt to an overly narrow definition security which places an excessive emphasis on military security and neglects its societal, economic and environmental aspects. In addition the 'the long peace' perspective advances benefits of the nuclear deterrence theory which remain highly questionable. Europe is now certainly more secure now the Cold War is over.