12 th March 2006
Ms G. Bongey,
The Barn,
Truscot,
Cricklade,
Gloucestershire,
SN17 4PL.
Dear Ms Bongey,
I am glad that you found our meeting useful. I feel it is an important meeting for first time authors.However, I'm sorry we did not have time to address all your queries, but I hope this letter will clear up any points.
We have asked you to provide your manuscript on Microsoft Word, as many authors have this program, and the text can be easily imported into InDesign, a program that enables the designer to combine pictures and text, and arrange them on the page in the required format. We then send the file to our printers who then print out the work on the file, in this case, the pages for your book.
Although Microsoft Word will automatically check spelling and grammar, a copy-editor is still necessary. Firstly, they read the manuscript, and check that the work, both text and illustrations, are clear. They also check that the text is consistent, for instance capitalisation, but also that it is in keeping with the house style, which is the style that is applied to all books produced by The Radcot Press. Our copy-editor will also deal with preliminary pages, that authors are not expected to deal with. They will look for terms that may be unknown to your readers, and will check that there are no errors, such as repetition or omissions. In addition to this, the copy-editor marks up your work, indicating parts of your work that might need a specific design, for instance, underlined headings. Therefore the copy-editor is essential in order to ensure your work is of the highest standard.
The picture researcher also plays a vital role in the process of publishing your book to a high standard. The picture researcher will take your photographs, and adapt them to make them look their best. They will also ascertain whether the photograph quality is high enough. Also, as you may not provide enough photographs, the picture researcher will collect photographs with relevant editorial content, reflecting the text. Picture researchers also estimate the cost of the images.
The copy-editor and picture researcher will ensure that the manuscript provided is perfect before it goes to print. They are there to make sure that your book is perfect, so don't worry. However, you will be sent a final proof copy, so you may make minor corrections.
The ideal paper for your book, as mentioned in our previous meeting, would be a coated paper called Kaolin. Kaolin is paper coated in china clay, usually on both sides, creating a bright white finish. This provides a higher quality for high colour images, as it is ideal for high ink density, and due to its low absorbency, the ink will not bleed. Therefore it provides brighter, sharper images than uncoated paper, so it is the ideal choice to make your images look their best. The Telegraph has a short life, therefore the paper quality only needs to be sufficient to last for one day. As we certainly want your book to last much longer than this, it will be printed on high quality paper.
After the sheets of paper have been printed, they will be folded into sections. These sections are the collated and bound together. Low quality paperbacks, such as the tatty ones mentioned in your letter, will be perfect bound, where the spine sections are cut off, and then they are glued to the casing, or cover. Slotted or burst binding consists of making perforations down the spine section when folding the sheets. Then, adhesive is inserted into these sections, which makes the binding much more durable. However, as your book is a high quality paperback, printed on coated paper, your book will be section sewn, as are all our high quality paperbacks printed on coated paper, and of course, our hardbacks. Section sewn binding consists of trimming three sides of the sections, leaving the spine section in tact. The sections are then sewn together and glued to the casing, with any preliminary or end pages glued to the front and back sections. This will ensure that your book will last for years.
In regards to your query about the timing of the production of your book, I have provided a rough schedule; however, this is subject to change. Firstly, our content editor will review your manuscript when it is sent in, hopefully in mid-July. He will work with you, in order to fine tune any of your work at this stage, and request changes. The length of this process will vary, depending on whether substantial amounts of your work will need to be changed. Following this, your manuscript will then go to the copy-editor, who will edit your work, as explained above. This will then be checked by a proof reader. We will then send you a final proof copy. You may make corrections, and return the proof copy, but unfortunately a charge will be made if there are substantial additions or corrections. After this, the cover is designed, and the text and images are laid out in the final format. The designer will then check the work, to make sure there are no design inconsistencies. When all pages have been checked and approved, they will then be sent to the printer. The printing and binding will take about four weeks. Copies of your book will then be distributed across the UK, a month before the publication date. This will ensure your book is available in all areas at the time of the Chelsea Flower Show. In addition to this consideration, it is necessary to allow for enough time for the books to be unpacked, checked and booked into the warehouse, which can be a lengthy process. Therefore, we leave enough time for this necessary process, in order to avoid any unexpected delays.
The whole process should take about 9 months, so your book will be finished late April, and distributed in time for the Chelsea Flower Show. You will mainly be involved in the initial process, with the final proof being sent to you hopefully some time in November.
If you provide an 80,000 word manuscript, with the specified number of illustrations that will be integrated within the text, we will produce a 320 page book. It will not be necessary for you to send us additional material if your manuscript falls slightly short of the 80,000 words, as editing the typographical design, by increasing the spaces between the lines for instance, it is easy to create additional page material if necessary.
At The Radcot Press, we do not offer our authors royalties based on the recommended retail price, which is becoming the standard practice within the publishing industry. This is due to Net Book Agreement being abolished. The NBA stated that booksellers could not sell books for less that the publisher's price. However, as this no longer applies, we have adapted royalties accordingly. Therefore we now offer a percentage of net receipts. This does not affect our authors' financial situation dramatically, as we would have offered a lower percentage of the recommended retail price, than the 17.5% we offer from the net receipts.
As a new author, it is rare that co-editions are produced. We have no co-editions planned, but we may sell the translation rights at a later date, depending on the success of your book in the UK. We have also decided not to do any English co-editions, as gardening is not as prevalent in other English speaking countries at present.
With regards to promoting your book, we have a suitable budget with which we will ensure your book is as successful as possible. Firstly, we include all our books in our catalogue, published half-yearly. The publishing date is ideal, as it coincides with the Chelsea Flower show, which will inevitably boost sales, especially as we intend to make copies available for sale at the Chelsea Flower Show itself. Secondly, we will be placing advertisements in gardening magazines, closer to the date of publication. We have chosen magazines as the main outlet for advertising, as magazines provide the most effective form of advertising. In addition to this, if you are willing, we will organise book signings and talks by yourself, in your home town of Cricklade, but also in the area of the Chelsea Flower Show, preferably during the dates of the show. I am certain that if we promote the book in these ways, we will maximise sales. The title is also a very important aspect to consider, with regards to promotion. The most successful book titles within the gardening sector are clear, and reflect the content of your book. I think it is best to provide us with a manuscript, and once we have a clearer idea of the content, I am certain we will be able to make some suitable suggestions.
If you have any more questions regarding any aspect of the publishing process regarding your book, do not hesitate to contact me,
Yours sincerely,
Hilary Hawkins,
Managing Editor