The four main bookshops in Oxford have all managed to stay in business, although in close proximity to one another, as they all have very focused target clientele, whilst also trying to appeal to the general public. Also, they may generate revenue from selling goods other than books.
This report examines the retail practices of the four main bookshops in Oxford, taking into account the location, the internal layout, the items sold, the range of books, and the general atmosphere of Blackwell's, Borders, Waterstone's and WH Smith. The information used in the report was gathered by visiting the bookshops individually, and recording information on key areas necessary for the report. The findings were then analysed, and each bookshop compared with one another.
Blackwell's is located on Broad Street, which may seem like an odd location at first. However, it is next to parts of Oxford University, which is ideal for academics. Also, the location is perfect for attracting tourists, as there is a tour bus stop, and Oxford University is a popular tourist attraction. Therefore, Blackwell's have made use of its prestigious history in order to make Blackwell's more appealing to tourists, for instance, advertising the fact that it has a "record breaking 3 miles of books".
The layout of Blackwell's is rather confusing, with many twists and turns. All the academic works are in the Norrington Room. They are spread out over many levels, with many high bookcases. This creates a certain style, and atmosphere which would appeal to academic clientele. This is a theme which spreads throughout the store, but to a lesser extent. The children's section has been given a cosy feel, and prominently displays the recommended books, with a few special offers. The general fiction section has a good range of books, but not as extensive as it's academic section. In order to appeal to general customers, there are many special offers. These include recommended "Books of the Month", signed copies of texts, advertisement of prize winning and short listed books, which are all needed to encourage sales in Blackwell's weaker area of general fiction. There are also "Oxford texts" which is another way in which they use tourism to their advantage.
WH Smith, in contrast to Blackwell's, has a less focused target market. It is on Cornmarket Street, which, as the main shopping street, is ideal for attracting customers.
As WH Smith is not just a bookshop, and focuses on a wide variety of areas, for example, stationary, the book department seems somewhat small and insignificant. The range of books is limited, although they do stock some non-fiction books. The fiction section is comprised of best sellers, and certain genres, including science fiction and crime. However, the range of books is limited, as WH Smith stock a relatively small number of books. There is also a children's section with fiction for ages 5-8, 8-12 and teenage years. There is also a good range of educational texts, from primary school level to A level.
WH Smith targets the occasional buyer, using offers such as "buy one get one half price" and advertising the Richard and Judy Book Club books. They also advertise a "Book of the Week" and a "New in Paperback" which is half price. All these offers are used to entice the browser who may not have been in WH Smith for books. They also recommend certain books and have money off some titles, which saves time for busy browsers, and appeals to people who are not used to buying books.
The general atmosphere inside the book department of WH Smith is generally poor. The lights are bright, and the bookcases suitable as the wall bookcases are high which is practical and makes use of space, and the central bookcases are lower down, which is beneficial as it feels more spacious. The bookcases in the children's department are also lower down, but are not necessarily designed with children in mind. This may be due to the fact that the books are displayed with parents in mind, highlighting books that parents might feel are suitable for their children. However, despite these positive points, it must be noted that the dcor is worn out, and unclean, which is not appealing to customers.
Waterstone's, just 30 seconds down the road from WH Smith, is in a fantastic location, being situated on the main road, and on a cross road, with entrances on Cornmarket Street and Broad Street. This means that Waterstone's would have more passers-by with two entrances, and in turn would encourage more custom.
Waterstone's sells predominantly books, however it does sell notepads in addition to wrapping paper and cards. This is promoting books as gifts. There is also a coffee shop, a Costa Coffee chain. This allows customers to sit and read their purchases, or books they are considering buying. This creates a more relaxed atmosphere and also attracts the buyer who treats reading as a leisure activity. The coffee shop may also attract a broader spectrum of customer.
The window displays the top 40 bestsellers, books on offer, and the spring collection. This is a way in which Waterstone's have tried to appeal to the customers who buy books for their holidays, and for readers who are too busy during the working week. Downstairs is the main fiction section, containing best sellers, new books, crime, and classic fiction. It also has an "Oxford Recommends" section. Therefore, like Blackwell's, this is utilising the tourism market.
The downstairs is deceptively small, which is useful as it doesn't intimidate the general shopper. However, there are two more floors and a basement. This is useful, as it enables a large number of books to be held, whilst appearing less intimidating. Also, the higher floors contain more specialised books, such as science fiction, architecture, poetry, popular science and law. This is perfect as the more experienced book buyers will feel more comfortable.
The general atmosphere of Waterstone's is on of quiet appreciation, appealing to frequent readers, but also attempting to attract occasional buyers, with offers and also book signings to bring in more customers than just the usual ones.
Borders is located on Magdalen Street, further down from Waterstone's and WH Smith, which may not be ideal as it doesn't have as many passers-by, but being located next to a local supermarket would increase it's footfall.
Borders is unique in it's retail practices, as it focuses equally on DVDs, music, books and games. This does not detract from the quality or range of the books department, but most likely increases the sales, as it brings in more customers through the doors. Also there is a Paperchase concession, and a Starbucks, which reaps the same benefits as the Waterstone's and the Blackwell's coffee shops.
The window displays a range of items, such as DVDs, as well as books, and also a book signing, and a talk from a talk from an author. It also advertises special offers such as 3 for 2, which is a device used for the same reasons as the other three bookshops.
The internal layout of Borders is remarkably different to the other three bookshops researched. It is very spacious, and each floor is big, therefore Borders only has two floors. The best sellers and new books are at the front, with crime and science fiction. The rest of the general fiction section is on the left hand side of the shop, some of which is next to Starbucks, which encourages people to read whilst having a coffee, and therefore encouraging sales. Borders also have chairs around the shop for this purpose. Although chairs were present in both Blackwell's and Waterstone's, it is evidently more successful in Borders, as they were being utilised. This is most likely sue to the relaxed atmosphere in Borders, created by the friendly staff and relaxing music, whereas the staff in the other bookshops were intimidating.
The non-fiction section is both at the back of the shop and downstairs. This is rather confusing, as there is no particular way in understanding which topics are upstairs and which are downstairs. Also downstairs is the children's section, next to games. This encourages children who go downstairs, to look at the games, to buy books, encouraging sales.
From the researched gathered, it is evident that although all four major bookshops aim to attract the tourists, the passer-by, and the occasional browser, each shop has a target group, which each chain aims to please, as once they have established a certain client base, it is best to stay focused on that group. WH Smith only aims to sell to the occasional buyers, and does not target certain groups in society. Blackwell's target group are academics, and people who still regard reading as a precious and intellectual past time, as does Waterstone's. Borders however target the more relaxed reader, and possibly people who do not normally buy books, and may be in Borders browsing in the music department. Borders may also be targeting the large number of students in Oxford, as it has an inviting atmosphere for students, and Borders did conduct a trial offering student discount, and have student discount days on a regular basis.
Therefore, as each chain target different groups of people, they have all managed to remain successful in Oxford although remarkably close to each other.