Currently there are eight crime novels in the top 20 of the Bestsellers list , which demonstrates that crime novels are very successful within the general fiction market. The crime fiction in the Bestsellers list employ many different styles, with 'Dead Run' by P.J. Tracy focusing on the thriller aspect, whereas 'The Da Vinci Code' by Dan Brown is primarily about the detective work. However, there are many titles with a degree of humour and light heartedness, such as books by Alexander McCall Smith.
My novel, 'Straight to the Heart' is aimed at men, between the ages of 25-45, and will hopefully attract a broader range of person. The title relates to the vein that runs from the wedding ring finger to the heart. This is relevant as severed ring fingers are delivered to the protagonist. However, it also relates to the common phrase "straight from the heart" indicating that the crimes committed are ones of passion. The style is appropriate for this target audience, as it is informal and has an edge of humour. It also addresses issues that the target audience will be concerned with. My novel has aspects of both thriller and detective novels, using a detective as a protagonist investigating the crime. This is similar to work by James Patterson and Ian Rankin. The thriller aspect is introduced into the novel through the actual murders. Therefore, men would be interested in both the thriller of the crimes, but could also relate to the life of the protagonist. The style and target audience is synonymous to that of Christopher Brookmyre's, and therefore will offer an alternative for fans of Brookmyre. As a woman, I will be using my first initial only, as men may be less inclined to buy a book by a female author.
I have chosen Abacus, an imprint of the Little, Brown Book Group, to publish my novel, as they have a list of impressive authors from many genres, such as Iain M. Banks and Anita Shreve. However, more relevant is Alexander McCall Smith, author of 'The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency' and Christopher Brookmyre. As my work is similar to aspects of the work of these authors, I feel that it will be suitable for their list. Abacus have published and advertised Christopher Brookmyre's novels well, and focused heavily on the locality of his books, which I feel will be a suitable technique to apply when publishing my work.
When marketing my novel, I would suggest using normal marketing strategies, such as speaking directly to bookshops, and convincing them to display my book outward facing when on the shelves. This would highlight my book within the shelf. If possible, it would be useful to persuade bookshops in my local area, Birmingham, to display my novel on the counter or in the window in a 'local authors' display. This would be suitable as my work is heavily focused on the location of Birmingham.
Another way in which my book could be advertised is to use promotional posters in bookshops and libraries. However, this could be costly if this strategy was employed on a national basis. Therefore, it may be more suitable to use posters in local bookshops and libraries, once again highlighting the importance of the location of my book.
Interviews would also be a way of marketing my book successfully, once again making use of the local interest. Appearing on local radio shows, both in Birmingham, my home, and Oxford, where I study, would create an awareness of myself and my novel,
and hopefully encouraging sales. Advertisements in the Oxford Brookes University newspaper would be a cheap and effective form of advertising, as students would be able to relate to my life as a student at Brookes, and this will generate interest within the student community.
To coincide with this, it may be suitable to conduct an author discussion at local bookshops. This would enable potential readers to learn about the background of the book, and why it was written. It will also give readers a chance to ask questions about the novel. Although a first time author, I feel this would be a popular event, as I would be a local author, and it would create the possibility for readers to explore the novel in greater depth.
Book reviews in newspapers and magazines would also be a useful marketing strategy. It would be preferable if this technique was conducted on a national scale, but this may not be possible, and may be more realistic to aim for local newspapers. In either scenario book reviews are very useful, as many people trust the views of the reviewer, and if the book has been tried and tested, people will be more willing to try it.
Finally, I feel that a great way to promote my novel would be to acquire celebrity endorsement. This may be an effective idea, using celebrities such as Lenny Henry and Jasper Carrott to recommend my book, as part of a 'local talent' campaign within Birmingham and surrounding areas.