According to Dian Hanson's "The History of Men's Magazines", men's magazines "...switched to an amusing mix of scandal, flying saucer sightings, freaks of nature and pinups." This is a theme which has continued through to today's men's magazine titles. The men's magazine industry can be split into two main categories; the "lads" magazines and the general interest magazines. The lad's magazines include content such as scantily dressed women, jokes and sex stories. The general interest magazines are more widely focused, with more carefully chosen articles on areas such as health and fashion. Many titles analogous to current titles have been brought to the market more recently, such as Zoo, launched in 2004. The majority of titles publish monthly issues, with Nuts and Zoo being the first two magazines within the sector to be released weekly.
FHM, published monthly, was previously the best selling magazine towards the end of the nineties; however, there was a slump in the lad magazine sales, sales dropping 9.6% in the first half of 1999. The use of the "funny, useful, sexy" formula is apparently one which works for the 18-30 age group, aimed at the average man, with a sport section added to keep up with other competitors. At 3.50, it is not as cheap as some, including Nuts and Zoo, and therefore is aimed at the slightly higher class of men, further up the ABC1 scale, which is reflected in the advertisements. Adverts included are for companies such as Topman, which indicates the social class FHM targets. The strapline "Quick! There's time to be wasted" is also an indication of the target audience.
Loaded, "For men who should know better", was first published in 1994, and was copied by FHM due to its success. The strapline suggests that it is trying to create an image for men who buy Loaded aiming for the man who believes that "behaving badly" makes life more fun. The strapline also indicates the coverage of the magazine, influencing content, and creating a house style. This explains why similar adverts appear in both magazines. However, the cheaper, but slightly shorter magazine, at 2.50 for approximately 190 pages, does contain less advertisement pages. This may indicate that Loaded generates more revenue on its circulation. It may even be that Loaded is circulation driven, with an increase of circulation of 5.4% in the latter part of 2005, selling 232,001.
Esquire, with a circulation of 54, 548 (July-December 2006) and a readership of 184,000 is obviously less successful than Loaded and FHM. However, as it is "For men who mean business" Esquire is aimed at upper class men, most likely from the AB sector, but maybe even the ABC1 groups. It includes intellectual articles, focused on home and professional commitments. This means that it targets a very different audience, and at 3.99 with a higher concentration of advertisements, mainly designers (c. 50 in 200), it is evident that considerable revenue is still generated.
The men's magazine industry is one with a wide variety of titles, but certain formulas obviously work well, as they have inspired other magazines. The most popular formats are the lad's magazines, but there is still a market for the middle classes.
The food and drink magazine market has increased over recent years, with the launch of Delicious in 2003 and Everyday food launched in 2004. This may be due to the increased interest in cookery programmes and celebrity chefs. This would explain, therefore, why the two most successful food and drink magazines are owned and published by the BBC.
Good Food is the UK's leading Food and drink magazine, with more recipes than any other magazine, and with a circulation of 344,434, 38.8% subscribers, and a readership of 834,000 (NRS January- June 2005). The core buyer, according to the BBC, is of the ABC1 profile, therefore from upper middle class to lower middle class, 77% of which being female. It is aimed at people passionate about food and entertainment, but also family cooks with need for practical recipes that save time and effort. However it also targets professional chefs looking for new ideas, therefore it has a broad target audience. Also, the link to television programmes and recipes featured on the BBC attracts the television audience.
Olive, also published by the BBC is the second most subscribed to food and drink magazine in the UK. It is also aimed at the ABC1 profile, aged 25-44, and with a higher price of 3.00, rather than the 2.80, it seems that Olive is aimed at a higher class of person, most likely AB class, for people who don't have much time but love stylish cooking, and food is a focal point in their lives. Due to the narrower target group, the circulation of Olive is much smaller, at 60,780 (July-December 2005) than that of Good Food, who target a broader spectrum of buyer. Olive also has a lower percentage of subscribers, just 22.6%. Despite Olive being less popular than Good Food, it is obvious that it has a loyal client base, and it provides for a certain area in the market.
Delicious was launched in the UK in November 2003. With a circulation of 102,095 (July- December 2004) it is more successful than Olive. This may be because it is aimed at a similar market to Olive, but at 2.80 people may feel it is better value. The core buyer is a modern food lover, with a high earning career. The average buyer also spends twice as much on a weekly shop than the national average. This indicates that they are aiming at the higher end of the ABC1 spectrum than Good Food. This is shown through the advertisements in Delicious, all advertising high priced, but good quality food.
It seems that the main magazines in the food and drink sector are aimed at the upper and middle classes, focusing on people who are passionate about food, and are experienced cooks. However, there are magazines aimed at beginners, for example Everyday Food that targets the "Supermarket Shopper". There are so many, in fact, that Barbara Borg, print director at OMD, expressed her opinion that "There are so many books that give recipes at a lower level, I don't know if we need another one."
The health and fitness sector has many different areas of focus, some titles focusing on exercise, others on diet. Some titles within the sector are very specific, concentrating on particular sports, while others are more wide-ranging, interested in general well being and lifestyle, including articles that are not necessarily health related. The sport magazines are not generally gender specific, whereas the general magazines tend to be designed for either men or women.
Zest is more a general health and fitness magazine, rather than narrowly focused. Its wide range of topics is reflected by the strapline "Health, diet, fitness, looks. Feel 100% confident." This is also an indication of the target market, aiming for women who want to make improvements in all areas of their life, including sexual and emotional health. According to Natmag, the circulation is 97,478, but with a readership of 255,000. The target age group is 20-40, with a median age of 36.
The sister magazine of Zest is Men's Health, which is much more successful, possibly due to the fact that many issues addressed in women's health magazines are also addressed in general women's magazines, whereas men's magazines do not have many articles regarding health and fitness. The total circulation of Men's health is 233,445, with a readership of 917,000, 150,000 being women. The median age is 31, and Men's Health is aimed at affluent, successful, well informed, target reader's being "intelligent men... (who) make the most of their physical, emotional and professional lives." Therefore it is a general magazine, addressing issues important to the middle to upper class man.
In contrast to both Zest and Men's Health, Runner's World is a more specific magazine, focusing on running and related health and fitness issues. It has a circulation of 83,527, and a readership of 317,000, 118,000 of which are women. The circulation of Runner's World is smaller than both Men's Health and Zest, due to the very specific information it contains, and it would therefore appeal to fewer people. But within the running community, it appeals to a broad spectrum of people, as it is aimed at people training for the Olympics, to beginners trying to get back in shape.
The majority of magazines in the health and fitness sector are aimed at younger generations, between the ages of 20-40. However there is a magazine aimed at older women. Health Plus is aimed at women aged 40 and over, and the strapline "Get the 40+ angle on feeling fabulous" indicates exactly the type of target audience Health Plus aims for. It deals with problems that women over 40 would experience, that would not be featured in magazines for younger women. Also, older celebrities are used on the cover, such as Jerry Hall, whereas Men's Health and Zest use non-celebrity models.
Other magazines within the sector are more focused on dieting, neglecting the exercise aspect of health and fitness. Titles such as Slimming Magazine, Weight Watchers Magazine, and Slimming World are some that have exploited the compulsive dieting trend that has taken over many women in the UK.
Political magazines range from serious political review to satire. The content ranges from British politics, to international politics. Each magazine tends to have a different political slant, depending on whether or not the house style is left-wing or right-wing. It seems that from the target groups for the main political magazines that all are aimed at the more upper class groups.
The New Statesman, founded in April 1913 and published weekly, is Britain's leading political magazine, with a readership of over 60,000 per week. It features political issues and current affairs from home and abroad. All articles included are aimed at the higher end of the ABC profile. The New Statesman describes its readers as "sophisticated, discerning and loyal" with 9 out of 10 readers attending the theatre, opera, art events or classical concerts once a month, and 66% of the readership have been reading the New Statesman for five years or more. Therefore, the New Statesman is aimed at the higher social classes, with professional prestige, and political links, 24% of its readership holding an elected position and 80% having graduated with a Bachelors degree or higher. However, it is not only magazines akin to the New Statesman that are popular within the political magazine sector. Political satire is very popular section of the political magazine market.
The Spectator, the oldest continuously published magazine in the English language, and owned by the same owners of The Daily Telegraph, has a circulation of 68,415 (NRS July-December 2005), more than 50% of the readers are subscribers. It is satirical, yet also includes serious news articles and therefore is in between the New Statesman and Private Eye. According to The Spectator "the most affluent and influential consumers in Britain read The Spectator", with 83% of the readership in the AB social group, and 99% ABC1.The Spectator, although more humorous than the New Statesman, seems target a similar audience, aiming at the professionals, often involved in politics. It would also target readers of The Daily Telegraph, writing with a Conservative bias.
Private Eye, founded in 1961, is also a satirical magazine, published fortnightly. It targets the same group in society as The Spectator and New Statesman, appealing to predominantly AB males, with high incomes. The readership of 751,000 (NRS January-June 2004), 71.9% being male, with a median age of 43. Private Eye, at a cost of 1.40 is considerably cheaper than the New Statesman, costing 2.50, which is published more often. This may be due to the fact that the general content is regarded as of higher quality, and also New Statesman might also be exploiting the affluent market it targets. The Spectator, priced at 2.75 is also using a higher price, as their target buyer would not hesitate on spending that much.
It seems that there is a big gap in the market, few magazines targeting women, or the lower classes. This is most likely because publishers feel that people in the lower classes are not interested in political issues, and therefore no demand for a political magazine aimed at this group.