The purpose of this report is to look at responding to others in general and health care terms, as well as to discuss the 'responding to others interview'. Responding to other includes all aspects of verbal and non-verbal communication as well as an understanding of ones self and other people's perceptions, including the factors that may influence these. Communication, both verbal and non-verbal, could be said to be the most important of all generic skills as it affects every social situation we encounter. Our ability to communicate well and respond to others therefore affects our professional, personal and social lives. The purpose of the 'responding to others interview' is not so much to be able to set up a good interview, as it is to understand the factors that can influence it. I hope to look at the importance of responding to others in health care and to gain a better understanding of the importance of effectively responding to and communicating with others, whether it be as a professional or in social situations.
Responding to others is perhaps never as important as it is in health and social care. Although good communication is always important, in the health and social care context you are dealing with people, their lives and things that can affect them. Whatever your profession in health and social care the people/patients you are dealing with are vulnerable, in at least they are finding themselves in a situation they don't want to be in. The purpose and importance of responding to others in health care can differ from other situations as there are different aspects that need too be considered, for example people may not be thinking or behaving as they would under normal circumstances. Communication in health and social care needs to be patient focused, and of a therapeutic nature. It is also important to build a relationship with your patients based on trust, confidence and understanding. The importance of this confidence is highlighted in Careless talk costs confidence (Nursing Times, 2001). The article explains that everything we say as professionals not only helps form impressions about us but also about the organisation we work for.
The 'others' you are responding to can include patients, patients families, colleagues from the same discipline and colleagues from the wider multi-disciplinary team. Who you are communicating with can affect how you communicate and should always be considered. It is important to treat all patients as individuals, sometimes it is all to easy to treat them as a condition or problem, by treating patients with the respect they deserve you can encourage open communication.
Responding to others includes all forms of communication. The practitioner needs to be able to observe the patient's body language as well as listening to what they say and how it is said. At the same time the practitioner needs to understand that their body language is being observed and what they say and how they say it is also receiving attention. Good communication skills are most often shown by people who pay as much attention to listing as they do to talking. By listening to a patient, watching their body language and paying attention to any 'leakage' the practitioner is in a better position to understand their patients' needs and requirements.
When responding to others, be they patients or colleagues, it is important to have the self-knowledge required to understand ones own reactions. By reflecting on our actions and responses we are able to better understand ourselves, this in turn helps us to better empathize with and understand those we are communicating with. Argyle (1994) explains that some forms of verbal and non-verbal communication are 'leaky'. By this he means that sometimes others are able to see or hear our real thought by actions we are not aware we are making, for example even if our words say something the tone of our voice may say something else. The tone of our voice can therefore by just as important as the words we use.
Patients' values, health beliefs and health behaviours can influence many aspects of their health care including the actions they take and the extent to which they are adherent (Naidoo & Wills, 2001). These values and health beliefs can be influenced by the patient's religion, culture, social standing and education as well as by things personal to them, such as previous experiences. It is not beneficial to use these values and beliefs as stereotypes such as 'all Catholics believe illness is a something sent to try them' or 'all Asian patients want the vegetarian curry on the menu', but it can be beneficial to consider that patients may find different things important to them and their care. It is always better to ask a patient what their preferences are than it is to assume you know, it is just as important to listen to their answer.
As a professional practitioner you may be dealing with information the client wouldn't normally share, Mason and Whitehead (2003) call this privileged communication. The practitioner would therefore need to respect the nature of this information and would need to consider the client's confidentiality and the Data Protection Act. Sometimes it may be necessary to use communication to persuade a patient to do or believe in something, for example a course of treatment. The impact this information has on the patient will partly be due to who gives the information, Mason and Whitehead (2003) use the example of a junior nurse verses a consultant practitioner when recommending a treatment.
Good communication skills on the part of the practitioner can hep to make a patient's stay or visit as comfortable as possible. While in hospital if a patient feels they are not being listened to this could make the already stressful time more stressful. Patients often worry about things that may not be obvious to the practitioner such as their children or finances, taking the time to get to know the patient and finding out what is worrying them can make them feel supported and understood. The ability to empathise with a patient can help communication as it shows the patient that even though you can't understand exactly how they feel you are making the effort to try and understand.
Almost everything you do in the health care setting involves responding to others. On a day-to-day basis you will be talking to, assessing and interviewing patients to collect information. You will be passing information on to or being given information from others in the multi-disciplinary team, information that is often vital to your patients care. As so much depends on the information you collect, are given and pass on it is important that the ways in which you communicate are as effective as possible. Much of what we learn about our own communication skills is learnt from our own mistakes, so even when we don't do things as well as we could it is important we learn from these mistakes and improve on them. The responding to others interview gives us the opportunity to learn from our mistakes and, hopefully our successes.
In sub sets we were asked to set up and try out an interview with responding to others in mind. The purpose of this was for us to be able to think about and improve on our own skills in responding to others and communicating in general. We could interview for a specific position in the multi-disciplinary team within health care or could interview for a new member for our sub sets study group. Working within a multi-disciplinary sub set would also encourage us to look at issues from other people's perspectives.
Our subset decided we would interview for a position within our study group. We did this because we thought we would be able to work out the personalities and qualities that would fit in with the people we already had. We hoped that by asking questions we thought would show the personality traits we required we would not only be able to hold a moderately successful interview but would also gain further insight into responding to others. We also valued the chance to work within the group hoping that it might enable us to improve on our own communication skills as well as offering an opportunity to learn from others experiences.
Before we started on the interview schedule we decided we first needed to find out what sort of person we were looking for, and to do this we first needed to find out what we had. There were many similarities within our subset including the fact that we were all mature students and all had work and life experiences we could share. It was also interesting to find out that we all preferred to work in much the same way - logically and systematically while still having fun, and that we all seemed to have the same values and qualities. There were surprisingly few differences and we all believed we would get the most out of the assignment by each making equal contributions We decided that the sort of person we were looking for needed to be flexible, have an easy going outlook (but not so relaxed nothing would get done), be organised (but not obsessively so), be a team player and a good communicator, have a sense of humour, be empathetic, enthusiastic, have a positive attitude and be good at conflict management while not being argumentative.
Once we had decided on the sort of qualities we wanted we set about researching and compiling our questions. We divided the necessary reading up between us and all had a go at writing the questions. We then decided on the questions we would use and in which order. In helping us to develop our question we used Stanton (2004) and Larson (2000) as well as our own experiences of interviewing and being interviewed. We found Stanton (2004) particularly useful as it also helped us to understand things we should avoid such as going off on tangents, the interviewer talking more than the interviewee and not making the purpose of the interview clear. We tried to use a mix of behavioural question, hypothetical questions and self-evaluating question in the hope that this may allow us to see more of the person we would be interviewing at the same time as allowing us to see how well each type of question works. We hoped that by using our interview to gain an insight into the interviewee's beliefs and values we would be able to find someone we felt would work well within our group.
As a group we spent quite a lot of time in trying to work out an appropriate seating arrangement. Most of us felt that in our experience sitting directly opposite the interviewers felt daunting and made us uncomfortable. As one of us thought that sitting next to the interviewer at an angle seemed unprofessional we decided to have three chairs in varying positions allowing the interviewee the choice. We hoped that by letting the interviewee choose they would be more comfortable hopefully helping them to give their best. We also decided that we would have two interviewers allowing the other three of us to observe, this would hopefully give us observations from different perspectives.
When it came to doing the interview we borrowed a member of another subset to interview, in the hope that we would hold a more realistic interview because they would not know what we were hoping to achieve. The two interviews opened the interview by asking how the interviewee was, how they found getting there and some brief comments about the weather. The three of us observing sat at different positions, recording our responses using a checklist adapted from Stanton (2004) and by making short notes. After the interview the interviewers thanked the interviewee for coming and told her they would be in touch. Once the interview was over we took the opportunity to ask the interviewee for feedback on the interview.
Following the interview our subset chose to discuss the interview and the feedback we were given from the interviewee. We were surprised by the success of the interview, in as much that we seemed to achieve what we set out to do. From the information we got from the interviewee we concluded that our questions and their wording were on the whole effective - we seemed to get the amount and depth of information we wanted from the different questions. The only question we felt we could improve on was question 12 which asked 'Would you say you had a positive or negative attitude to most things?' We had hoped for an answer with explanation, but the answer we got was simply 'Positive'. We may have got an explanatory answer if we had added an open probe to this question, for example 'Would you say you had a positive or negative attitude to most things? Could you give us an example?'
Most of the feedback we got from our interviewee was positive. She said she felt welcome and comfortable, felt encouraged by the interviewers responses (both verbal and non-verbal), and felt that the questions were easily interpreted. The only criticism she made was that the interviewers didn't introduce themselves. This was interesting because all three observers had ticked the box for 'Did the interviewers use an appropriate opening technique?' we only noticed this omission after it was brought to our attention. If we were to do this or any other interview in the future we would all be sure to introduce the interviewers and observers.
We spent a lot of time working out the best seating arrangement for the interview but had paid no attention to the room in which the interview was to be conducted. We held our interview in the classroom at the same time other groups were doing so. The interviewers and the observers felt distracted by the background noise - although the interviewee didn't mention it. If we were to hold an interview again this is defiantly something that should be considered, in the heath care setting the location of the interview would be crucial, especially when confidentiality is considered.
As mentioned earlier we gave the interviewee the choice of three seats at different positions to the interviewers. Our interviewee chose to sit directly opposite the interviewers, most of our subset were surprised by this, however, Argyle (1994) p 41 states that in an interview situation most people will chose to sit directly opposite the interviewer. This may be partly due to the views of one of our subset who believed that it would be seem as unprofessional to sit adjacent to the interviewers and partly due to the distances one would chose to be at with someone they did not know. I still believe that it is important to offer people the choice and would therefore aim to offer this choice in other interview situations.
Our subset chose not to elect positions instead choosing to share our work equally. This worked very well but only because we all did what we said we would. If we had different members or different types of people I am sure this would have failed. Each of us contributed equally and none of us undermined anyone, which showed professionalism and mutual respect. We all shared our strong points and at the same time supported each other's weak points, helping where we could. Every one of us had worked as part of a team before and therefore understood its importance. We all made personal contributions but have chosen to think of them as teamwork rather than individual credits.
I am sure that in the future we will all be able to work well as part of a multi-disciplinary team.
On the whole I feel that our "responding to others" interview was successful. I believe this because we got the information we required, although it would have been good to try the interview on more than one person. The interview was also a success because every one of us has learnt things from it that will hopefully help us in our everyday lives as well as our professional ones, if nothing else it has taught us to think about and reflect on our interactions with others be they friends, colleagues or patients.