An acute haemorrhage is a sudden loss of blood from a ruptured blood vessel that can occur internally or externally. The physiological changes that occur are proportionate to the degree and duration of blood lost (O'Neill, 2003).
Blood transports nutrients, oxygen and waste products around the body (Martini, 2004). Normal cellular function relies on normovolemic circulation for adequate tissue perfusion (Collins, 2000). Hypovolaemia and its associated reduced circulatory function can cause inadequate tissue perfusion resulting in ischaemia, necrosis and eventually organ failure (O'Neill, 2003).
Circulatory blood volume is calculated as approximately 7% of total body weight in kilograms. It is generally accepted that average adult males and females have 5-6L and 4-5L of blood respectively, the difference being primarily associated with average body size (Martini, 2004). This gender difference dictates that the same blood loss would leave a smaller female with proportionality less blood volume than a male, and would therefore have greater physiological consequences. These variations make it important to know the percentage of total volume depletion as well as the amount of blood lost.
The body can compensate for minor blood losses without clinical symptoms manifesting, however, a loss of more than 15% of total blood volume causes observable physiological changes (Martini, 2004). These changes include hypovolaemia, hypotension, tachycardia, hypoxia and haemorrhagic shock. Such losses require clinical interventions e.g. transfusions to restore blood volume and composition (Collins, 2000). Vasoconstriction helps elevate blood pressure by decreasing the diameter of the blood vessels thus increasing peripheral resistance. Tachycardia presents as the heart works harder to compensate for lost volume. The patient's skin and extremities may become pale, cold and clammy as blood is redirected to vital organs such as the brain and heart (Martini, 2004). Water and sodium reabsorption in the kidneys increases thus reducing urinary output and maintaining volume.
Clinically it is important to monitor the patient's blood pressure, pulse, oxygen saturation and levels of consciousness. Any decline in these observations could indicate further haemorrhage or shock. If untreated, hypovolaemia and its associated physiological changes can quickly cause mortality (Martini, 2004).
Body temperature represents the balance between heat gained and lost. Heat is generated as a by-product of normal metabolic processes. Optimum homeostatic cellular function takes place at temperatures between 36C and 37.5C (Dougherty & Lister, 2004). Any deviation from this range affects the body's ability to maintain homeostasis.
Hypothermia is an abnormal physiological condition in which a patient's core temperature is below 35C. It occurs when the body loses too much heat or when it cannot maintain its normothermic state (Kelly, 2001).
Thermoregulation relies on the activities of many systems but is coordinated by the hypothalamus, often referred to as the body's thermostat (Gould, 2002). Heat losses and gains are regulated by the heat-loss and heat-gain centres of the preoptic area of the hypothalamus respectively; both centres adjust the activities of other hypothalamic nuclei (Martini, 2004). If the preoptic nuclei detect a fall in temperature below acceptable levels the heat-gain centre is activated. Once activated it stimulates mechanisms that promote heat gain and reduce heat loss. The generation of heat is promoted by shivering thermogenesis and non-shivering thermogenesis.
Shivering thermogenesis increases skeletal muscle energy consumption by gradually increasing muscle tone to the extent that muscle contractions cause the patient to shiver (Martini, 2004). Heat is produced by the increased oxygen and energy consumption of the muscles tissues.
Nonshivering thermogenesis helps elevate temperature by stimulating the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system to trigger the release of epinephrine from the adrenal medullae. 'Epinephrine increases the rates of glycogenolysis in liver and skeletal muscle and the metabolic rate of most tissues' (Martini, 2004 p962). The resultant increase in metabolic rate increases heat production.
To conserve heat loss by radiation, convection and conduction blood flow to the dermis of the skin is reduced. Blood returning from the peripheries is also rerouted to a network of deeper, insulated veins to allow countercurrent heat exchange to take place (Martini, 2004).
Hypothalamic regulation aims to prevent conditions such as hypothermia occurring. Medical intervention is normally required to enable the hypothermic patient to restore normal temperature and homeostasis (Kelly, 2001).
The pituitary gland secretes nine hormones and is divided into anterior and posterior lobes (Martini, 2004). Any dysfunction of the pituitary can cause insufficient or excessive secretion of these hormones. Fluid balance is regulated, in part, by antidiuretic hormone (ADH) which is secreted by the pituitary's posterior lobe (Martini, 2004).
Disorders of the pituitary often result from tumours which cause compression and/or invasion of the gland. Other dysfunctions result from trauma, ischaemia, infection, degeneration, inherited and idiopathic causes (Debuse, 1998).
'The maintenance of fluid balance is necessary to preserve an effective circulatory system' (Debuse, 1998 p55). ADH is secreted in response to increased electrolyte concentrations and falling blood pressure or volume. This hormone regulates the amounts of sodium and water reabsorbed by the kidneys. Osmosis dictates that water follows sodium ions and is thus reabsorbed passively (Dubuse, 1998). Its control over reabsorption enables ADH to help maintain blood volume, pressure and osmolality by ensuring that too much water is not lost.
Over secretion of ADH, known as Syndrome of Inappropriate Anitdiuretic Hormone secretion (SIADH) causes retention of fluid without oedema (Debuse, 1998). SIAHD is characterised by hypertension, decreased plasma osmolality and hyponatraemia. Symptoms include headache, apathy, muscle weakness, mental confusion and irritability. The excess of water reduces electrolyte concentrations causing an imbalance which can lead to fits and coma (Debuse, 1998).
Failure of the pituitary to secrete adequate amounts of ADH results in Diabetes Insipidus (DI). Many cases of DI have idiopathic causes (Gould, 2002). Its clinical manifestations include polyuria with large volumes of dilute urine, constant thirst, dehydration, postural hypotension and apathy. Tachycardia may be present as cardiac output increases in an attempt to maintain normal blood pressure values. If untreated the resultant dehydration and electrolyte imbalance can be fatal.
Ultimatly the pituitary's secretion of ADH plays an important part in the regulation of fluid balance and the correct functioning of the circulatory system. Any dysfunction of the pituitary gland makes it difficult or impossible for the body to carry out its normal physiological processes.
Crohn's disease (CD) is an Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) involving chronic inflammation of the gastrointestinal system, it is characterised by periods of remission and exacerbation. Although its aetiology is unknown it is believed genetic predisposition and immunological abnormalities play a part in its origin (Gould, 2002). CD occurs mainly in the small intestine and colon but can develop in any part of the digestive tract (Martini & Welch, 2004). Individual disease progression and the resultant severity of symptoms can vary immensely.
Typically inflammation is patchy, with affected areas being separated by areas of normal tissue (Pearson, 2004). Initially inflammation occurs only in the outer mucosal layer, however, as the disease progresses it often becomes transmural. Inflamed areas can develop into shallow ulcers that merge into fissures, thickened nodules may also develop. Continual inflammation and fibrosis eventually result in a thick rigid bowel with a narrowed lumen (Gould, 2002).
The intestines play a major role in the digestion and absorption of nutrients needed by the body to maintain acceptable levels of nourishment (Martini, 2004). Crohn's disease impairs the bowels ability to process and absorb adequate nutrients from food (Gould, 2002). This is mainly because optimal absorption relies on a large surface area of intestinal villi. The physiological changes associated with CD damage or destroy these villi and in doing so decrease the surface area available for absorption. Periods of exacerbation increase bowel motility resulting in an increased frequency of bowel movements and diarrhoea, decreasing the time available for absorption (Gould, 2002). A combination of these factors put patients with Crohn's disease at increased risk of malabsorption and malnutrition. Extreme cases of CD require surgery to remove part of the bowel, further increasing the patient's chances of becoming malnourished.
Other factors put patients with Crohn's at increased risk of malnutrition. These can include social and emotional factors such as reduced appetite caused by pain or embarrassment. It is also important to note that as Crohn's is degenerative a patient's nutrition should be continually monitored and, if necessary supplemented (Pearson, 2004).
Healing involves a series of physiological processes including haemostasis, inflammation and regeneration. Optimum conditions for wound healing can be achieved by promoting factors that encourage healing as well as minimising factors inhibiting it. (Dougherty & Lister, 2004). Ideally wound assessment should be holistic, including systemic and local, as well as intrinsic and extrinsic factors (Collier, 2003). Many factors influence the rate at which wounds heal. Amoung others these factors include the aetiology and location of the wound, the patients general health, circulation, nutrition, and resistance to infection. While these factors in isolation can improve or impede healing they are often interrelated (Westaby, 1985).
Locally a microenvironment conducive to healing plays an important role in determining the healing rate of tissue. Effiecient healing requires adequate microcirculation, oxygen tension and humidity. Moist environments promote collagen synthesis, capillary formation and epithelialization which are crucial elements of the healing process (Dougherty & Lister, 2004). However, an over moist microenvironment can result in excoriation and maceration thus prolonging the healing time (Collier, 2003).
Cellular growth, maintenance and repair cannot occur without the nutrients and energy supplied by dietary intake. A sufficient nutritional status is therefore essential to the healing process. Specifically an inadequate protein, zinc and vitamin A and C intake can slow or halt the process of healing. As nutritional requirements vary with age, activity and severity of illness a nutritional assessment can be a fundamental aspect of holistic wound healing (Cartwright, 2002).
Systemic diseases can hinder the progress of healing. Conditions such as diabetes have complications that deprive damaged tissues of essential nutrients. Diabetes mellitus inhibits normal healing in several ways. For example patients with diabetes often have a degree of vascular disease. The increased thickness and rigidity of the capillary endothelium restricts blood flow to the damaged area thus limiting the amounts of oxygen and nutrients available for repair. Diabetic patients are also predisposed to bacterial infection as bacteria thrive in environments with elevated concentrations of glucose. (King, 2001).
Healing processes are both complex and systemic. Restoration of normal cellular function is therefore dependent on adequate supplies of nutrients and energy.
Postural or orthostatic hypotension is defined as abnormally low blood pressure that occurs when an individual stands. As you stand blood is driven away from key organs, such as the brain, to the lower extremities by the force of gravity. This action causes a decline in blood pressure and perfusion to superior organs. Usually the body compensates immediately by increasing systemic vascular resistance (SVR), therefore restoring acceptable blood pressure values. (Woodrow, 1998). Prolonged periods of inadequate blood pressure and perfusion to the brain can cause dizziness and syncope (Jevon, 2001).
Woodrow (1998 p528) describes physiological ageing as 'the decline of the body's physical systems'. Intrinsic physiological changes that predispose an older person to postural hypotension generally involve the degeneration of the cardiovascular system. To maintain homeostasis the cardiovascular system must undergo constant adjustment however, its ability to adjust adequately and immediately is reduced with age (Martini, 2004).
Blood pressure is controlled by the autonomic nervous system and baroreceptor reflexes which are regulated by a negative feedback loop. As you stand baroreceptors, located in the walls of blood vessels, detect the reduction in blood pressure stimulating the arterioles to constrict via the sympathetic nervous system. This constriction increases vascular resistance and in doing so raises blood pressure.
The physiological process of aging causes gradual calcification of the smooth muscle of the arterioles which reduces elasticity causing stenosis (Martini, 2004). In addition fatty plaques and collagen may begin to build up on the inner vessel walls attracting localised clots thus narrowing the lumen and restricting blood flow (Woodrow, 1998). The combination of increased rigidity and narrowing of blood vessels reduces their capacity to constrict and dilate in response to stimuli and in doing so prolongs the time taken to regain homoeostasis.
The physiological affects of aging vary among individuals and do not necessarily reflect chronologic age. Postural hypotension can become problematic with age due to the older persons reduction in residual capacity. Vascular degeneration associated with ageing delays but does not prevent the maintenance of blood pressure. (Gould, 2002).
Hyponatraemia is defined as a below normal concentration of sodium (Na+) in the blood. The normal concentration range for serum sodium is 135-145mmol/L, hyponatraemia occurs when concentrations fall to 135mmol/L or below (). Variations in extracellular compartment sodium content do not normally affect sodium concentration as water gains and losses are adjusted to maintain constant concentrations however, changes in the sodium concentration directly affect osmolarity (Martini, 2004).
Direct sodium loss or increased water in the extracellular compartment cause hyponatraemia (Gould, 2002). Dilutional hyponatraemia results from excessive water intake or water retention whereas solute reduction is often linked to losses caused by diarrhoea and vomiting or profuse hyperhidrosis ( 25/04/2005). Laboratory testing is used to confirm diagnosis as the clinical symptoms of hyponatraemia are often vague and non-specific (). Symptoms include headache, dizziness, syncope, confusion, lethargy, fatigue, nausea and vomiting, abdominal cramps, convulsions and coma (Alexander et al, 2000).
A reduction in sodium concentration in the extracellular compartment results in a lowered osmotic pressure, allowing water to escape from the blood stream into the interstitial fluid (ISF) . Cellular osmotic pressure is comparatively greater than that of the ISF allowing water to flow through cell membranes. The consequent fall in circulatory volume results in hypovolaemia and hypotension often manifesting in dizziness and syncope (Gould, 2000). Fluid shift also contributes to symptoms such as headache, lassitude, convulsions and coma. As a consequence of increased intracellular volume cells swell and become oedematous. As the brain is encapsulated cerebral oedema causes tissue compression which inhibits neurological function (Casey, 2004).
Sodium is also a vital contributor to nerve impulse conduction and muscle contractions (Martini, 2004). Sodium ions in the ECF generate action potential by flowing into and depolarizing neurons via the sodium-potassium pump (Gould, 2002). Rates of sodium-potassium exchange are controlled by ECF sodium concentrations therefore hyponatraemia reduces the rate of exchange interrupting normal neuron function.
Electrolyte balance is necessary to maintain Homeostasis but can only be achieved when electrolyte gains and losses are equal. Total electrolyte concentration directly affects fluid balance and individual imbalances can affect specific cellular functions (Martini, 2004).