Multidisciplinary teamwork is increasingly important in health and social care (Boaden & Leaviss, 2000) and, consequently, it is increasingly important for students in this area to develop teamwork skills and learn to work in flexible ways. All nurses need to be able to work as part of a team (Hogson & Simpson, 2003). For the partnerships in practice module we had to collectively analyse, and write a group essay, on a case study and this is my reflection on that process. To enable me to discuss my experience of working in this group I have used Tuckman's (1965) 'stages of group development' to guide my essay. I will also refer to the team roles of Belbin (2005) as I feel these too are of relevance. I will discuss my own perceptions, thoughts and feelings, and at the same time integrate some of the published literature in relation to teamwork. Pseudonyms have been used when referring to team members to maintain anonymity.
Our subset/team was pre-selected consisting of 7 members studying in different disciplines. It included 2 occupational therapists - Jane and Lucy, 1 children's nurse - Ben, 1 social worker - Will, and 3 adult nurses (at different stages in their training and from different campuses) - Ed, Paul and me. Apart from me and Will the group didn't know each other. Our task was to collectively study, research and analyse a case study relating to the issues of diversity and social exclusion affecting a group of housemates with mental health problems in order to write a joint essay. To achieve this we had to work together in person and communicate via an internet based discussion area - WebCT.
Tuckman proposed 4 stages of team development in his article Developmental sequence in small groups (1965). His stages relate to both interpersonal and task behaviours and are based on the contention that all groups must address themselves to the successful completion of a task (Tuckman, 1965). I have chosen to base my work round these stages as it reflects the progression I experienced in our group, I have worked in many groups but none have 'fitted' this model as well as this group did.
Initially I was daunted by and not overly enthusiastic about, the task so, in hindsight, didn't approach it with a positive attitude, for example I thought that it would be impossible to successfully write an essay as a group, even just the logistics of it seemed impractical. My attitude therefore contradicted the advice of Stanton (2004) who highlights the need of all group members to approach the task and team with a positive attitude. I had reservations about the size of the group as I thought it was too big, I find communicating with large groups frightening and I become very self-conscious. I agree with the view of Stanton (2004) who explains that groups of between 5 and 6 members work best as they are the idea size to encourage communication while at the same time benefiting from the diversity of members. The practicalities of working with a group concerned me as we lived a long way away and most of us had very little time due to placements, which I thought would make getting together difficult.
This first stage of group development is characterised by orientation - to the task and the group, testing and dependence. Group members attempt to discover what interpersonal behaviors are acceptable and what the task requires (Tuckman, 1965). Naidoo and Wills, (2001) believe that most interactions at this stage are polite and guarded. I wasn't present at the first meeting of the group so while others were forming in week 1 I couldn't contribute until week 2. In week 1 the group decided on ground rules which I was happy to comply with as they fitted in with my own values. The rest of the group had decided that they preferred not to assign group roles so we would share responsibilities. To make things even they decided that note taking would rotate between members on a weekly basis. In week 2 we discussed the task and agreed that before the next meeting we would go away and get an understanding of the case study and what the task required, and come prepared with ideas to discuss. We would also think about how we would divide the work as we thought it would be easier to work individually to start with and combine our work later. For me this stage was about getting to know what the others expected of me and what I expected of the group.
Tuckman (1965) believes that this stage is characterised by intragroup conflict and that hostility towards each other is a means of expressing individuality and resisting group structure. He also believes that individuals react emotionally to the demands of the task at this stage. For me, week 3 was a difficult week mainly because I prefer to avoid conflict. It was clear that one of our members, Jane, was unhappy with the group's progress, she said she thought we were going round in circles. I felt she was only looking at our study through the eyes of her profession because she wasn't prepared to consider anything but what an OT could do for the case. I think I felt that she was not seeing the bigger picture and was making more work for us all. My reaction to her and the situation surprised me as I became quiet agitated and in hindsight was probably just as unaccommodating as she was. We managed to decide what areas we wanted to focus on and agreed that by the next meeting we would have considered the structure of the essay and done further research into the case.
During this stage group 'norms' are established and members accept the diversity and idiosyncrasies of others allowing the development of a cohesive unit. Team roles begin to form and new found harmony and openness allows efforts to be directed to working out how the task can be achieved (Tuckman, 1965). I was worried that the friction of the previous week would continue but was please to find that in week 3 we began to 'gel' a bit better. Prior to the meeting Jane had posted a request that we brainstorm our ideas so that we could be sure our work was not overlapping or going off the point. After doing this and seeing that we were all focusing on complimentary areas I found her much easier to work with. Will had a better understanding of the laws and policies we needed for our study and very kindly produced a handout for us all explaining some key points. I was very grateful to him for this and felt it was more than was required of him. Cottrell (2003) explains that groups are enhanced if members are supportive, encouraging and sharing, I felt that Will displayed all these qualities with this one act. We further discussed and refined our focus and agreed how we would split the work, each of us took a different topic with the exception of Lucy and Jane who chose to work together.
Lucy and Jane were first to post their work however, most of us felt it wasn't what we needed. After some deliberation I posted a message pointing out what I felt was good and what needed improving, I tried to be diplomatic and constructive but was very worried I would offend them, or that they would feel I was trying to take over. I was aware that any criticism I made needed to be phrased in a positive way and suggest improvements rather than pick fault (Cottrell, 2003) however I still found it a stressful task. I was pleasantly surprised that when Jane replied she was ok with what I said and she had written a new piece on her own that I, and others, thought was exactly what was needed. Everyone except from Paul posted their contribution as agreed. A day after the deadline I contacted him as I didn't think he would be the sort of person to miss a deadline, especially as he seemed so enthusiastic about the project. He said he didn't realise he had missed a deadline as he had not been present when it was set, I would have understood this if it wasn't for the fact that I had called him to tell him about the deadline. He did however have his contribution done for our meeting, was very apologetic and had obviously put a lot of effort into his work. Will took the lead in this meeting so that we could decide what to include and where, he then collated all the work and posted it for us to consider. By the next meeting we were all to have a go at editing the collective work so it was ready for Ben to add the introduction, conclusion and references.
At this stage the team focuses on the tasks successful completion and members take on roles that enhance task activities. As the members have learned to relate and deal with each other they are able to divert attention from the group process allowing for constructive attempts at task completion (Tuckman, 1965). In week 7 I was very frustrated to find that I was the only member of the group that had made any attempt to edit the group essay. Lucy especially irritated me, and later I discovered others, as not only had she not attempted to edit the work she had not read it as presumably she thought 'someone else would'. My frustration and my want to get the job done led to me taking a leadership role in this meeting, a role I wasn't at all comfortable with but I felt it needed to be done. I was, and to some extent still am worried that the other members of the group felt I had taken over. We worked through the essay discussing what we wanted as a group, I took notes and made the agreed amendments before posting the draft on WebCT for everyone to comment on. Even though much of what I did in my edit was to remove duplications and reduce the word count I was very conscious that by taking one persons part over another I might offend them and so found the whole task and my role in that particular meeting very uncomfortable. Before the essay was finished I spent a lot of time correcting mistakes and tweaking the structure, again I did this because no one else wanted to.
Dr Belbin (2005) defines team roles as 'a tendency to behave, contribute and interrelate with others in a particular way'. By defining these roles he aimed to describe patterns of behaviour that characterise people's behaviour in relation to others in teams. They are of value because they let individuals and teams benefit from self-knowledge, helping them adjust to the demands of different situations. Belbin described 9 roles that can be divided into 3 categories: Action-orientated roles - shaper, implementer and completer/finisher; People-orientated roles - co-ordinator, teamworkers, and resource investigators; and Cerebral roles - plant, monitor-evaluator and specialist. All roles have valuable contributions and weaknesses and successful teams incorporate them all (Belbin, 2005). Naidoo and Wills (2001) add to this as they believe effective teams appear to consist of members who undertake different but complimentary roles although they aren't usually similar in personalities or functions.
In my opinion Will filled the role of co-ordinator, Belbin (2005) describes co-ordinators as mature, confident, leaders, who clarify goals, promotes decision making and delegates well but can be manipulative. As I have already explained I found him supportive and encouraging, he also posted a lot of messages of thanks and support that were well received by all. For this task I think I took on the role of completer/finisher, which Belbin (2005) describes as conscientious, thorough and delivers on time but inclined to worry and reluctant to delegate. Levin (2005) adds to this say that completer/finishers try to prevent mistakes and omissions, search out aspects of the task that need a lot of attention, maintain urgency and finalise tasks with attention to detail. Although I filled this role it is not a role I am comfortable with and usually prefer to be a team-worker. I played a different role within this team because I felt I could help by filling a role that no one else was playing. People often show the ability to shift from the role they are more comfortable with to another if there is more need to fill another role (Levin, 2005) and people play different roles in different teams or for different task and may play multiple roles to compensate for deficiency (Naidoo & Wills, 2001). I am not trying to use Belbin's roles as labels but highlight their applicability to our team.
Although social loafing isn't one of Belbin's team roles I feel it needs mentioning. Hogson and Simpson (2003) describes social loafing as the phenomenon where some people do as little work as they can get away with. Levin (2005) says it's inevitable that some people will do more work than others and some people put less effort into group work than they would if it was individual. He also says that this is likely to make others angry and frustrated and therefore should be addressed. I feel that within our group Lucy was our social loafer. It became clear that she wrote little if any of the work her and Jane produced and as I mentioned earlier she made no effort when it came to constructing our essay. I found it very frustrating that she didn't contribute to group communications, even though we did all we could to encourage her. I found her lack of effort extremely frustrating and thought it was unfair on the rest of the group as she would benefit from the grade the rest of us achieved. In hindsight it might have been better if we confronted this issue as Levin (2005) suggests, if this situation arose in the future I would try to address it.
Stanton (2004) states that successful groups have high levels of compatibility but do not necessarily share beliefs and values, I feel that this applied to our group as we managed to work well. It's natural for groups to have problems (Cottrell, 2003). Naidoo and Wills propose that for a group to work as a team they need to progress through Tuckman's stages of development, my experience of working within our team has highlighted this to me. We had no designated leader instead letting leadership emerge and change and I think this worked very well. I have learned the relevance of Hogson and Simpson's (2003) concept of unconditional acceptance, everyone is entitled to respect even if you don't like them you should accept their behaviours and belief systems as important to them. No one is perfect but we should all aspire to be a good team member. Teamwork skills are vital for all health care professionals. An understanding of the process of group development and team roles has helped me understand our team and the part I played. On the whole our group worked well but could have been improved by more openness and discussion about issues affecting the group, such as social loafing. Working within teams encourages growth and personal development and assists in developing a better understanding of the importance of diversity (Naidoo & Wills, 2001). This experience has taught me more about the teamwork process and a lot about myself and has reinforced the benefit of the different perspectives of group members (Stanton, 2004). I have also seen that different team member roles and characteristics can affect team performance (Boaden & Leaviss, 2000).