I will be reflecting on the care provided for a patient, who I will call Mary, to assess the extent the care she received met her individual priorities. All names used are fictitious to preserve anonymity. I will be using Holm & Stephenson's (1994) model of reflection to guide my work and aid my reflection. I will also incorporate the module themes of personhood and values and assumptions which will be my main focus, although all themes will be covered to some extent as they are, I feel, interrelated. I will be discussing the assumptions of both the patient and the nurses including patient expectations versus what can be offered, patients rights to access treatment and services, quality of care in relation to patient priorities and the concept of personhood and possible barriers to its provision. I will begin with a discussion of the module themes and by explaining the situation I am reflecting on.
Personhood represents the humanness of people and the factors that people regard as most important and most challenging in their lives. It is the recognition that everyone is different and the willingness to aim to provide for people in a way that best suits them (Ford & McCormack, 2000). Person-centred care encourages a sense of self, thus recognising personhood, and 'emphasises an individual's uniqueness and freedom to choose' (Ford & McCormack, 2000 p41).
Individualised care needs to take into consideration the patient's clinical situation, personal life and decisional control over care (Suhonen et al, 2005). Dawood (2005) states that patient centred care responds to patients' needs and wishes and ensures they are treated in a dignified and supportive manner. Central to patient-centred care is getting to know patients, asking their views, offering choice wherever possible and seeking feedback (Abley, 2005). Personhood and patient-centred care have become a main focus of policy such as the National Service Framework for older people (DoH, 2001b; Clegg & Mansfield, 2005). Clegg & Mansfield (2005 p14) note that 'Making person-centred care a reality depends upon staff attitudes which are influenced by organisational culture and pressure of work'. They go on to say that in reality nurses have to prioritise care and competing demands which can be a factor in not being able to deliver patient-centred care consistently. However Dawood (2005) states that although the provision of patient-centred care is often hindered by the constraints of the health care system it is possible to provide and leads to better outcomes.
Values and assumptions affect almost everything that occurs in the health care context. As Hinchliff et al (1998) point out it is easy to assume that a patient's perceptions and priorities are the same as those of the nursing or medical staff, or the same as another person in a similar situation. To assume is to deny the chance for the patient to express their views. Building a relationship that allows open communication may encourage the patient to share their thoughts, feelings, fears and priorities, enabling the nurse to provide individualised and person-centred care based on real, rather than perceived, needs. Nursing values are often based on experience, personal beliefs and what the system permits and often fail to see the patient's perspective by seeing only their own (Fulford et al, 1996). As nurses it is important to understand the patient's experience from their perspective and be mindful of the fears, worries and concerns illness can bring. Nursing or medical priorities for the patient may be in direct conflict with the patient's own priorities while at the same time increasing patient empowerment is leading to knowledgeable consumers of healthcare with increasingly high expectations of what the system can offer (Alexander et al, 2000).
All care should be responsive to the particular needs, circumstances, and preferences of the individual and should be directed to improving the balance of power and promoting personhood. Bad care is destructive to selfhood, self-esteem and self-confidence, and undermines the person's capacity to make choices. (Brechin et al, 1998). Empowerment aids the redistribution of power between patients and professionals, at a theoretical level empowerment is concerned with maintaining the autonomy of the individual thus preserving personhood (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). All care involves interpersonal relationships that impact on people's identity, sense of self and personhood (Brechin et al, 1998). Quality care is dependent on focusing on individual needs. To achieve this all nurses need to be able to respond with flexibility. Fulford et al (1996) point out that this is often in direct conflict with the needs of the health care system and the needs of the department to run effectively and manage its services well. They also say that the structure of health care systems today puts added strain on professionals to maintain efficient running - often person-centred care is sacrificed to an extent to meet the needs of running the department. The resultant impersonal and fragmented environment can make patients feel depersonalised. Mason and Whitehead (2003) believe this resource limitation must be dealt with through a process of allocating resources in relation to the provision of a quality services, it is a utilitarian conflict of quality care verses quantity of care. They believe it is a question of ideals verses reality. As a note of caution Fulford et al (1996) point out that quality care isn't about letting the views and wishes of the patient prevail as it is not always in their best interests. The patient should be the focus of care but not at the expense of neglecting the professional's duty of care. There needs to be a balance between the patient's wishes and the professionals understanding of their needs.
Rights can be employed to emphasise the importance of individual over general values (Fulford et al, 1996). It is everyone's right to expect help and care from health professionals and to be treated with dignity and respect (Hinchliff et al, 1998). First and foremost patients are people, and this should be acknowledged with the provision of individualised care. Professionals must except that behaviour is influenced by previous experience and should therefore avoid making judgements based on their own values and assumptions (Hinchliff et al, 1998). The idea that patients, as people, have rights is central to the concept of patient-centred care. It is everyone's moral right to expect care and to be provided with what is required not just what can be offered however, this is not a legal right and is often impossible to ensure (Fulford et al, 1996). The growing consumer ideology in health care is giving patients increasing choice, rights, and opportunities to be involved in decision making regarding care (Hinchliff et al, 1998). Fulford et al (1996 p151) warn that 'An unthinking acceptance of patients' rights is dangerous, because introducing the wrong sort of rights would be as damaging to patients as continuing to ignore their rights altogether.' They also state that, unfortunately, in health care 'patient rights are more rhetoric than reality' (Fulford et al, 1996 p152).
Mary, a 61 year old lady, self-presented to A&E on two occasions, just over two weeks apart with right sided lower abdominal pain. On both occasions she was accompanied by her daughter, Sue, who was a qualified nurse.
On the first occasion Mary attended A&E because she had been experiencing abdominal pain for more than two weeks and wanted to find out if it was anything serious. She had visited her GP who had suspected a urinary tract infection, which was a recurrent issue, and prescribed antibiotics. Mary was unhappy with this so went back to her GP who prescribed analgesia and referred her for an outpatient ultrasound in 3 weeks. Mary explained to me that although the GP had referred her for the ultrasound she thought it was too long to wait and even though the pain wasn't that bad at all, Sue and she thought that if she came to A&E she could have the ultrasound there and then. Mary wanted to know what was wrong, she feared it was cancer because she had bladder cancer 3 years previously. From A&E Mary was admitted under the surgical team for investigations. A mass in Mary's appendix was detected and investigated using ultrasound and a CT scan, she was observed for 3 days and treated with intravenous antibiotics which reduced the mass, surgery was not thought necessary so Mary was discharged and a follow-up outpatient appointment was arranged in a month's time.
After discharge Mary again saw her GP as she was still worried she had cancer, she felt that by not having surgery she didn't have a definite answer. Her GP then made a direct referral to an emergency surgical unit with suspected appendicitis. Again Mary was reviewed by the surgeons but was not admitted as they were happy with their previous decision.
Still unhappy and wanting answers Mary attended A&E for a second time. She said she had done this out of desperation, Sue felt her mother had been treated badly and was angry and distressed by this. Mary explained that the pain was still the same but not bad at all, she had not taken any of the analgesia provided. An A&E doctor again examined Mary and readmitted her under the surgeons. The doctor said he admitted Mary mainly because of her, and Sue's, persistence but also because a mass had been detected previously and there was a risk this could have grown or ruptured. I have been unable to find out the outcome of this second admission.
As a student nurse on placement in A&E I was directly involved in Mary's care on both occasions. It was my first shift on placement the first time Mary attended, Rachel, my mentor, triaged her and was her named nurse, I was observing and spent much of my time with Mary and Sue. On the second occasion I was taking my own workload, under Rachel's supervision, and took over Mary's care at the start of a night shift, she had been triaged but was yet to be seen by a doctor.
I was very nervous the first time Mary attended and trying to adjust to and understand the A&E department, although I had little confidence I was able to stay with Mary for most of the time until she was admitted because of my supernumerary status and was able to build up a relationship and rapport with her. By the time Mary attended the second time I was much more confident and settled in the department and felt more able to provide her care and offer support. I felt for Mary and her situation and was beginning to empathise with her, I felt that if I were in her situation I would probably be just as anxious to get answers and could understand her worries that the cancer had returned.
I was uncomfortable with, and a little intimidated, by Sue, I felt very self conscious and was worried I would say the wrong thing, because she was a qualified nurse. I had not had anxieties of this kind with Mary or other patients and their relatives. This was compounded by the fact that she was so openly angry and frustrated because her mother had not had the answers she required. I felt that if I said or did something she thought was wrong I would also become one of the things she was unhappy about and I didn't want this to happen, I just wanted to do my best. Although I was still wary of Sue by their second attendance I felt a little more experienced and confident and as we had built a relationship I felt more able to answer her questions.
Within the A&E department there was much discussion about the reasons why people attend and whether it is appropriate or not. As Walsh (2000) has noted people attending A&E for reasons that are not seen by A&E staff as emergencies or for things that could be dealt with by primary care are often thought of, and referred to, as 'inappropriate attenders'. In Mary's case many of the nurses and doctors thought she shouldn't have come to A&E as she was already being investigated, the fact she came a second time meant they thought her attendance all the more inappropriate. Walsh (2000) also points out that labelling people, like Mary, as 'inappropriate attenders' can have profound effects on the care they receive. She goes on to explain that patients labelled in this way often feel they are 'told off' by almost every member of staff and punished by the negative attitudes shown towards them and by being made to wait excessively (Walsh, 2000). To some extent I agreed with the concept of inappropriate attendance to A&E. I didn't feel this so much about Mary because I really could understand why she had come and would have probably felt the same in her situation but I had certainly considered a few other patients attendance as inappropriate. I don't think that I or any of the nurses told Mary off, acted particularly negatively towards her or made her wait unduly but she may not have received the same attention or empathy as patients that were not considered inappropriate attenders. It was therefore not appropriate to regard Mary in this way.
I find it hard to determine how I personally could have improved the situation for Mary as I, as a student nurse, was not in a position to provide the answers she wanted. Although I was able to ascertain Mary's priorities by building a relationship and talking with her I felt unable to meet her priorities as they were out of my control. Her main priority was finding out if she had cancer and I didn't see how I, or her attendance in general, could provide the answer. In hindsight I should have tried harder to advocate Mary's priorities to the medical staff. I was able to provide an amount of comfort and support by being there for Mary and acknowledging what was important to her.
There are many things in this situation that I feel powerless to change but there are also areas I have control over, not least my attitude to patients. In future I will try not to label people or regard them with negativity. As Mason and Whitehead (2003) explain negative attitudes are reflected in a nurse's behaviour, which can have detrimental effects on individual patients and services offered. This experience has opened my eyes, especially to my own compliance to conformity. I was surprised at how quickly I conformed to regarding people as inappropriate attenders. However I have learnt that attitudes can indeed be changed on the basis of new information (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). Because I felt uncomfortable that other nurses regarded Mary's attendance as inappropriate it made me think about my attitude to those patients I had regarded in this way and it helped me understand the effects that this could have on the care I give. I had seen the patients I thought of as inappropriate attenders as time wasters depriving those that needed care from receiving it, I now realise they are people trying to address issues that concern them in the way they know how.
I feel this experience has taught me a lot about myself including my own values and assumptions. It has highlighted to me that in the past I have been more judgemental than I would like to admit, and I hope I am more self aware because of this. I consider patient advocacy to be an important part of the nursing role but I am now aware that I didn't advocate Mary's priorities as well as I could have. Even if this was because I was new to the placement and still finding my feet I now feel that this was putting my own needs before those of the patient which denies person-centred care. Although, as Ford and McCormack (2000) highlight, I was able to get close to Mary and understand her needs and aspirations, I failed to fully act on these and therefore didn't provide her with quality care. Nursing practice primarily concerned with meeting goals or objectives will be meeting the nurses own needs to perform professionally or meeting the needs of the system but may be overlooking the needs as perceived by the patient (Schoenhofer, 2002).
Fulford et al (1996) advocate that a patient's experience of illness should be considered as important as any physiological sign, and believe that without this person-centred care is impossible. I hadn't really thought of it like this before but by empathising with Mary's situation I better appreciate the importance of the patient's perspective. Fulford et al (1996) also say that valuing past experiences can help nurses understand a patient's perceived needs or fears, and this is certainly relevant to Mary as her previous cancer increased her fears. There are many uncertainties in relation to cancer, despite improvement in treatments and cure rates there is always the fear that it will reoccur, there are no guaranties (Alexander et al, 2000). This experience has also changed the way I see people's reasons for seeking health care and I have benefited from seeing the health care system from the point of view of what people expect rather than just what it can provide.
A survey of patient expectations of A&E by Walsh (2000) found that reasons for attending included wanting attention at the time of illness, the constrictions of GP appointments and feeling that hospitals were more likely to make an accurate diagnosis because of technical backup. Walsh found patients expected A&E attendance to provide a diagnosis, timely treatment and the provision of information. Research by St Martin and Cole (2002) stated that the numbers of people accessing A&E for non-emergency or primary care matters are steadily increasing, factors that influence this include the 24 hour availability of A&E and the belief that access is everyone's right. The study found that the main reasons for non-emergency A&E attendance were lack of access to primary care, dissatisfaction with primary care, convenient out-of-hours care and difficulty obtaining appointments elsewhere. Although this research was carried out in America I feel it is relevant because the results are in line with my own observations and also because Mary's reasons for attending A&E were her dissatisfaction with her GP's answers and the wait for diagnostic or follow up appointments.
Striving to deliver patient-centred care in practice represents the development of health care to focus on the needs of the individual receiving care over the needs of the professionals or the organisation (Ford & McCormack, 2000). The concept of health care related expectancy-value assumes that a particular behaviour or action will lead to an anticipated outcome, chosen on the basis of what is most likely to produce what they consider a positive outcome (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). Mary equated attending her GP with long waits and few answers while she saw attending A&E as providing quick answers and treatment.
In 1992 the Department of Health produced The Patients Charter (DoH, 2002) which, among other rights, highlighted all people's right to receive emergency medical care at any time, through a GP, the ambulance service or an A&E department. It didn't however make clear what constituted an emergency or when it was appropriate to make use of these services (Walsh, 2000). In 2001 The Patients Charter was replaced by Your Guide to the NHS: getting the most from your National Health Service. This sets out what people can expect from the NHS and what people can do to assist the service, however it doesn't actually state what constitutes an emergency situation nor does it explain when it is appropriate to see a GP or go to A&E. It puts the perception of urgency with the patient (DoH, 2001a). Patient empowerment and patient-centered care encourage patients to take more responsibility for their care and to learn from their own experiences. This has produced higher patient expectations and has changed patient attitudes, many are no longer prepared to be passive receivers of care (Fulford et al, 1996). Ford and McCormack (2000) highlight that the rights, responsibilities, choice and freedom afforded to patients by such policies are often constrained by health care service provision and the system. 'Within the constraints of health and social care services, it is not uncommon for there to be a lack of freedom of action' (Ford & McCormack, 2000 p41).
By attending A&E Mary was exercising her right to choose, being proactive and taking what she saw as positive action to meet her health needs. She was doing as policy suggests and taking part in her health care, despite this she was met with attitudes that assumed she was wasting time and playing the system. This is tantamount to the view of Hinchliff et al (1998) who state policy empowers patients but the reactions and attitudes of staff do not always support this. I feel that empowerment is futile unless patients can feel that health professionals will listen and respect their views and act according to them. Kitwood and Bredin (1992) propose that to achieve true patient-centred care in practice nurses must understand patient needs, engage in positive work with the patient and place the desire of the patient to maintain or improve wellbeing central in all decisions and actions.
By reflecting on and analysing the care Mary received I feel that her individual needs were not met completely. Although I was able to build a relationship with Mary and in doing so establish her priorities we were unable to provide her with the answers she required. By failing to respect Mary's views and priorities her personhood was denied and her right to individualised and quality care ignored. As Ford and McCormack (2000) suggest the primary focus of person-centred care should be to maintain personhood by recognising the individuality of others, respecting them and establishing trust. As I mentioned earlier I do not know the outcome of her second admission but I hope she was able to get a definitive answer as to whether or not her abdominal pain was caused by cancer. I have found my experience of caring for Mary enlightening and am grateful for the opportunity her situation provided me to question my own values and assumptions. I also value the greater insight it has given me into patient priorities and expectations. I hope I will be able to take what I have learned about this situation and myself and use it positively to improve the future care I give.