Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the yeast used by bakers and brewers. Its ~13Mb genome has been sequenced, and this along with its similarity to higher organisms in terms of basic biological processes (including biosynthetic pathways, DNA replication and repair, signal transduction, and cell cycle repair), and its ease of genetic manipulation makes it a good experimental organism.
This investigation uses three proteins: p53, SV40 and lamin put into 2 categories, bait and prey. The bait is put with both of the prey, to see which it will interact with. Figure 1 shows how these three proteins are used in this experiment in a yeast-2-hybrid screen, where the 2 haploid cells mate to form a diploid.
The yeast strains used are Y187 (mating type ) and AH109 (mating type a).
The yeast's preferred state is as a diploid, therefore it will always attempt to mate to become a diploid if it's in its haploid state, insuring mating without any artificial intervention required.
SV40 (simian virus 40), has a large T antigen, which is the protein used in this experiment as part of the "bait" construct. It is a DNA binding protein with high affinity for segments of the viral genome, where it works to prevent apoptosis of the host, ensuring its survival. It is tested here to see whether it binds to the proteins lamin or p53. The bait construct also contains the LEU2 gene, a nutritional marker that allows transformed yeast to grow without leucine. (This is important as the yeast strains used: AH109 and Y187 cannot grow naturally in the absence of leucine, tryptophan, uracil or histidine). LEU2 and the T antigen of SV40 are on a plasmid in AH109 (diagram on page 26 of manual).
P53 and lamin are the "prey" of the experiment. p53 is the product of a tumour suppressor gene, and is involved in regulating the activity of some other genes and prevents cells entering cell division. Lamin are structural components found in most multicellular organisms. Either lamin or p53, along with the TRP1 nutritional marker (allows growth in the absence of tryptophan) are inserted into a plasmid in Y187 (diagram page 25 of manual) and used as pray.
The interaction between one of the prey and the bait, will be shown by the production of the reporter genes by the activation of the upstream activation sequence (which can only occur in the diploid cell, not haploid)