I will be reflecting on a situation I found challenging, and the strategies used to manage it, while on placement in a local Accident and Emergency (A&E) department. All names used are fictitious to preserve the anonymity of patients and staff. I will be using Holm & Stephenson's (1994) model of reflection as a guide to my work. As the module handbook says 'Situations themselves are not the challenge. Challenge results from our own appraisal of them and the skills and resources you have at your disposal'. (Oxford Brooks University, 2006 p9). Through reflection I will try to explain why I found this particular situation challenging and what I have learned from it. I will begin by explaining the situation I am reflecting on.
On a busy night shift Joseph, a 22 year old man, accompanied by his partner Max attended A&E at 02.30 in the morning. They had been out drinking at a club where Joseph had got into an altercation with some other men; this and his drunken state resulted in him falling and cutting his forehead on a broken glass. Max had called an ambulance and brought Joseph to A&E to have his wound tended to. The ambulance crew reported that on the way to A&E Joseph had been verbally abusive towards them and was very drunk. On his arrival my mentor Becky and I triaged Joseph, cleaned his wound and applied a temporary dressing. He was clearly intoxicated and was very hard to communicate with, we got much of the information we required from Max. We advised Joseph and Max that the wound would need closing with either steri-strips or sutures but he would need to see a doctor first, we then asked him to wait in reception until he could be seen.
After 25 minutes one of the receptionists came to find us to come and speak to Joseph. He was being verbally abusive and threatening to the reception staff and was demanding to be seen as he claimed he had been waiting for more than 2 hours. Becky and I returned to reception to find Joseph hitting the glass of the reception office and swearing loudly, Becky immediately called security to assist. Joseph demanded to be seen immediately by a cosmetic surgeon as he said he was an actor and he couldn't be left with a scar. Becky and I then sat with Joseph and explained calmly that it wouldn't be possible to see a plastic surgeon but that we would do everything we could to insure a minimal scar and that we would be able to treat him shortly. Joseph began to calm and accepted that we would do our best, Max apologised relentlessly for Joseph's behaviour explaining that he wasn't normally an aggressive person. The security guards remained with Joseph and explained that if he behaved like that again he would be asked to leave the department.
Ten minutes later we went back to reception as Joseph was again being aggressive. The sister, Jane, joined us and told Joseph that if he didn't calm down and be respectful to the staff he would be asked to leave and the police would be called. Joseph was angered by this and his aggression increased, he continued to swear and threatened numerous members of staff. Max tried to stop Joseph and continued to apologise for him; unable to do anything he sat down with his head in his hands. Jane tried to explain to Joseph that he would be seen soon but by causing a fuss he was stopping the nurses working and at the moment there was a very sick patient and the doctors were busy trying to save their life. Joseph's response was "my face is my life, save my life!" and his aggression again increased. At this point Jane explained to Joseph that she was satisfied that Joseph's injuries were not life threatening and the department had a 'zero tolerance' policy on violence and aggression. As he had failed to stop his aggressive behaviour after being asked to, she considered his behaviour unacceptable and was refusing to treat him. She then asked the security guards to remove Joseph from the department and he was escorted off the premises.
As a student nurse I was new to the A&E department and still learning how the department ran and what was acceptable behaviour. The incident occurred early on in my placement so I was yet to develop much confidence and I didn't feel I had the authority or skills to manage Joseph. Needham et al, (2005) suggest that patient aggression is a problem in many health care settings and student nurses are among the most vulnerable to this aggression as they are usually younger and have less professional experience. I certainly felt vulnerable as I felt my lack of knowledge and experience in dealing with intoxicated patients left me open to attack. I was worried that because I would not be able to provide answers I would be an easy target for any aggression.
It is widely acknowledged that A&E nurses face more verbal and physical aggression than any other nursing group (Health & Safety Commission, 1997 cited in: Hinchliff et al, 1998). I understood this and had accepted that I was likely to come across at least some aggression in the course of my placement. I have had previous experience of dealing with irate and aggressive people in previous jobs and had been lucky enough to have had a lot of training in dealing with aggressive and otherwise challenging situations however, as these jobs were telephone based I had little experience of dealing with aggression face to face and the training focused on verbal communication. Although I felt I could call on and use this training and experience as much of it would apply to face to face situations the prospect of dealing with aggression in person made me nervous as I thought of it as more personally threatening.
Aside from my personal anxieties I found this situation particularly uncomfortable as we failed to calm Joseph and because he left without treatment. I saw this as a personal failure as I am usually quiet good at defusing such situations and I was worried for Joseph and his injury. Although I agree that aggression should not be tolerated I found it hard to balance this against providing a duty of care. It is hard to ensure you are not neglecting the duty of care to a patient by refusing them treatment and for this reason the removal of a patient should always be the last resort (Diamond, 2005). Diamond (2005 p488) explains that in A&E "once a patient comes through the doors, a duty of care is owned and the patient should not be sent away without adequate examination". In this context Joseph's duty of care was fulfilled as he was fully assessed by Becky, Jane also assessed him briefly and deemed it safe to evict him even though he wasn't seen by a doctor. I understood that "violent, drunk and abusive patients may be refused treatment in hospitals as part of an ongoing campaign to protect NHS staff" (DoH, 2001b) but I had never experienced a patient being refused treatment before and was surprised by the anguish it provoked in me.
On the whole I felt I and the other members of staff did all they could to manage a difficult situation and gave Joseph more than ample opportunity to cooperate however, in hindsight I feel some aspects could have been handled differently. As Morcombe (1999) states good communication is the key to managing aggression. Becky engaged in most of the communication with Joseph. She remained calm and professional and actively listened. Hinchliff et al (1998) believe that to diffuse aggression a nurse needs to communicate in a calm, clear and confident manner taking a non-threatening approach, Becky's actions certainly met these criteria. Although Jane joined us when Joseph was most aggressive I saw her response towards him as confrontational and was surprised that when shouted at she shouted back. It is suggested that matching an aggressors volume and directly confronting them, as Jane did, can escalate the situation. To de-escalate a situation a low arousal approach is recommended where the nurse remains calm and talks at a normal speaking volume (Morcombe, 1999). I understood that, as sister, Jane needed to control the situation but I couldn't help wondering if a different approach would have brought about a preferable outcome. She later told me that she was worried for the safety of other patients and the staff as she thought Joseph may become physically violent; Hinchliff et al (1998) warn that what begins as verbal abuse may quickly turn into disruptive or physically violent behaviour if not diffused. My lack of confidence meant that I had little communication with Joseph verbally but I was very conscious of my non-verbal communication as I didn't want this to provoke the situation, as Morcombe (1999) highlights even if you remain silent during aggressive situations non-verbal cues may have an effect on the aggressor and escalate the situation. As I said earlier I had little experience of dealing with aggression in person and I was worried that this would show through my body language.
Perhaps if I had been less self-conscious and had more confidence I would have been able to contribute more effectively to the situation. I now appreciate that aggression management is an area I feel I lack in and I believe more training could improve this however I have taken this opportunity to read into the area. Taylor (2002) explains that student nurses benefit from training that practices interpersonal skills, develops awareness of theories of aggression, and helps develop skills in defusing violent situations. Needham et al (2005) adds that training in aggression management at an early stage in careers could be instrumental in avoiding the many negative experiences among nursing students. For the benefit of patients Hinchliff et al (1998) suggest that drunk and aggressive people attending A&E should be dealt with quickly and separately to avoid violent situations. They explain that allowing drunk and aggressive patients to wait in the waiting area may disrupt the department and put other patients at risk and they recommend security staff 'guard' the patient in a separate room until they can be treated. Although security guards were able to stay with Joseph I am not sure of the extent that this aided the situation. It would have been preferable if Joseph had been able to wait in a cubicle but all areas were full and the reception area was the only option. Although factors such as a changed environment and reduced waiting time may have improved the situation at the time we were unable to offer an alternative, thus making them out of our control.
Through research I have been able to identify some parts of strategies used in this situation although I was unaware of them at the time. Mason and Whitehead (2003) suggest 3 strategies for dealing with aggressive patients:
Talk-over technique - If a patient is rational an open discussion about the problems causing their anger and aggression may be the best course of action however, this requires a degree of skill on the part of the nurse and a degree of willingness on the part of the patient. If the patient is irrational distracting conversation may be more helpful in defusing the situation.
Adverting approach - This involves discussions using a series of questions and gives the patient time to think and review the situation for themselves. The nurse must listen to the answers and ask how they feel not just assume they know, again this requires skill on the part of the nurse and the willingness of a rational patient.
Verbal de-escalation approach - This is based on an individuals social skills, confidence and professional authority and maintains patients self-esteem and calmness. The nurse must use a calm clear voice, be honest, make options clear, use empathy and use consistent non-verbal communication.
I feel that combinations of aspects from these approaches were used during this situation and those that were not may have been inappropriate. Because Joseph was under the influence of alcohol he was not rational and it was not possible to discuss anything with him as he was unable to hold a conversation. I do not believe any strategy would have alleviated this problem and therefore am not sure if the situation could have been improved given the circumstances. Garnham (2001) points out that sometimes people just need to 'sound off' and allowing them to do this and acknowledging their feelings, even if you don't agree with them, is often enough to defuse the situation; had Joseph been sober I believe this would have been the case. I have benefited from researching strategies used in managing aggression and hope to be able to use them in my future practice.
Violence and aggression is an occupational health and safety issue that all nurses face in their day-to-day work and front line nurses such as those in A&E are often the main target of aggression (Crilly & Chaboyer, 2004; Alexander et al, 2000). Dougherty and Lister (2004) go on to describe violence as endemic in health care, with nurses often the target of abuse. The Health and Safety Executive defines violence against staff as "any incident in which a person working in the health care sector is verbally abused, threatened or assaulted by a patient or member of the public in circumstances relating to his or her employment"(Health Service Advisory Committee, 1997 cited in: Morcombe, 1999 p12). It is widely acknowledged that patients under the influence of alcohol are more likely to be aggressive towards staff and others and that intoxication may provoke and magnify aggressive behaviour. (Duxbury & Whittington, 2005) Alcohol impairs judgement and has a disinhibitory effect on behaviour; those under the influence may display exaggerated or inappropriate responses such as violence and aggression (Crilly & Chaboyer, 2004).
In 2000 the Department of Health published guidelines to tackle violence against NHS staff and declared a zero-tolerance policy on violence and aggression (Diamond, 2005). In 2001 the NHS was then given the go ahead to deny patients treatment if they attack NHS staff as part of the zero tolerance zone campaign. National guidelines on withholding treatment from violent and abusive patients were published that ensure the need to protect staff is properly balanced with the duty to provide health care to individuals. The guidelines support NHS trusts to draw up their own policies whereby unacceptable behaviour could lead to treatment being withdrawn - such as verbal abuse, threats, violence, drug or alcohol abuse in hospital, and destruction of property (DoH, 2001a). The zero tolerance zone campaign has two principle aims: to underline to the public that violence against staff is unacceptable; and to be clear to all staff that violence and intimidation is unacceptable and is being tackled. (DoH, 2004) It has been said that the "Zero tolerance policy has in many ways compounded problems by attributing blame to patients and encouraging intolerance by health care workers" (NHSE, 1999 cited in: Duxbury & Whittington, 2005). Taylor (2002) reminds nurses that although violence should not be tolerated they should reject violent and aggressive behaviour but not the person as this goes against their duty of care.
In conclusion this situation involved many complex and multifaceted issues, which before undertaking this work were beyond my understanding. By researching the areas of violence and aggression and their management in the health care context I have developed a greater understanding of their importance. I now better understand the importance of nurses developing strategies to deal with aggressive patients (Hollingworth et al, 2005) and policies such as the Zero Tolerance Zone Campaign. Although this situation didn't have a satisfactory outcome I hope to have learned from the experience and aim to use my new insight to develop my future practice.