I will reflect on a decision made in practice and incorporate critical analysis of the evidence that was and could have been used to inform it, using the Gibbs reflective cycle (1988 cited in: Palmer et al, 1994 p39) (appendix b) as a guide. Decision-making processes and theories will be discussed and information I feel relevant to my decision and the context in which it occurred will be included. I will reflect on my methodology for gathering evidence (appendix a), and critically review two pieces of evidence I feel are of relevance based on the criteria of the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) (Milton Keynes Primary Care Trust, 2005a; Milton Keynes Primary Care Trust, 2005b). I will also discuss the implications of my learning on future practice. Pseudonyms will be used to respect anonymity.
Whilst on placement at a stroke unit I was caring for 39 year old Mark, who was 6 days post stroke and had right-sided hemiplegia. Mark was a consultant surgeon from Africa who had travelled to give a lecture and had a stroke on his second day in the country. Together with the worries caused by having a stroke and by being in a different country away from his family, he was finding it very difficult to accept that he had to rely on others and, because of his cultural beliefs, found it particularly difficult to allow others to wash and dress him. I had spent time with Mark but was not directly involved in his care. On his sixth day post stroke I was assigned his care with one of my responsibilities being to assist him with his washing and dressing. I knew that up until now the nurses caring for Mark had been washing him at the bedside and that rather than expose himself he had chosen to neglect his hygiene needs. I thought he would find it hard to let me wash him so after discussion with my mentor and Mark, and based on my knowledge of his ability, I decided to try and enable him to shower himself. In deciding this I had to make assessments of the risks posed and needed to balance what Mark wanted against his safety. I spoke with colleagues to see if they felt Mark was able to manage, asked Mark what he felt, and looked at all the shower rooms to see if it would be feasible and which would offer the safest environment. I hoped that by adapting the environment and making continued assessment in I would be able to minimise the potential risks. I felt that as Mark was finding it so difficult to allow others to wash him, and as he understood the risks and was managing well despite his hemiplegia, helping him to shower himself would be a risk worth taking and if successful would benefit his overall wellbeing.
Decision-making is integral to nursing (Muir, 2004) as all nursing decisions have implications for patient outcomes (Thompson et al, 2004). Decisions are made at the end of a problem-solving process (Muir, 2004) and involve gathering information and making judgements (Thompson et al, 2004) thus, judgements and decisions are interlinked. Judgements are about determining risks and assessing alternatives while decisions involve choosing between alternatives (Thompson & Dowding, 2002). Thompson and Dowding (2002) suggest that as in healthcare there is almost always uncertainty most nursing decisions have their foundations in judgements, such as the judgements nurses make about the condition or ability of patients. "Health care is dependent on the clinical decisions of the professionals delivering it. These decisions are often borne of, and accompanied by, uncertainty." (Thompson & Dowding, 2002 p22). Decisions are informed by evaluation of available information and clinical judgement (Thompson et al, 2004).
One theory of reasoning is the information processing theory which refers to the different stages of reasoning used to reach decisions. There are different interpretations of this theory involving differing stages but they all have stages in common (Thompson & Dowding, 2002). Thompson and Dowding (2002) advocate that in nursing decisions the following stages are relevant. The first stage, referred to as 'cue acquisition', involves gathering preliminary information about the situation or patient; in relation to my decision this includes gathering information about the patients ability, desires and needs, and what risks are attached. The second stage, 'hypothesis generation', involves generating an initial hypothesis or solution to the situation against which the decision can be judged. The third stage, 'interpretation', is a reasoning process that involves interpreting gathered cues and classifying them as confirming, refuting or not contributing to the hypothesis; and the fourth stage, 'weighing up, involves weighing up the pro's and con's and attaching value. Information processing theory can be described as an analytical framework as it involves analysis and evaluation and requires conscious awareness (Muir, 2004).
Intuition is offered as an alternative explanation for decision-making, especially in relation to nursing (Thompson & Dowding, 2002). Intuition is often described in abstract ways such as 'gut feeling', 'instinct' or 'hunch' (Muir, 2004) and is a "process of reasoning that just 'happens', that cannot be explained and that is not rational" (Thompson & Dowding, 2002 p11). Thompson and Dowding (2002) believe that many clinical decisions involve intuition but point out that when used alone it cannot provide all the answers while, Benner (1984 cited in: Muir, 2004) believes that intuition is an essential part of nursing judgement. Muir (2004) adds that intuition is often used in conjunction with information cues and other forms of knowledge and represents a function of experience and pattern recognition.
Analysis and intuition offer two conflicting conceptual frameworks of decision-making (Muir, 2004), however the cognitive continuum offers a framework that acknowledges the differences in the two approaches and relates them to different tasks (Thompson & Dowding, 2002). There are 3 dimensions to the cognitive continuum - complexity of task, ambiguity of task and task presentation (Thompson et al, 2004). The mode of cognition used is determined by the task structure , the time available and the number of information cues, with cognition being viewed along a continuum from analysis to intuition (Muir, 2004); unstructured tasks are seen to require intuition while structured tasks require analysis (Thompson & Dowding, 2002). The cognitive continuum therefore suggests that reasoning is neither purely intuitive nor purely analytical but instead located somewhere between the two. As nursing decisions are often unstructured, with numerous information cues and time constraints intuition occurs frequently and is often appropriate; it is acknowledged that decision-making in nursing involve a combination of analytical reasoning, intuition and evidence based knowledge (Muir, 2004).
Strokes often happen suddenly and without warning. Many younger people, like Mark, who have strokes often have no previous experience of serious illness or hospitalisation thus as well as dealing with a stroke they have to deal with a change in role and the psychological consequences this can bring (Different Strokes, no date). Hemiplegia can have a profound impact on almost all activities of daily living (ADLs) which can cause patients to feel embarrassed and ashamed (Gibbon, 2002), the consequences of becoming a 'recipient of care' can include feelings of fear, helplessness, loss of dignity and autonomy, and isolation (Different Strokes, no date). Gibbon (2002) highlights that inability to independently perform ADLs should not be regarded as a permanent state in patients following stroke as rehabilitation can be inhibited by doing things for patients rather than assisting them to do what they can. The psychological consequences of physical disabilities caused by strokes, such as embarrassment at not being able to wash and dress independently, are seen by patients as being vitally important to wellbeing and as requiring attention in nursing care (Snape & Burton, 2002).
The nursing role in stroke rehabilitation therefore encompasses both physical and psychological factors (Mitchell & Moore, 2004) as rehabilitation is the process of enabling and facilitating a patient to regain optimal physical, social and psychological functioning (Mallik et al, 2004). In stroke rehabilitation significant gains can be achieved in the days and weeks following stroke with therapeutic nursing intervention in combination with more formalised rehabilitation regimes (Gibbon, 2002) thus nurses have a significant role (Mitchell & Moore, 2004). The nursing role includes facilitating the assimilation of skills into meaningful self-care and social activity (Burton, 2000). "Restoration of independence in activities of daily living is one of the central aims of rehabilitation" (Gibbon, 2002 p51) and as such it is recognised that falls and other risks represent an inherent consequence of an active rehabilitation process and cannot be completely avoided (Snape & Burton, 2002). Early mobilisation is important in stroke rehabilitation as it improves functional gains and ultimately quality of life however such improvements are only achieved by taking risks (Bernhardt et al, 2006; Gibbon, 2002) therefore "effective rehabilitation entails an inevitable risk of falls as patients are encouraged to regain independent mobility." (Oliver et al, 2004 p122).
Risk assessment is fundamental in managing patient care and therefore in decision-making in nursing; as clinical practice is uncertain it is never without risks (Hogson, 2002; Thompson & Dowding, 2002). Risk is "the probability that a particular adverse event occurs during a stated period of time, or as a result of a particular challenge" (Royal Society, 1992 p2 cited in: Thompson & Dowding, 2002 p82) and "must be in the minds of all who deliver health care" (Mallik et al, 2004 p31). Risk assessment is a continual process and with adequate assessment and intervention risks can be reduced even though the hazard remains; key questions to ask in risk assessment are: what can go wrong? What could be the effect? And what can be done to stop it from happening? (Mallik et al, 2004). Risk management is rooted in risk assessment and in the planning and implementation of preventative action and involves trying to reduce negative outcomes by implementing measures to reduce risks occurring (Mallik et al, 2004; NMC, 2006: Thompson & Dowding, 2002). Risk assessment tools offer a formalised method of making judgements about risk assessment (Thompson & Dowding, 2002).
A common approach to managing risk is an 'engineering approach' that assumes that by modifying the environment safety can be enhanced and risk reduced (Mallik et al, 2004). I can now see that this approach featured strongly in my decision as I hoped that by manipulating the environment I could reduce the risk of harm to Mark. "The outcome of risk assessment must be the identification and implementation of risk management strategies to ensure that particular risks are eliminated or adequately controlled" (Mallik et al, 2004 p35). Nurses have a responsibility to "deliver safe and effective care based on current evidence, best practice, and, where applicable, validated research" (NMC, 2006 p1) thus "the nurse's role is to ensure the safety of the environment by assessing the potential risks and facilitating action for change" (Mallik et al, 2004 p31). Although it is rarely possible to completely eliminate risk, nurses must manage it and reduce it to an acceptable level (NMC, 2006). Risk assessment and management should include ensuring an environment that helps maintain and enhance physical, psychological and social wellbeing (Mallik et al, 2004).
Patients may have different perceptions of risks and different priorities about what causes the most risk to their wellbeing. A patient's perception of wellbeing can be influenced by their culture, social class, gender, age and level of education (Mallik et al, 2004). As culture can influence patient perception and priorities, nurses should ensure they are sensitive to multicultural needs (Mitchell & Moore, 2004; Naidoo & Wills, 2001), and patient preferences should be taken into account where possible (Hogson, 2002). Campbell and Breisinger (2006) believe that risk assessment can be enhanced in rehabilitation by including a patient's input and perception of their own abilities. Hogson (2002) adds that patients should be encouraged to take part in risk assessment when it relates to decisions about their care, while Mitchell and Moore (2004) add that patients may consider the psychological and social effects of stroke more significant than the physical effects and thus risk assessment should be holistic including physical and psychological factors; a view that is supported by Mallik et al (2004). Snape and Burton (2002) conducted a literature review to explore nursing practice in stroke rehabilitation based on the perceptions of stroke patients concluding that nurses play a key role in facilitating individual recovery and wellbeing because nurse interventions impact on patient recovery and self-esteem; addressing psychological as well as physical needs has a positive impact on patient wellbeing. Decisions involving risk assessment in healthcare often have multiple and conflicting decision goals (Thompson et al, 2004) and can lead to moral dilemmas between respecting a patient's cultural and individual beliefs and acting in their best interests to maintain and promote safety (Mallik et al, 2004).
My main concern was that letting Mark shower himself would put him at risk of falling. It is recognised that falls are one of the most frequent complications in stroke patients and although few falls result in significant injury it can be assumed that injuries and other consequences of falls are likely to have a negative effect on rehabilitation and patient outcomes (Nyberg, 1997). Falls prevention is a frequently discussed topic in rehabilitation nursing (Campbell & Breisinger, 2006) and it is widely believed that minimising fall occurrence by implementing targeted prevention strategies would be desirable (Snape & Burton, 2002), however it is noted that there is often inconsistency in predicting falls risk (Campbell & Breisinger, 2006).
A retrospective study aiming to develop an easily administered falls risk index for patients in a specialist stroke rehabilitation unit in Sweden stated that the identification of patients prone to falls is an essential aspect of risk assessment and the development of prevention strategies (Nyberg, 1997). Nyberg's (1997) study indicated that the risk factors associated with falls in stroke patients are: male sex, urinary incontinence, dependence in ADL's, bilateral signs of motor impairment, signs of visuospatial hemineglect and the use of antidepressants, sedatives and diuretics. However it should be noted that although the sample was considered representative of stroke inpatients in the sub-acute phase of care (Nyberg, 1997) the study was limited as the prediction factors were only tested on the data from which they originated; thus to achieve validity the predictors would need to be tested prospectively. Smith et al (2006) conducted an extensive prospective cohort study to investigate the predicative validity and reliability of the STRATIFY falls risk assessment tool when applied to acute stroke patients across six specialist stroke units. The STRATIFY tool has been found to predict patients at high risk of falls with clinically useful sensitivity in gerontological settings. Risk factors used by STRATIFY are: previous falls, agitation, visual impairment, frequent toileting or incontinence and poor mobility (Barthel index). A patient is given a score of 0 if the risk factor is not present and a score of 1 if it is; scores range from 0 - low fall risk to 5 - high fall risk (Smith et al, 2006). Although the researchers believe a routinely used falls risk assessment tool would be useful in stroke units the study concluded that STRATIFY performed poorly as a predictor of falls in a heterogeneous population of stroke patients. The authors believe that the studies results highlight that it cannot be assumed that a generic tool will perform well in specific patient groups and suggest the need for a stroke specific assessment tool. They go on to suggest that the factors that would be more useful in predicting fall risk in this group are: male sex, increased motor response time, postural sway and depression; as these were the factors associated with falls in the study sample (Smith et al, 2006).
Burton's (2000) methodically sound study 'A description of the nursing role in stroke rehabilitation' set out to explore and describe nursing roles in stroke rehabilitation. It set clear aims and used an appropriate qualitative/reflective methodology, had ethical approval and was based in an appropriate setting, although some non-stroke rehabilitation patients were on the unit and therefore included in the study. Registered nurses working on the stroke unit where the study took place were chosen as the best participants because it was felt that as they managed the majority of care they would provide the most valuable information; all nurses on the unit agreed to participate. Data collection appeared adequate however information on the exact content of the proforma used was not included; I assume that all reflections were included but this isn't made obvious. Some description of the data analysis was reported, including information on the content of the thematic analysis. Findings were clearly reported and discussed in relation to their bearings on other literature. The author acknowledges that the study's generalisability is reduced as it was restricted to one unit, however I can relate some of the findings to my own experiences on a stroke ward. The study identified three categories of nursing role: nurse as provider of care - including meeting basic requirements, maintainence of safety and prevention of harm; facilitator of personal recovery - including maintainence and improvement of wellbeing, improving coping strategies, improving ADL's and including working with risks and a willingness to take risks to produce benefits; and, manager of multi-disciplinary provisions - involving liaising, planning and aiding transition and wellbeing (Burton, 2000). Facilitating personal recovery was seen as a key aspect of the role and includes nursing interventions that involve a greater degree of interaction between patient and nurse in which the purpose is to maintain and improve wellbeing (Burton, 2000). Burton (2000) point out that although the need for risk taking in the interests of rehabilitation was a recurring theme it was often not supported by formal training or formal assessment tools but based on intuition and knowledge of the patient and their needs. The critical role of acknowledging the socio-psychological impact of stroke was highlighted as was the importance of holistic awareness in facilitating individual recovery (Burton, 2000). In line with the view of Bernhardt et al, 2006, Gibbon, 2002 and Mallik et al, 2004, the study suggests that doing things for a patient doesn't help them to achieve independence as much as facilitating them to do things.
Oliver et al (2004) paper 'Risk factors and risk assessment tools for falls in hospital in-patients: a systematic review' aimed to identify all published papers on risk factors and risk assessment tools for falls in hospital inpatients to identify clinical risk assessment tools or individual clinical risk factors predictive of falls. The exemplary review included relevant research in order to achieve its aim and involved a comprehensive literature search, using Cochrane methodology and included relevant databases and indexes, follow-up of references, didn't limit the search to English only papers, and 'experts' in the field were contacted to gain information on unpublished trials. Papers were independently and blindly assessed by two assessors using agreed inclusion and exclusion criteria that limited inclusion to papers of high methodological quality and validity relevant to the review aims. Despite the heterogeneity of the studies the review identified a small number of risk factors that repeatedly emerged: gait instability, lower-limb weakness, incontinence/frequency, previous fall history, agitation/confusion, impaired judgement and hypnotic/sedative drugs (Oliver et al, 2004) and concluded that there are few validated risk assessment tools but there are common risk factors. Oliver et al (2004) also state that no consistent evidence of effective risk assessment tools or interventions to prevent falls in hospital inpatients were found and they therefore suggest that the best way to prevent falls is to target reversible risk factors in all patients. In agreement with Smith et al, 2006 the results highlight that due to the lack of validity in different setting generic tools may not be sensitive in specialised settings, adding that even the best validated tools will fail to predict a significant number of falls; and as such the review does little more than highlight the need for further methodologically sound and validated research in the area.
"Evidence-based decision-making involves combining the knowledge arising from one's clinical expertise, patient preferences, and research evidence within the context of available resources" (Thompson et al, 2004 p68), thus nurses should incorporate research evidence into their professional practice and decision-making (McCormack et al, 2002). Thompson and Dowding (2002) purport that four areas are included in influencing decision-making: clinical experience, research evidence, patient preference and available resources; with different weight being applied to each area in different circumstances thus no one area can ever be considered superior. It is acknowledged that nurses tend to base their decisions on personal experience or the experience of colleagues as human sources of information in situations with uncertainty are preferred (Thompson et al, 2004), however many nursing decisions are amenable to the application of research (Thompson & Dowding, 2002). It is clear to me that much of the information I used to make my decision was based on experience - of Mark's abilities and needs, and my intuition that it was a risk worth taking; however, by McCormack et al (2002) criteria in which evidence includes research, experience and patient preference my decision could be considered evidence based.
Integrating evidence-based practice into decision-making is an active process that relies on the ability to source relevant information (McCormack et al, 2002).
The methodology I used to gather the evidence I have incorporated is detailed in appendix a. I found extensive research and literature on stroke rehabilitation, risk assessment and falls risk factors and feel this has helped me better understand the decision I made and the evidence it was based on. A lot of the research findings, such as the importance of psychological wellbeing and the risk of falls in stroke patients, support what I already knew, or thought at the time, although I was unaware that it was based on any sort of formal research. I now better understand how focusing questions maximises search results (Thompson & Dowding, 2002) as I found that I needed to refine my search as I went along, so having a better idea of how to find relevant information would have improved my searching and made better use of time; however I do feel I was able to access adequate and appropriate information. I will learn from this and build on it in future.
I feel that risk assessment was central to my decision as if I had considered Mark to be at a greater risk than I did my decision would have been different. On the whole I feel that it was based on weighing up the pro's and con's (Thompson & Dowding, 2002) of the benefits Mark would gain by washing without feeling uncomfortable against the chances of him coming to harm. I better appreciate the integral role risk and risk assessments play in nursing decisions (Thompson & Dowding, 2002) and appreciate the need for holistic assessment in this area (Mallik et al, 2004). Although it was not possible to eliminate risks, as some risks factors are inherent in rehabilitation (Bernhardt et al, 2006; Gibbon, 2002; Oliver et al, 2004; Snape & Burton, 2002), managing risk is central to the nursing role as it is a nurses responsibility to ensure the safest possible care (NMC, 2006). I had assumed that as fall risk assessment tools offer a formalised framework for calculating risk my decision would have benefited from their use yet as Oliver et al, 2004 and Smith et al, 2006 point out those that exist don't seem to be applicable to the stroke setting and may therefore be inappropriate. There are differing views regarding which factors are predictors for falls (Nyberg, 1997; Oliver et al, 2004; Smith et al, 2006) and although some appear to emerge consistently, Mark had very few of them so would have been considered at low risk. I now see that my decision involved a combination of intuition, analysis and evidence based knowledge and therefore in accordance with decision-making theory. My understanding of how decision-making processes and evidence-based practice are interlinked (Muir, 2004) has improved as has my appreciation of the reasoning process and I hope I will be able to apply this to my future decision-making and wider practice.