I will describe and analyse an ethical dilemma encountered in practice. By using relevant literature I will incorporate philosophical and professional ethics, state what I consider the best resolution, discuss the counter-arguments and will reflect on how my learning will influence my future practice. While I will incorporate other theories my focus will be on the ethical principle of respecting patient autonomy as I feel this is central to the dilemma described and integral to the nursing role. Pseudonyms will be used to respect anonymity.
While on placement at a stroke rehabilitation ward, caring for 83 year old Mary who was admitted with a stroke and long-standing urinary incontinence I faced the ethical dilemma of respecting autonomy verses acting in what the ward believed was in the best interests of all patients. Mary passed urine on movement and wanted to use incontinence pads as she did at home. She was embarrassed by wetting herself and reluctant to move without pads, thus limiting her rehabilitation. Ward policy was not to use pads for anyone as they believed that they inhibited regaining continence and the risks of pressure sores was considered so great that it is in best interests of all patients not to use them. I appreciated that using pads poses a potential risk but felt that Mary's case should be assessed on an individual basis as she was fully competent and understood the risks. I felt it important to respect her wishes and autonomy, however the ward believed that their policy was there for the benefit of everyone and should be followed.
All moral actions involve balancing of risks, assessing strengths and weighing up pro's and con's (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). Rumbold (1999) describes ethics as being concerned with the basis on which individuals and groups decide on certain actions, and whether they are right or wrong or whether one ought to do something or has the right to do it. Philosophy informs many ethical considerations that impact on practice (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). In healthcare, ethics or morals relate to a branch of philosophy that deals with questions of conduct that are important to individuals and professions; principles or standards of conduct are set by professional bodies to provide ethical guidance for their members (Hamer & Collinson, 2005).
Hewitt-Taylor (2003) highlights the concept of what constitutes health is central to ethical and moral reasoning in healthcare as promoting health is a moral imperative, with actions that inhibit health considered immoral; however there is a lack of consensus over what constitutes health. More holistic views, such as the RCN (2003) include social, psychological, spiritual, cultural and emotional factors in health and wellbeing. Ethical dilemmas in healthcare can occur when patients' express beliefs or wants that conflict with a proposed course of action which is believed to be in the patient's best interest (Hamer & Collinson, 2005). Ethical reasoning in healthcare is complicated as it cannot be assumed that all healthcare professionals (HCP's) will have the same understanding of what is ethically or morally right, differing interpretations may mean patients and HCP's have opposed views of what constitutes health, and patients and HCP's may also have differing priorities (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003).
Nurses are guided in ethical dilemmas by codes of professional conduct and local and national policies (Hamer & Collinson, 2005). Codes of practice on which professionals base their practice are formal ethical frameworks enabling professionals to judge the morality of actions (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). Tschudin (2003b) describes the NMC code of conduct as normative as it describes what is, or should be done. Respect for patients autonomy is central to nursing ethics; clause 2 of the code of conduct states nurses must "respect the patient or client as an individual" and clause 3.2 states "You must respect patients' and clients' autonomy" (NMC, 2004 p4-5). A core value is that "Every patient has the right to make their own decisions regarding their healthcare." (NMC, 2006 p1).
Medical ethics are concerned with the moral principles that HCP's are expected to work within (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003). Wilmot (2003 cited in: Hewitt-Taylor, 2003) asserts the four ethical principles that underpin the aim of acting in a patients best interests are the principles of beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy and justice. However Hewitt-Taylor (2003) points out that these principles interlink and there are varying opinions regarding which principles take precedence, how they are best achieved and what constitutes best interests. Rumbold (1999) highlights that these principles have strong paternalistic overtones and that the principle of beneficence is often used as a means of justifying paternalism; he goes on to say that "principles of beneficence and non-maleficence must be tempered by respect for autonomy" (Rumbold, 1999 p224).
Autonomy is defined by Gillon (1985 p60) as "the capacity to think, decide, and act on the basis of such thought and decisions freely and independently". Autonomy can be divided into autonomy of thought, will and action (Gillon, 1985). The philosophical concept of autonomy is linked to respect for people as individuals (Booth, 2002). Respecting patient autonomy is high on current British healthcare agenda and consistent with a culture in which people are aware of their rights and expect greater choice (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003). It is a moral requirement to respect other people's autonomy as we all believe our own autonomy should be respected (Gillon, 1985). Patient autonomy is emphasised and endorsed by the Royal College of Nursing (RCN, 2003), and is congruent with a fundamental ethical principle of healthcare; respect for individuals (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003). Respecting patient autonomy is important to me as I value my own autonomy highly and therefore feel it is my responsibility to respect and promote the autonomy of others, especially the vulnerable.
Vulnerability for what ever reason can prevent people from expressing, and fulfilling, their wants (Wheeler, 2000). Gillon (1985) distinguishes between wants and needs; needs being those things ascribed to people while wants are those things patients identify as important. Many patients have reduced autonomy of action but are fully capable of making autonomous decisions about their care (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). Promoting autonomy is a key aspect of nursing care and a fundamental ethical principle (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003). It is important to recognise that individuals' wants and needs may differ, and also that nurses perceptions of patients' interests and wellbeing are frequently opposed to patients' perceptions (Wheeler, 2000). Gillon (1985) believes that acting in what you think is a patient's best interests is paternalistic, and difficult to reconcile with autonomy (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). This is concurrent with the view that nurses should not act in the way they assume best for the patient but should provide the patient with information and support to make their own decisions (UKCC, 1996 cited in: Wheeler, 2000). Patients must be informed about the risks and benefits of a proposed course of action if they are to be able to make autonomous decisions (Booth, 2002). For autonomy to be achieved nurses must respect patients as dignified human beings capable of deciding what is in their own best interests, even if they disagree with their decisions (Hyland, 2002).
The principle of beneficence literally means 'to do good' and is the moral obligation to do what is beneficial for patients and behave in a way that produces positive outcomes (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). The duty of beneficence needs to be tempered by the duty of respect for autonomy (Gillon, 1985). Beneficence is constrained by different perceptions of 'good' and risks contravening autonomy and paternalism (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). Mason and Whitehead (2003) go on to say that the three main constraints to beneficence are: respect for autonomy - may be cases where principle of beneficence overrides respect for autonomy, such as desire to commit suicide, a balance of cost - between acting beneficently and respecting patient autonomy, and, justice - balancing limited resources. Conflicts can arise between doing what is considered good in medical terms and respecting autonomy (Rumbold, 1999).
Nurses need to ensure that their view of what is beneficent is not achieved at too high a cost to the patient and also tempered against non-maleficence (Gillon, 1985), however the principle of beneficence is often seen as taking precedence over autonomy if the nurse feels that by denying autonomy they are acting in their best interests (Rumbold, 1999). Hewitt-Taylor (2003) argues that the measure of whether an action is beneficent or maleficent centres on how far it is commensurate with promoting individuals autonomy, and Rumbold (1999) points out that beneficence is not always in patients' best interests if it denies them autonomy as it is unjust. In some cases preventing harm, the principle of non-maleficence is considered the benefit and therefore beneficent, however actions that set out to be beneficent may inadvertently cause harm (Mason & Whitehead, 2003).
Teleological ethical theories are based on the consequences or outcomes of an action, with right being seen as a good consequence of action; it is possible to do wrong to achieve a right (Tschudin, 2003b). Utilitarianism is a subgroup of teleology. Utilitarianism aims to maximise welfare, either based on the utility of an act or the utility of rules. Rule utilitarian's judge morality based on rules that maximise benefit or wellbeing for all, regardless of individual assessments. They believe rules that benefit many should be followed despite the possible reduction in wellbeing for some individuals, thus they accept the sacrifice of some to maximise the greatest good for the greatest number (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). In this context it could be argued that the ward were following utilitarian theory as the 'rule' they have not to use pads aims to do good for all patients'; this view has been expressed by Hewitt-Taylor (2003) who argued that when HCP's make decisions on behalf of their patients they are considering what would achieve the greatest good for the greatest number rather than adopting a paternalistic stance. The principle of autonomy is important to utilitarian's but does not come before maximising overall welfare or minimising harm (Gillon, 1985). As Gillon (1985) points out a problem with utilitarianism is that sacrificing the rights and needs of individuals is seen as unacceptable to some and conflicts with the NMC's (2004) aim to respect patients as individuals. It can be a useful premise but as there are differing views on what constitutes health, differing individual priorities and differing views of what is beneficial it impinges on individual choices and preference and is therefore problematic in healthcare (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003).
It could also be argued that the ward was taking a deontological approach to ethics; deontology being the study of ethical frameworks that take the notion of duty as the basis for morality (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). The ward believed using pads is detrimental so their intention in having a policy (or rule) that prevents their use is there to prevent harm. Deontological moral codes are structured around the idea of what 'ought' to be done by assessing the consequences of not abiding by certain rules; however they are not consequentialist because their theories are justified according to abiding by the rule (Mason & Whitehead, 2003; Tschudin, 2003b). Hewitt-Taylor (2003) has argued that deontological approaches to ethical reasoning that judge actions on the intentions of outcomes alone, isolated from other consequences, are incompatible with modern healthcare as they fail to recognise patients as people while Gillon (1985) adds that in healthcare adopting generalised rules is not always appropriate or just.
I felt at the time, and still do, that the best resolution to this dilemma would have been to respect Mary's autonomy as it would have benefited her overall wellbeing. The NMC (2006) advocates that patient wishes should be taken into account when planning and providing nursing care and their decisions should be supported. The RCN (2003) makes it clear that nurses should encompass individual social, physical, psychological, cultural and spiritual needs in determining benefit or harm in healthcare. A patient's view of their best interests will often be more qualitative and what they consider most important will not necessarily concur with what HCP's believe (Booth, 2002). Hewitt-Taylor (2003) advises that multifaceted needs must be considered for each individual and not just on a general basis; and Booth (2002) reminds us that patients have the right to prioritise their health needs differently to HCP's; and may put psychological before physical wellbeing. Promoting patient choice and partnership in decision-making is central to nursing (RCN, 2003).
Wilmot (2003 cited in: Hewitt-Taylor, 2003) suggests that reducing patient autonomy reduces wellbeing, and Booth (2002) asserts that respecting a patient's autonomy and choices can benefit overall health. The concepts of health and autonomy are thus intertwined; "assisting an individual to achieve health may improve his/her autonomy, and enabling a person to become autonomous may assist him/her to achieve health." (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003 p1324). Hewitt-Taylor (2003) believes that from this perspective promoting autonomy is indisputably a central function of healthcare and that anything that impinges on individual autonomy is immoral. It is also important to remember that reduced autonomy of action in no way reduces moral obligation to respect patient autonomy (Gillon, 1985). Mary's physical limitations reduced her autonomy of action as she required assistance in all activities of daily living. Although she knew what she wanted she was unable to go against the wards decision. Defining what is right or best for an individual cannot be based solely on best available evidence but has to take into consideration individual values, beliefs, choices and preferences (Hamer & Collinson, 2005); "The weighing of bad effects in the quest to do good for the patient must be considered, and the balancing must involve the patient's wishes." (Mason & Whitehead, 2003 p227). Hewitt-Taylor (2003) highlights that appropriately informed autonomous individuals are responsible for their decisions, however fear of repercussions may prevent patient autonomy being achieved and despite a more holistic view of patient care nurses are still often guilty of paternalism (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003).
Respect for autonomy cannot be an absolute moral obligation as it may conflict with professional responsibilities to promote beneficence and reduce maleficence; respecting autonomy can cause harm (Hyland, 2002). Gillon (1985) acknowledges that it is possible for respect for autonomy not to be the central moral issue but usually only when respect for one patient's autonomy will impinge on or harm others. It is also acknowledged that although professional guidelines require nurses to respect patient autonomy they may be constrained by risks to self or patients, traditional paternalistic attitudes, fear, or lack of knowledge (Hyland, 2002). Promoting and sustaining respect for patient autonomy is often very difficult and often causes conflicts in loyalties and duties for nurses (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003).
Paternalists would argue that if you can prevent people from harm you should (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). Arguments for paternalism include that the moral principle of non-maleficence has priority over other principles and thus actions that reduce or prevent harm are in the patients best interests and morally right, and that although respect for autonomy is important it is often more important to act in the patients best interests to maximise wellbeing (Gillon, 1985). Rumbold (1999) describes this as paternalistic beneficence, the view that HCP's know what is in the patients best interests and the belief that by doing what they know to be right, even if the patients perspective differs, is benefiting the patient and thus morally right. In paternalistic decisions considerations must be given to the weight applied to risks and benefits for the person concerned; in healthcare risks-benefits ratios are often complex and frequently conflict with autonomous choice (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). In Mary's case I believe the benefits outweighed the risks in her perception but in the perception of the nurses the risks outweighed the benefits. Dispite the rhetoric of respect for patient autonomy in healthcare paternalism is still rife especially when patients' views differ significantly from those of HCP's (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003).
Paternalism in healthcare negates patient autonomy (Hyland, 2002; Mason & Whitehead, 2003), thus the trend in nursing is away from telling patients what to do towards involving them in decisions about their care (Rumbold, 1999). Hewitt-Taylor (2003) contends that paternalism is an instrument of oppression, is harmful and is often not in the best interest of the patient and Rumbold (1999) adds that it is unjust to deny patients autonomy. Paternalism denotes restrictions to a person's liberty, even when imposed with the best intentions or for the good of that person, and it could be argued causes more harm than good; many questions also arise over who can judge what is good for another and what constitutes a measure of good (Mason & Whitehead, 2003). The NMC (2006) advice on advocacy and autonomy requires nurses to keep patients at the centre of their care, never to practice in such a way that assumes they know what is best for their patient and to respect decisions patients make, and their right to make such decisions, even when they result in potential harm. "Respect for the person is rooted in the desire to avoid suffering, but doing precisely this can interfere with another's freedom." (Tschudin, 2003b p64). Gillon (1985) professes that patients autonomous decisions should be respected even if they differ from what you consider in their best interests and believes HCP's should not impose their views but instead should provide information on different options and support the patient in their decisions. It should also be acknowledged that HCP's do not possess complete or irrefutable knowledge and should therefore be willing to enter into discussions with patients in which conflicting views can be openly expressed (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003); something the ward staff were reluctant to do. While I agree that the risks the ward were concerned about had merit I feel that they were not proportionate to the benefits Mary would gain by having her autonomy respected and therefore feel that a paternalistic stance denied Mary the best possible care.
I agree with Mason and Whitehead's (2003) view that the principles of autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence and justice ought to influence everyday interactions with patients and professional practice and that an individual's right to autonomy and self-determination is central to nursing (RCN, 2003). It is also clear that "The reality is that patient autonomy cannot be seen as a stand-alone feature of healthcare, and must be facilitated within complex healthcare finances, policy and politics." (Hewitt-Taylor, 2003 p1329). I better appreciate that an understanding of ethical theory helps us comprehend and appreciate the opposing standpoints or theories others are defending (Tschudin, 2003b) and have taken this opportunity to look at ethical issues from different angles. I had never appreciated that other nurses could be the third party you would be attempting to influence in triadic advocacy (Wheeler, 2000) or the conflicts that this can cause (Hamer & Collinson, 2005) and had not considered how the lack of autonomy of nurses and nursing can affect the achievement of patient autonomy (Tschudin, 2003a). I am also more aware of the many potential conflicts of duties that are present in ethical reasoning and will aim to acknowledge these in my future practice. Patients are often vulnerable and require someone to 'speak up' for or advocate on their behalf to achieve their desired outcomes (Wheeler, 2000) and I feel I now have a greater appreciation of the nurses role as advocate to promote and protect the interests of patients who are unable to do so themselves (NMC, 2006) and hope this will have a positive effect on the care I am able to give in future.