OPUS Ltd. is a well established software development company with extensive industry experience. OPUS has an excellent track record for delivering excellent quality products on time and within reasonable price. The secret is the blend of high calibre technical staff, application of well known software development techniques and management principles and experienced management and solid financial backing from investors.
OPUS's commitment to quality of of the outmost importance. Out quality is of the highest standard the client's can get. Developing software to well established standards such as PRINCE2, ISO 9000 and SEI standards are all too familiar to us. Our highest quality and affordable products are due to the right balance of standards, procedures and flexibility within the establishment. Our technical creativity and efficiency are not hindered by organisational bueurocracey and too much paperwork. Yet we can guarantee the QA in all our products by following our unique QC and QA procedures. We believe in the application of right procedures and techniques at the right time and place in the development life cycle will enable our clients to benefit, which no doubt we have proven over and over again.
At each stage of production, quality is built into our products though our quality control processes and guaranteed by quality assurance procedures before moving over to the next stage. This varies from informal technical reviews and walkthroughs to extensive system testing to confirmation to the right budget and time. We have fulltime QC teams that are dedicated to make sure that our products confirm to our standards. We continuously involve our clients during each stage of production make sure that our standards meet their requirements and expectations.
All our suppliers and contractors are hand picked to make sure they confirm to the sufficient quality standards.
Our most valuable resource are our technical teams who makeup most of the OPUS. Our highly skilled and qualified tech staff come from well reputed universities such as Oxford Brookes. Managed by our highly specialised and experienced management teams. We have sophisticated automated software tools (custom built and brought) that enables our tech teams to efficiently develop and test products.
This is the OPUS culture and our trade secret and this is why we can produce high quality products that meets client expectation, deliver the products on time AND at reasonable prices. This competitive advantage enables us to compete with very large software houses and has always been the envy of the industry.
Depending on the stage and activity of the development cycle the QC/QA techniques varies. However all the following techniques are used in the SQA process.