The experiment aimed to investigate conjugation and recombination in Esherichia coli and determine the chromosomal order of a number of genes for amino acid synthesis and sugar metabolism. This was carried out by mixing donor and recipient strains and at certain time intervals interrupting the mating and plating on selective media. Qualitative assessment of the plates was then used to map the gene order. The chromosomal gene order was found to be thr, arg and xyl, ilv, leu, pro, his (see discussion for explanation of gene names).
Bacterial DNA can be exchanged between different strains allowing new allele combinations to be produced. This means that a 'wild type' gene can be passed to a strain with a mutation in this gene and through recombination the gene activity can be restored.
The most common mechanisms of genetic exchange are transformation, transduction and conjugation. In each case genetic material is transferred from the donor strain to the recipient strain and this is assessed by monitoring a change in phenotype of the recipient. This is usually carried out by arranging growth conditions to select for recipients that have received the genetic material as in bacteria the change is normally in a requirement for an amino acid, nucleotide or vitamin, and ability to use a compound as an energy source or a resistance to an antibacterial agent.
Here conjugation will be looked at. This involves cell-cell contact between donor and recipient achieved through an F pilus (a protein appendage) synthesized by the donor and used to anchor the recipient to form a mating pair (or mating aggregate).
Here conjugation will be investigated in Escherichia coli. In E. coli conjugation involves the F factor, which is present in the donor but not recipient strain (F-). This experiment involves conjugation between an Hfr (high frequency recombination - the F factor is integrated into the chromosome) strain, the donor, and a F- strain, the recipient. The E. coli chromosome is circular and transfer always starts from the same point, the F factor integration site, which allows time of entry mapping to be carried out: As soon as the two strains are mixed mating aggregates will form and transfer of the chromosome will start from a fixed site and in a fixed orientation. If the mating pairs are physically interrupted at intervals, mapping the time of entry of genes from the donor into the recipient can create a genetic map of the chromosome.
The aim of the experiment was to understand these concepts and methods of bacterial genetics by exchanging pieces of E. coli chromosome between different strains by the process of conjugation and using a non-quantitative method to establish the order of some genes relating to amino acid metabolism and sugar catabolism.
The experiment was carried out as laid out in the lab manual with the following detail.
The donor strain used was E. coli KL14 (thi-1 Hfr KL14)
The bacteria donor and recipient strains were allowed to grow in the shaking water bath at 37 oC for 120 minutes before being mixed together.
From the results it is clear that the bacteria could grow earlier on some plates than others. In this case the sample selective media lacking threonine (Plate 6) grew first at time 0minutes (but also had growth on the recipient strain area), then on both plates lacking arginine (plate 1) and with xylose as the sugar (plate 7) at 15 minutes. The sample on plate 3, lacking isoleucine and valine was next to grow then plate 4 lacking leucine at 30 minutes. Plate 5 lacking proline showed growth at 60 minutes and finally plate 2 lacking histidine at 120minutes.
The E. coli chromosomal gene order was determined to be:
From the table of results it is clear that the genes allowing growth to occur by transferring the wild type allele were transferred at different time points for each gene selected. This is due to the process of Hfr conjugation discussed previously in which the chromosome is passed into the recipient in a certain order. As the mating pairs were disrupted at the time intervals given above no further gene transfer could take place in that particular sample and the sample would only grow on a selective plate if the gene allowing synthesis of that particular amino acid or metabolism of the sugar had already been passed into the recipient strain.
It was therefore clear that by looking at the time points at which the samples started growing on different plates it was possible to map the order in which the genes had been transferred from the Hfr strain and hence the order in which they are present on the chromosome.
Both plate 1 and 7 (lacking arginine and with xylose) showed growth at 15mins and had roughly the same amount of growth at this time and following times. It can therefore be concluded that these genes transferred at times fairly close together between 0 and 15 minutes and are therefore likely to be fairly close together on the chromosome. Plates 3 and 4 (lacking isoleucine/valine and leucine respectively) both showed growth for the first time on the sample plated at 30minutes. However Plate 3 showed more growth at the next sample at 60 minutes (+++) compared to plate 4 (++) and therefore it was concluded that the isoleucine/valine gene would have been the one transferred first probably nearer to the start of the time period (ie. 15minutes)
Plate 6, lacking threonine appears to have growth at time 0 and much growth (+ +) at 15 minutes. However this plate also shows growth of the recipient strain alone. This could be due to the mutation in the recipient reverting to the wild type. This is only possible in a point-mutation - a deletion cannot revert as the DNA is missing completely. The mutation in the threonine coding gene in the recipient strain is known to not be a deletion (see materials list in lab manual) and therefore this reversion in possible. This would then invalidate the results for this plate, as this growth does not represent gene transfer. However the growth on plate 6 does still appear to show a gradation increasing at 15 minutes and 30 minutes and therefore there is still a high chance that this is an early gene.
Taking all this into account an approximate order of gene transfer from the Hfr strain to the recipient can therefore be determined as follows:
Where thr = gene coding for threonine, arg = gene coding for arginine, xyl = gene involved in xylose metabolism, ilv = gene coding for isoleucine and valine, leu = gene coding for leucine, pro = gene coding for proline, his = gene coding for histidine.
Possible sources of errors in this experiment include the risk of dislodging the mating pairs by causing shaking or jarring whilst removing samples. This would have led to no further gene transfer in the bacteria concerned and hence errors to the results as growth may not have occurred at a time point in which it would have otherwise.
The time at which the genes appeared to be transferred was determined by plating onto selective media. It was necessary to not only select for the recombinant (the recipient after it has received genetic material) but also against the donor. This is known as counter selection and here was carried out by including nalidixic acid in the medium as this prevents donor growth but not the recipient. Nalidixic acid will also prevent further gene transfer. If it was not included the donor strain would also grow on the selective media and all samples would show growth at all times due to the presence of the donor.
The procedure and accuracy of results could be improved by using a quantitative approach in which the number of recombinant colonies are counted at each time point using a viable count.
In conclusion the rough mapping of gene order along the E. coli chromosome can be determined qualitatively by physically interrupting mating pairs of a donor and recipient E. coli strain at certain intervals and noting growth levels after plating on selective media. This highlights the basic concepts and methods of conjugation and recombination in bacteria.