Higher plants and algae use various mechanisms to concentrate CO 2 at the site of Rubisco. The three key concentrating mechanisms C 4 photosynthetic carbon fixation, crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) and internal concentration of CO 2 each exploit the features of the plant type including the structure, the light sensing machinery, the regulatory elements and enzymes. The mechanisms relate directly to the environment in which they live: C 4 plants coping with high temperatures and dryness, CAM with drought and algae with minimal light in the water depths. Each has evolved over time in various species each with the environmental conditions in common.
Rubisco has poor affinity for CO 2, probably due to its evolution in CO 2 levels much higher than today. In normal atmospheric conditions Rubisco operates at below 30% of its capacity. To improve this C 3 plants contain high amounts of Rubisco. O 2 competes with CO 2 as Rubisco's substrate, and O 2 from the atmosphere accounts for 30% of the reactions catalysed by Rubisco. It is therefore vital that plants can increase the concentration of CO 2 at the site of Rubisco to increase the amount of CO 2 fixation, and decrease the amount of oxygenation reactions. This essay will look at the mechanisms and significance in relation to the environment of three plant groups that use varying methods of this CO 2 concentrating mechanism. The three mechanisms are C 4 photosynthetic carbon fixation, Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) and internal concentration of CO 2 used by C 4, CAM, and algal and cyanobacterial cells respectively.
C 4 plants have spatial separation of enzymes: PEP carboxylase in the mesophyll cells, and Rubisco in the bundle sheath cells. They concentrate CO 2 at the site of Rubisco by combining the C 4 cycle with the Calvin cycle, as shown in figure 1, a process summarised into four stages (2):
CO2 fixation.
Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) is carboxylated in the mesophyll cells to form oxaloacetate, which is converted to a C 4 acid (malate and/or Aspartate). Atmospheric CO 2 is not used directly, but rather converted to HCO 3- first by carbonic anhydrase (CA) because PEP carboxylase has a high affinity for HCO 3-, and is insensitive to O 2, unlike Rubisco. Rubisco does not interfere because of the spatial separation of it in the bundle sheath cells. PEP carboxylase is not unique to C 4 plants but its activity can be up to 100-fold more than in the leaves of C 3 plants.
C4 acid transported to bundle sheath cells
This detected CO 2 movement demonstrates the action of the C 4 cycle. It moves compartment via an ATP-driven carbon dioxide pump in which two ATP molecules are transferred per CO2
C4 acid decarboxylation
If the C4 acid is malate, this is carried out my malic enzyme, generating a C 3 acid (pyruvate or alanine) and CO 2, which is reduced to carbohydrates by the Calvin cycle. In the Calvin cycle Ribulose uses CO 2 and ribulose-1.5-bisphosphate to form two molecules of 3-phosophoglycerate
C3 acid is transported to the mesophyll cells, and the CO2 acceptor PEP is regenerated.
PEP regeneration, and therefore the autocatalytic nature of the process is only possible because the two cycles are involved, the C 4 cycle alone would not facilitate this.
PEP regeneration consumes two ATP equivalents per CO 2 transported. The total energy required to fix one CO 2 molecule is 4ATP plus two NADPH (2). This is a higher energy demand than required by C 3 plants, but due to the mechanisms avoiding photorespiration in varying environmental conditions the quantum requirement of C 4 plants remains relatively constant.
The C 4 mechanism is thought to have evolved between 7 and 30 million years ago in response to a decrease in atmospheric CO 2 concentration. It was discovered in tropical grasses (2) and is now known to consist of 17 higher family plants, and includes many important crop species including maize and sugarcane (both Graminae) (1). The plants vary considerably and indicate that the mechanism evolved multiple times in different species. They are found primarily in hot, dry environments and predominate in tropical grasslands covering 15% of the earth's vegetated surface, and, despite the small number of species are responsible for about 18% of the global terrestrial photosynthesis (1). They predominate in these locations as the process minimises water loss and photorespiration compared to that in C 3 plants. Photorespiration rate is shown to be low unless the intercellular [CO 2] is severely limited by stress (8). Both of these factors enable C 4 plants to photosynthesise more efficiently at higher temperatures than C 3 plants (2). Because of the high activity of PEP carboxylase, C 4 plants can reduce the stomatal size reducing water loss without reducing the CO 2 fixation rate, which is important in their environments. The suppression of photorespiration by the high concentration of CO 2 is also beneficial as it means, the enzymes can be used for the CO 2 reactions.
Some plants have been observed to have properties between those of C3 and C4 plants depending on their natural environments (2).
Many plants that exist in environments with a short water supply undergo Crassulacean Acid Metabolism, which is a CO 2 concentrating mechanism that induces increased water-use efficiency (WUE). The first recognition of CAM was that succulent plants tasted more bitter (malic acid) in the morning then the evening (15), initially by the Romans, and formally described in the early nineteenth century by de Saussure (16), and Heyne (whom it was named after(13))(17). The diversity of these drought exposed species from the common Cactaceae and Euphorbiaceae, and tropical epiphytes to the two ferns suggests that, like the C 4 mechanism it has evolved many times throughout evolution.
In cyanobacteria and microalgae, Rubisco has a particularly low affinity for CO 2, therefore operating far below its maximal specific activity (1) and the K m(CO 2) can be greater than 200 M, which is high compared to C 4 plants. To increase the CO 2 concentration at the site of Rubisco and to try to out compete the high levels of atmospheric O 2, they concentrate CO 2 internally by the use of CO 2 and HCO 3- pumps at the plasma membrane.
Microalgae cannot stop the CO 2 escaping by thickened cell walls as C 4 plants do as they consist of one to a few cells, each of which can easily access the environment. They need therefore to have cell walls that can prevent the leakage of CO 2, whist allowing the entry of other nutrients.
To do this, firstly these organisms accumulate HCO 3- (as well as CO 2) which being charged has a greater diffusion resistance and therefore diffuses out through the membranes more slowly than CO 2. The cells take up both CO 2 and HCO 3- by active uptake driven by ATP derived from light reactions (2). The HCO 3- must be converted back to CO 2 to be used as the substrate for Rubisco. It is thought that Rubisco is packaged into the cell at a specific location within the chloroplast of the cell, and the action of carbonic anhydrase then quickly generates higher CO 2 levels from bicarbonate in the chloroplast than elsewhere, a process favoured in the plastid stroma alkaline conditions in the light. This has been observed by an increase in CA activity in multiple compartments upon induction of CCM. This specific chloroplast location is the pyrenoid, which is a structure specific to the chloroplasts of certain algae and hornworts (6). The CO 2 can then be used by Rubisco and consequently the Calvin cycle, before it diffuses out of the cell or is out competed by O 2 (4).
Secondly cyanobacteria and microalgae are effective at scavenging CO 2 that is leaking out from both the chloroplast to the cytoplasm, and the cell to periplasmic space (6). It is thought that the peculiar internal structure of microalgae such as the localization of rubisco in the pyrenoid, the starch envelope and the concentric thylakoid membranes contribute to the effective CCM and low amount of CO 2 loss (6).
The gene responsible for the transcription factor controlling this apparatus is only induced in low CO 2 conditions so as not to be wasteful in the cells' energy by expressing genes that are not required (1).
The result of this CO 2 concentration mechanism in low CO2 conditions for the cells is that oxygenation of Rubisco is suppressed and therefore so is photorespiration. It also costs the cell one extra ATP molecule (1).
It can be seen be looking at three major mechanisms how plants overcome the problem of Rubisco having a low affinity to CO 2, the competitor O 2, and the leakage of already accumulated CO 2. All three of the mechanisms work to concentrate CO 2 at the site of Rubisco in slightly different ways, and it can be concluded that the mechanism varies according to the environment in which they live, and that further variations exist within each type discussed.
The structure is vital to each type of mechanism. In C 4 plants spatial separation of the enzymes is used, enabled by the complex Kranz anatomy. CAM plants have features supporting the mechanism but they not as characterised as Kranz anatomy. Algal and cyanobacterial cells are yet more simplistic in structure, but the plasma membrane pumps and unique chloroplast structure are vital for the mechanism to exist.
C 4 and CAM plants have evolved independently in a vast range of species indicating that it has been vital for the survival in the changing atmospheric conditions through evolution. The internal concentration of CO 2 is present in a narrower range of species.
Each of the processes exists in a specific environment, C 4 in hot dry environments, CAM in areas of drought, and internal concentration of CO 2 in aquatic organisms. CAM plants and algal and cyanobacterial cells can exploit times when the environment is not as harsh by the turning on and off of the CO 2 concentrating mechanisms.