There are various different methods in which local governments collect revenue, including Local Taxation, User Charges, Government Grants and through borrowing. The most controversial method is through Local Government Taxation and this has evolved over time with various different methods used by different governments. This essay will analyse each method of local government taxation, including methods not used in the UK, and will determine which of these methods best protects local democracy.
The current method of local taxation is known as Council Tax, in which residents pay tax to their council according to the value of their home. The system has been in use since April 1993 and is based on property values of 1 st April 1991, whereby housing was graded on a scale of A-H (Table 1.1), depending on the value of the property at that time.
Under the current system, various groups are exempt from paying the tax. These include students, monks and nuns and people in prison (excluding those imprisoned for avoiding council tax). There are also benefits available of up to 100% for people with low incomes. The system is also seen as simple and sustainable as explained by Harvey in 2000 (p389).
Its is important to understand that Council Tax is paid to Central Government, which then allocates each local authority a share of the pool, as revealed on the St Edmundsbury Borough Council Website.
Due to the fact that this tax is based upon property prices, Council Tax encourages people to fully occupy their homes, reducing under-occupation. This is due to the fact that it is a tax on property alone and makes no distinction between wealth or number of occupiers. This was illustrated by Harvey in 2000 (p389).
However, there are also many criticisms of the present system. Harvey (2000 p389) highlights the government's policy of offering subsidies to housing as a merit good, implying that taxation on property seems a contradiction of policies.
Another criticism of Council Tax is that being a tax on the value of property it is in sense a taxation on wealth. It, however, only covers one form of wealth, that being property. This allows other forms of wealth to escape taxation as revealed by Harvey in 2000 (p389).
Thirdly, we have already seen that Council Tax is based upon the value of property alone, and is unrelated to wealth or circumstances. This can discriminate against the poor, who already spend most of their income on property. This is argued by Harvey in 2000 (p389).
Prior to the implementation of Council Tax in 1993, the conservative government operated a system for three years which was known as Poll Tax, although its official, but rarely used name was the Community Charge. This was the most controversial policy of the government of the time, and contributed to the downfall of Lady Thatcher, who was heavily criticised due to her influence in the implementation of this form of taxation.
Introduced in 1990, Poll Tax replaced the existing General Rates system, and as explained by Wikipedia (2005), is a tax involving a fixed charge per person.
Despite the negative press received by the Community Charge, there were advantages that this system brought over the previous method, The General Rates. As Trotman-Dickenson (1996 p319) explains, it gave the public an interest in how their local authority was spending their money.
Trotman-Dickenson (1996 p319)expands on the above statement by comparing it to The General Rates, which was the method of local tax collection in place prior to the Community Charge.
Trotman-Dickenson believed that the fact that every adult would pay a fixed charge would result in pressure placed on local authorities to direct their expenditure as best as possible.
The introduction of the Community Charge proved to be the most unpopular decision of Margaret Thatcher's government. It led to large scale riots in London in 1990, the worst experienced in the capital for over a century.
The tax involved all adults in the UK paying a fixed charge to their local authority regardless of means. This was seen as unfair on the poor due to the fact that the payments due were unrelated to the value of property or any other means.
As a result of this unpopularity, large numbers of people evaded payments. The nature of the tax made it hard to collect these payments and the BBC Website (2005) recalls this:
Margaret Thatcher resigned in 1990, and her successor, John Major scrapped the tax in favour of the present system, Council Tax.
Prior to the introduction of The Community Charge in 1990, both domestic and non-domestic local tax was covered by what was known as The General Rates. This form of taxation was based upon the value of the property, regardless of number of occupiers. The General Rates were purely a local taxation in that they were set locally, received locally, and the proceeds spent locally.
The form of local tax paid by businesses is known as Uniform Business Rate (UBR), or the National Non Domestic Rates, (NNDR). This is collected by local authorities and given to central government where the total amount is then redistributed nationally much like the current system for Council Tax.
There are other possible methods of collecting tax for local authorities. Firstly, a direct tax such as Income Tax could be altered to become Local Income Tax, where all tax on income would go directly to local government rather than to central government. Alternatively, an indirect tax similar to the existing Value Added Tax system could be introduced, where all monies raised would go to the Local Authority. Both of these systems however would pose problems relating to how to apply the tax. For example, a person commuting to work would pay tax to a particular Local Authority, but not the other, and this would cause disputes with regards to how to implement the system.
To conclude, various methods of Local Government Taxation have been studied, with past, existing and possible future methods analysed. Each of the systems has its advantages and disadvantages and each could argue to protect local democracy best. The Community Charge is the least popular of the systems due to the fact that it is not means tested, and therefore provided problems for poorer people who did not necessarily have the funds to pay the tax. Council Tax and the General Rates are similar in that they relate to property value and take no consideration into occupation of the particular property.
The present system however makes a distinction between domestic and non-domestic properties and therefore best protects local democracy out of all the methods discussed. Council Tax considers people's respective wealth through the value of their homes, and NDRR is designed specifically for businesses.
The other methods discussed, such as Local Income Tax or Local VAT are possible alternatives but would involve strategic problems such as to which local authority tax should be paid to when a person works and lives within different areas.