This report will introduce the concept of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), giving definitions and a brief history. It will examine in detail the impact EIA has made on land use planning in the UK, quoting the views of various professionals with the aims of creating a balanced argument before reflecting on both sides of the argument. Paragraph numbers are used throughout the report to aid structure and referencing.
The above definition is one of a number of varying interpretations of EIA. Taken from Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions, (DETR) (2000:5), it highlights the fact that EIA is essentially a decision making tool used to gain understanding of potential threats a new development could pose to the environment, with the aim of mitigating any impacts before a development goes ahead. Paragraph 6 covers the legal implications of this.
A formal EIA system was introduced to the UK in 1988, three years after the other EU member states implemented it through the EU Community Directive 1985, making it regulation across member states. The report covers the reasoning behind this in further detail in paragraph 8.
The need for a formal EIA system was due to a growing public concern regarding environmental issues. Prior to the 1985 EU Directive, there had been no formal system of environmental assessment, and as a result EIA was introduced, to give legal guarantee that environmental issues would be addressed using a more rational approach. This is explained by Lawrence (1997:79).
EIA is required for 'major projects likely to have significant environmental effects', a statement which has raised much political debate due to the vagueness of the terms 'significant' and 'major'.
It is a process which adopts a stage by stage approach whereby decision making must occur after each step. The early steps, screening and scoping, are the most important, as they involve the most complex decision making exercises. This is explained by Weston (2000:10).
The Screening stage involves making decisions on which projects require EIA, with each project being assigned either to a) schedule one or b) schedule 2. Schedule one involves major projects where EIA is mandatory, and if a project is classified as schedule two, EIA will only be required if it is deemed that there are likely to be significant environmental effects. The scoping stage involves deciding which impacts these projects may cause are the most significant.
The following stages are: Predict and Evaluate, Mitigate, ES Report, ES Review, Decision and Monitor and Audit. In the UK, once the project has been approved, the formal EIA process is no longer required, as explained by Weston (2000:11)
The 1985 EU Directive has been amended through the March 1997 EIA Directive (97/11/EC), resulting in an extended range of projects covered by EIA. This new directive was enforced in the UK with the Town and Country Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 1999 (hereafter 1999 EIA Regulations), which also reveals a number of small changes to EIA procedures. Interpretation guidance is given in circular 2/99, which replaces circular 15/88.
Circular 02/99, paragraph 4-1913 11c dictates that ESs must be considered in decision making by LPAs. 'The ES...must be taken into account by the competent authority.' However, as explained in paragraph 4-192 point 13, the ES is not necessarily the most important factor in this decision, and the LPA must consider other issues such as the local development plan.
Further legislation refers to public participation in the EIA process:
One of the aims of the 1997 amended directive was to broaden the focus of EIA, in order to result in smaller projects being subject to EIA. Greater emphasis will also be put onto the early, important stages of EIA, and legislation has been introduced for formal consultation at the screening and scoping stages.
It is important to note the progress made since the introduction of formal EIA in 1988. Weston (2000:56) highlights this:
Weston furthers this statement by explaining how increased experience amongst professionals has improved the performance, particularly in the screening and scoping stage.
To refer back to the question, the report will now attempt to create a balanced argument both in agreement with the statement, and in opposition.
The 1999 EIA amendments have led to a rather more optimistic future for EIA in the UK. EIA now covers a broader area, with smaller projects being involved and more emphasis placed on public participation at the screening and scoping stages.
Leknes (2001:31) believes that there is an area in which EIA can improve, by introducing requirements to explain EIA's role in decision making.
According the Beattie (1995:114), one of the main problems of EIA is its false perception as a scientific tool. Essentially EIA is a tool used to 'test and refine explanations', allowing for any potential threats to be mitigated, but is not a scientific approach.
To refer back to the question, this report has aimed to confirm whether the statement 'the introduction of a formal system of Environmental Impact Assessment has made little significant difference to decision making in the UK's land use planning system' was true or not. Having weighed up the arguments, it can be seen that there is an element of truth in this statement.
The views of the government and the RTPI as sited in Weston (1997) reveal the feeling that previous development control adequately dealt with environmental issues and that a formal EIA system would only lead to complications. Further views after the implementation such as those sited in Weston (1997), Stallworth (1998) and Glasson (1994) confirm the views that EIA had made little significant difference.
However, it is seen that prior to 1988, there was no legal guarantee that regard would be made to environmental issues and for this reason the introduction of EIA has been useful. The amendments to the directive in 1999 have also broadened the area that EIA covers and can only lead to further improvements in the system.
To conclude, it is my opinion that the formal introduction of EIA into the UK made little significant difference to the UK planning system. Prior to 1988 UK development control dealt with environmental issues and EIA was not admired by many professionals post implementation. However, experience combined with the 1999 amendments has led to improvements in the system, and EIA has started to have a greater impact on the planning system.