People are used to using car wherever they go. People even take journeys in car under a mile - because they can; there is nothing stopping them.
People now travel further because of car
It is widely viewed that increased CO2 emission through pollution is contributing to climate change.
Congestion itself results in pollution with countless cars idling
Congestion costs the economy - time spent in traffic jams could be spent working
Government policy should be used to discourage car use. Political boldness should be applied; politicians need to be less concerned about their political futures and more about the future of the country.
By increasing costs to use the private car people would eventually feel inclined to use public transport.
Currently public transport provision is not good enough:
Trains are unreliable and expensive
Buses are stuck in congestion, obviously this issue relates to car use
People feel less comfortable using pulic transport - elements of personal safety
Public transport cannot take you 'to your door.'
Over the past 40 years - the private car has transformed the way we live. People are used to this.
People can use their cars - so will. It is easier than public transport
Education - people need to be educated about why they need to use public transport more
Other than increasing public transport use, there are other ways of cutting pollution
green fuels
new technology
but this does not deal with congestion - which is another major problem
If the trend didn't reverse, congestion would get worse if predictions are correct.
How else would this be combated - through an extensive road building programme? Previous road building - such as widening the M25, has proven that road building does not cut congestion; it encourages people to use the roads more, therefore increasing congestion.
A reversal of this trend would be very desirable.
Whilst impossible to totally illiminate car use - a reversal in this trend would significantly cut congestion due to fewer cars on the road.
It would also cut pollution, and could be actioned along with an increased use of new technology and greener fuels.
Yes, if the following is applied;
we need to provide better public transport services
we also need to better educate people
we need to discourage people from using their cars - increase the costs such as congestion charging