One of the main problems facing Britain and the developed World is pollution, and in particular, traffic congestion in city centres. Today we see our towns and cities heavily congested during peak hours and as explained by Balchin et al in 1995 (p211) this is down mainly to the increase in Gross National Product (GNP), which has led to Urbanisation.
In Greater London, roads make up just 16% of the land, but when this land use is combined with other transport methods, as explained by Balchin et al in 1995 (page 212), the transport system in Britain is a dominant feature of our cities.
The government has been faced with the task of trying to reduce congestion in city centres, and has four main options in order to do this:
This essay will examine the government's attempts at encouraging the use of public transport, and explain the role that elasticity plays in analysing these attempts.
We must understand the meaning of supply and demand in context of transport. Demand involves the actual journeys made, as explained by Balchin et al (1995), on page 216.
Supply, in this context, involves the actual methods of transport available; this is also explained by Balchin et al (1995), on page 216.
There must be sufficient demand shown to provide public transport, for example, it would not be financially viable to run a bus service to a village with a small population. There must also be a sufficient supply of public transport before road pricing can be introduced to an area; it would not make sense to charge people to use their cars if they is no alternative method of transport.
The car is a more convenient method of transport, allowing people to travel exactly where they want to go, when they want to and allows them to govern the speed with which they travel, within reason. It also offers comfort that public transport cannot compete with, this is explain by Balchin et al (1995) on page 216.
One method of promoting public transport is to increase the price of private car travel, therefore encouraging people to seek other transport methods. Elasticity of demand should be used here to determine how much prices should be increased to encourage people to switch to public transport. Begg et al (2003), gives a definition of price elasticity of demand on page 41.
Currently the private motorist is not being charged enough, according to Balchin (1995).
Efforts have since been made, such as charging people to enter certain areas, like the M6 Toll Road and the Central London Congestion Charge, where motorists are charged 5 to enter the central areas of London.
The congestion charge has gone some way to reduce congestion in Central London. Table 1, taken from the Transport for London website (2003), shows some figures 6 months after the implementation of the congestion charge.
However, the balance between supply and demand needs to be monitored for schemes such as this. For example, without the extensive network of public transport available in London, the congestion charge would not have been viable.
Other methods of increasing the price of private car travel include increasing general car tax, and the cost of fuel.
All calculations regarding implementing other methods of transport must recognise the hidden costs that are incurred today. Whilst there are no general figures, congestion costs the country large amounts in not only monetary terms, but also in terms of time resulting from delays, as explained by Balchin et al (1995) on page 215.
One type of public transport is using buses. Buses use the same roads as the private car and the cost of running buses depends heavily on the level of congestion. It is estimated that one bus full of passengers who would otherwise be using their car reduces the number of vehicles on the road by 35. By encouraging more people to use buses the level of congestion will be reduced, therefore resulting in faster and cheaper bus journeys. Balchin (1995) explains on page 226 how congestion has an indirect effect on bus fares.
In this situation, as demand increases, so does supply as the speed of traffic will increase with fewer cars and more buses on the roads. Cost of bus services decrease with the volume of services. For this reason the government should make an effort to encourage people to use buses, possibly by reducing fares through subsidies.
Figure 1, obtained from Balchin et al (1995), shows that if subsidised, bus operators could cut fares whilst increase services, as explained on page 228 by Balchin et al (1995).
With the modern day increase in air travel, airports are busier than ever. This has led to the government having to choose which transport methods to introduce or improve.
One option would be to improve road services to and from the airport. This would be a costly process however, with little profit in return. It would also contravene any policies regarding a green transport plan.
An example of this process occurring was at Heathrow airport in the 1980s, and as Trotman-Dickenson (1996) explains on page 406, there were three different methods to encourage public transport to and from the airport:
A cost-benefit analysis must be taken out regarding each scheme. Each has its own advantages and disadvantages, in monetary, environmental and practicality terms, and these need to be analysed in order to find the best solution.
In an economic sense, scheme A would be the cheapest, with scheme C costing the most. The advantage of Scheme C is that it would reduce traffic congestion between the airport and the city, whereas the others would add to it, as explained on page 46 by Trotman-Dickenson (1996).
So elasticity plays a role here in terms of analysing the costs of the scheme. Elasticity is also used to examine the benefits of the schemes, with potential revenue from ticket sales acknowledged as well as the potential for a faster journey. This is explained by Trotman-Dickenson (1996) on page 406.
In the event, the government opted for Scheme C, by extending the Piccadilly Underground Line in the 1980s.
This essay has aimed to explain the role of elasticity, in terms of analysing the potential effectiveness of government attempts to encourage the use of public transport.
We have seen the concept of supply and demand in terms of transport, where the supply is the transport methods available and demand is the journeys to be made. This concept needs to be applied when examining different methods of encouraging public transport, as efforts to promote public transport can only be applied when such services are readily available.
Secondly, the essay has shown how the private car has advantages over public transport in terms of comfort, flexibility and convenience. For this reason elasticity needs to be applied to determine how much more car travel should cost, in order to encourage people to seek alternative transport methods.
Another factor is the hidden costs that we are incurring today, with the time and money being wasted while people are delayed and use fuel in congestion. This point needs to be recognised when performing a cost-benefit analysis on means of promoting public transport.
We have also seen how the speed of buses depends on congestion, and therefore the more people using buses, the more efficient the service. Therefore it would be profitable for the government to use subsidies to reduce fares in order to encourage bus use. Elasticity will play a huge role here in determining how subsidies could benefit the speed of bus services.
Finally, an example of a decision making exercise was analysed, with the government examining the costs and benefits of implementing different schemes as alternative transport methods between Heathrow Airport and London City Centre.
Overall, elasticity plays a huge part in analysing the potential effectiveness of the government's efforts at promoting public transport. Various costs and benefits, both of the present system and any future initiatives must be analysed in order to determine how the government should seek to reduce car travel, and promote public transport.