The preface to this book first needs to be examined on its own to make sure the reader first understands exactly what Montaigne is declaring. 'To the Reader' is saying that the essays are not written to reach a wide audience, but merely for his close friends and family to have a way of remembering him more effectively when he has died. Montaigne does not intend to try and impress his readers, but purely intends to show the reader his views on many aspects of society 'you will read of my defects and my native form so far as respect for social convention allows'. Most importantly Montaigne asks that the reader trusts what is written in the book.
Having examined what the preface states, it is important to remember Montaigne's above points upon the reading of his following chapters, for it will undoubtedly influence the way we process and assimilate the information in our heads. I think the preface of any book is important whether work of fiction or fact, and can be wrongly ignored as I myself have done in eagerness to attack the main text. The preface enables us to understand the authors' intentions for his piece of writing, and in the case of The Complete Essays is extremely important due to it being a work of fact. It tells us exactly why Montaigne decided to share his views with us, but that they are his views and should not be treated as anything else. With this in mind, the first chapter I intend to examine is chapter eighteen; On Fear.
After first reading the chapter, one could be forgiven for questioning some of the examples Montaigne uses to demonstrate the different types of fear. This is especially true of the modern day reader, seeing as most of the examples come from the middle of wars, a topic the average person today would be unfamiliar with except for if he desired to read about it. Examples of two large troops of soldiers taking fright and 'fleeing to the place where the other had just fled from' or a lone soldier running towards his enemy only to have 'realised what he was doing and headed back through the very same gap out of which he had...dashed' sound farfetched, but if we are to read this in the context of the preface, we must believe it to be true. We can also infer that some or all of these experiences mentioned in the chapter are personal ones, as the preface states Montaigne intended to write for 'the private benefit of my friends and kinsmen'. This being so is it possible Montaigne picked the juiciest personal examples he could think of so as to allow his audience to 'find here again some traits of my character and of my humours'? This shows the importance of the preface for without it we would not be so sure as to whom his target audience was and why he possibly chose the examples he did.
The readers present in Montaigne's lifetime, having probably lived through battles of some sort, and hearing fables of such cowardly deeds would probably believe the stories of fear and be more likely to take them at face value. Fellow readers of Montaigne's social status would probably, based on the preface, use the book as a way to remember him (if they knew him), or use it as a way to learn about his thoughts and views on all elements of society, (in this case fear) if they did not. For people lower in society who could read and were able to obtain a copy of the text the principles of what they were able to learn from the book would probably be the same. The importance of the preface here, is that for those readers who did not know Montaigne, they could take his word and believe that what they were reading was true, yet apparently not exaggerated. Montaigne also endears the reader to him by implying in the preface he is too humble for them to waste their time reading about him, and that the chapters are really the musings of a 'simple, natural' man. This could have the reverse effect of making people read the book to find out why he states this, so in this way the preface is actually being used as a way to entice people to read The Essays.
Montaigne states in the preface that this is 'a book whose faith can be trusted' and does not 'seek the favour of the world'. These statements are strengthened by the content of the chapter being looked at, he does a good job of cataloguing and ordering the different types of fear we humans experience. He talks of fear that 'puts wings at our heels' but also of fear that 'hobbles us and nails our feet to the ground' using humorous examples to keep the mood light. However, all these examples are taken from military escapades, which for someone trying to understand fear in a situation outside of war is not too helpful. Montaigne does state though 'I leave aside simple folk for whom fear sometimes conjures up visions of their great-grandsires rising out of their graves..." showing he has thought about other types of fear, but prefers to rely on his own views (as the preface states), of fear in war, for it is in soldiers that 'fear ought to be able to find very little room." Based on the confident and seemingly correct manner in which Montaigne categorises fear in this chapter, the reader would be more inclined to read other chapters believing that its writings can be trusted, as the author claims will be the case in the preface, so the content has indeed backed up the claim.
Moving on to chapter fifty-five; On smells, I intend to examine how important the preface is in relation to this section. Obviously, the main statement that carries through across the whole book is that we must have faith in what is written. However, because this chapter is about something we smell but cannot see, we must, (if we are to consider the preface important in affecting our deductions of The Essays) interpret it in a slightly different light.
In the chapter about fear, although it is also something we cannot see, it is easier to follow Montaigne's train of thought because he makes statements that categorize the emotion. In this chapter detailing smells, he makes more bold statements such as that of 'when people give off odours that are not their own, we may rightly suspect them', implying he agrees with the later Latin phrase, 'a man who always smells nice, Posthumous, actually stinks'. As a modern reader, I would have to disagree with this line of argument as it is the norm for people to scent themselves everyday. However, I know from the preface though that Montaigne is merely expressing his views for others to see, not attempting to force his views onto the reader, as could be implied if one skipped the preface, or if Montaigne had simply not bothered to write one.
The chapter starts off compiling information about smells but does quickly become a more personal account when Montaigne talks of how his moustache attracted scents so that they 'linger there all day'. Without the preface, this section could be read and questioned as to how relevant it really is, (why is this man talking about his moustache?), but fortunately we know from the preface to expect this and every other chapter to possibly be filled with such personal stories.
I have argued within this essay that the preface is important for our appreciation of The Essays as it gives us a 'heads up' as to what to expect. However, let us examine the counterargument which would imply the preface is not important in our reading of the book. 'To the Reader' tells us what to expect in every chapter; personal opinions, honest questions and answers, no flamboyant or outrageous ramblings in search of fame and praise. All this basically means though is that we are at a slightly greater advantage than if we had to find these things out for ourselves. Based on Montaigne's style of writing it would be fairly clear after reading a portion of the book that these are his views on elements of culture and society. Many of the titles even begin with 'on', which the reader would soon latch on to as being, '(the author's views) on...' Perhaps the only drawback could be said to be that the reader may at first feel as if Montaigne is trying to steadily force a change of views in the reader, but would this last the entire book? I think not.
It seems then the preface is something that is there for the author's peace of mind, something that enables him to happily know he has explained why the book has been written, and that it is up to the reader to take notice of it. Nevertheless, to avoid confusion over authors' intentions which implies that the preface is important, perhaps every book should have one, that way there can be no room for any misunderstandings.