In this report I intend to evaluate myself from the experiences I have had in the Brookes restaurant and the kitchen. I have spent 10 sessions in each section. They have taught me lessons that I will be able to use in the future, in my career in the hospitality industry. I also intend to plan ways in which I can use the lessons I have learnt in the future.
Communication is an important aspect in the restaurant. According to McEwan (In Mullins, 1995, pg 345) "effective communication is an essential requirement of the numerous formal and informal contacts that occur each day in hospitality organisations between managers and staff, or with customers." Good communication is the difference between the message being understood correctly, and the message being misinterpreted. If it is poor, there can be misunderstandings, and mistakes may be made. In week 4, a customer asked me for a "French Espresso." As I had not heard of one of these, I asked him to explain what he meant. He struggled with this, and eventually, Sue and I decided he probably meant a double espresso. When asked he didn't understand what this was. He thought it was double strength, not double the size. Finally, it was decided that the double espresso was what he wanted. This experience taught me that when someone is struggling to explain something, I need to ask more specific question about what is needed. Another episode that demonstrates this is occurred in week 8 when I was having my meal experience. I requested extra potatoes instead of one of the vegetables, but I didn't communicate this properly to the waitress that served me, as I received no vegetables at all. I have learnt that when I am requesting something different, I must explain my needs fully, and communicate the message more effectively. Although most communication with the customer is verbal, there is a certain amount of written communication in the form of the menu and wine list. In week 5, the menu was communicated badly to a customer. On ordering the warm pigeon salad, they expected salad vegetables, but were surprised to be served with stir fried vegetables. This was because they didn't read the menu in the same way as the person who wrote it. I will remember this in the future, so the customer fully understands what is on offer. It taught me that different people can perceive things in different ways. According to Mullins (1995), different groups, and individuals 'see' things in different ways. An instance of poor communication took place in week 10 when the customer received marzipan ice cream rather than vanilla, as specifically requested. The caller in the kitchen was given the information, but didn't relay it to the sweet staff. When the sweets were sent back, they took a long time to be replaced as the vanilla ice cream was very frozen. This left the customer slightly disappointed, as they had specifically asked for a different ice cream.
Communication is an integral part of good team work. I consider teamwork to be very important in the restaurant, and feel that I am a good team player. After week 4 in the restaurant, we were split into teams to look after tables. According to Mullins (1995), teamwork is essential in hospitality operations. Each week, I felt the teamwork between us improved. In week 9, this is particularly evident. From this experience, I learnt that it's best to work with everyone, and not just on your own. We communicated well with each other to ensure that all of the jobs that needed doing for each table were done, for example being offered bread before starters, and crumbing down before sweets. There is a kind on synergy effect when people work together. Buchanan and Huczynski (1997) define synergy as "the ability of the group to out perform even its best individual members." The result of the team members working together is better than if they were working individually. Part of working in a team involves helping the other members in the team, and communicating well. In week 9, the unexpected table was given to us just as our other tables had arrived. This meant that we had extra work to do. As we worked so well together, we were able to cope with the extra work.
The restaurant has also made me more aware of the need to consider customer's requirements. In week 3, my first session in the restaurant, one of my customers ordered cheese instead of dessert. However, I didn't correct the cover to give her a cheese knife. The customer had to ask me for the knife when she was able to attract my attention. I hadn't considered that the customer would need a knife. However, if I had looked at the book by Brown et al (1994), which was set as a text at the start of the module, I would have realised that a knife, and occasionally a small knife are required for a cheese course. I have learnt that I must consider all the possible requirements of the customer, especially when it involves something that will help them eat their meal. Another situation where I misread the customer's needs was in week 6. The customers were taking a long time to decide over sweets, and it became quite embarrassing when I asked them the 4 th time if they were ready to order. In Brown et al (1994) it says to look for signs that customer's are ready to order, such as closing, or putting down their menus. I should have noted that the customers were still occasionally looking at the menu. I have learnt that I must be very alert to the customer's needs, and their actions, such as looking at a menu still. Another instance of not being fully alert to my surroundings was in week 11, when I nearly spilt coffee on a customer. The cafetiere had been overfilled, but as I didn't notice, it poured out before I expected. I was lucky it didn't land in the customer's lap. I must make sure that I watch what I am doing all the time.
As I have never worked in a kitchen before, I was unsure of what to expect. I was expecting a lot of pressure particularly during service, and not as much support from Chef Trainers as we received. One of the main traits that I needed in the kitchen was good teamwork. As previously mentioned, this is very important in hospitality operations departments. My reflective commentaries show that the teamwork developed over the time in the kitchen. In weeks 8, 9 and 10, the teamwork displayed was particularly good. There were no delays in the vegetable or starter sections, and when in production, we finished early. The teamwork was good, because all of the staff involved supported each other well. When I needed help from the others, I asked for it, and likewise, when they needed help I gave it where I could.
In week 8, another reason that the vegetable section ran so smoothly was that we planned our time effectively, and before we started, we set deadlines for when we had to finish certain activities. This meant that everyone knew exactly what they were meant to be doing, and if someone finished early, then we could help the others. In week 9, the other reason that the making and service of my risotto went so well was that I had thoroughly learnt my recipe. I knew exactly what I was meant to be doing, so didn't waste time with re-reading the recipe a lot. The customer feedback forms also suggested that the customer's were happy with the dish, as many of them of them felt the quality of starters was at least good, and many were excellent. According to Johnston and Clark (2001, pg 395), the hospitality industry is "time sensitive", and so all activities have to take place when they are supposed to.
Communication is also important in the kitchen, as much so as in the restaurant. This is evident in weeks 5 and 7. Week 6 was an example of poor communication. I was preparing the vegetarian option on the main courses, but didn't realise I would also be required to cook the quick lunch main courses as well. This was due to poor communication between the Chef Trainer and I. I should have been told about the quick lunch, but equally I had heard that the quick lunch menu was on, so I should have asked who prepared it. However, weeks 5 and 7 demonstrate very good communication within the kitchen. In both weeks, I had to help develop menus for special dietary needs of customers. In week 5, we knew about the needs in advance, so we planned a special dessert for the dairy free customer. As we communicated well, we came up with lots of good ideas between us, but the dessert was as similar to the original as possible. In week 7, the vegan food that I helped to prepare was for a vegan customer who didn't inform us of their dietary needs before they arrived. Due to this, ideas had to be produced on the spot. Between the team on starters, and with help from Chef Trainers, several ideas were put forward, and the customer was very happy with the meal.
The above episodes of special dietary requirements highlight the need to think of customer requirements that may not be immediately obvious. Another such case was in week 3. A customer didn't want caraway seeds on their carrots, but all the portions had been made with caraway seeds. We should have considered that a customer may not like caraway seeds. We could have prepared some plain carrots, and boiled them when necessary, as if not used, they could have been used the following day.
In the future in restaurant and kitchen work, I plan to make some changes. I will continue my good teamwork, as I feel I am good at it. This has also been supported by my tutorial feedback form from Chris Noone. He has noted that I am a good supporting worker, and that I am a team player. In the kitchen, my feedback form shows that I am a committed worker, who continually works to a high standard. However, I must consider the customer's needs more, as in the cases in the restaurant in weeks 3 and 11, and in the kitchen in week 3. I plan to do this in several situations. Outside of university, I work in a bar and a pub/restaurant. The teamwork and communication aspects are very important in both situations. In the pub/restaurant in particular, I need to consider the needs of the customer's. I serve them throughout their meal, and I think I can improve their meal experiences by being more responsive to their needs. Another place where I can develop my communication and teamwork skills, and improve my receptiveness to customer's needs is in Supervised Work Experience placement. I am keen to work in a high class accommodation establishment where I will have the opportunity to work in several operational areas. This will allow me to develop all my skills.