I have now completed a year's work experience at Cowley Manor hotel, and feel I have developed as a person. Moving into the world of full time work after my first year at university was quite a shock. The first few weeks were busy with me settling into a new job and new town. I soon discovered that I enjoyed the set routine that comes with a full time job and knowing that time outside work was my own. I have always thought of myself as an independent person, but feel that my time in Cheltenham made me more independent. I looked after myself, and in work, I made a point of being eager to learn, and not be "spoon fed." I feel that I swiftly settled into work. This is reflected in my first appraisal, when Jake mentioned that I had adapted well to the areas I had worked in. When reflecting upon my first appraisal, I felt that my efforts to integrate myself and settle in had been recognised.
When I started work at Cowley Manor, I was expecting there to be high expectations of me. I thought it would be assumed that I would know exactly what I was doing, as I was a hospitality student. However, I was given plenty of guidance by Heads of Departments and other members of staff. I feel that this helped me to settle into my new surroundings. I was expecting the management to be more visible around the hotel than they were. When working in reception, I was witness to the times when they did very little. As the office was behind reception, it realised that often work was overlooked in favour for a football match on television. I saw how this lowered the morale of staff, particularly those on reception, and it made me consider the sort of manager that I would like to be in the future. I found it difficult to respect the managers when they were doing nothing.
By taking part in appraisals and writing a reflective journal over the course of the year at Cowley Manor, I have been able to identify the strengths in my working and my character. Over the first few months at the hotel, my organisation skills improved a lot. I feel that my organisation skills came to the fore in the restaurant in particular. I was entrusted with the responsibility of looking after a large group on the 24 th September. As I had coped well that night, a few days later I was given the role of co-ordinating the smooth running of three small functions for the day (29 th September). While in the restaurant, I feel that I was trusted to carry out my job properly, and was even asked to help train a new member of staff. I was also asked to carry out a supervisory role on two occasions (5 th and 10 th October). Being given this role made me very confident in my ability, and improved my self esteem. These experiences helped me to become very driven towards achieving similar responsibilities in other departments. Another strength that was identified in all of my appraisals was my ability to work under pressure. In March, the Gold Cup races are held in Cheltenham, and Cowley Manor was fully booked for the whole week. Working in reception at the time, I found that I never had a spare moment in the day, but enjoyed the constant work I was doing all the more. The moment that made me feel like I had really made an impression on management at the hotel was when the Reception Manager offered me a full time job after just six weeks of seeing me working in reception. Over the year, this was the person who really contributed to my improvements. She gave me praise when it was due, but also discussed my areas for improvement with me when necessary. As the other staff had so much confidence in my ability, I was able to develop more as a person.
Through my appraisals and journal, I was also able to identify weaknesses and areas for improvement. In my first appraisal, I was told that my social skills needed refining. This disappointed me as I felt my social skills were good. By my final appraisal, it was decided that this was the area where I had improved the most. As I am quite an opinionated person, often I would not fully listen to the opinions of others before giving my own, and this was commented on by another member of staff. I also had a tendency to intervene where it wasn't necessary with other members of staff who were arguing. In the spa, this happened when the manager had left for the rest of the day (18 th Nov). I learnt that I should have stayed out of the situation, and spoken with the manager about it the following day. After this, there was only one further instance of confrontation with a restaurant supervisor (1 st May). I should have handled this in a more grown up manner, and asked him to allow me to work in the way in which I was used to. Over the year, I did learn to consider other people's opinions more, and try to resolve disputes in a more rational manner. One area I found difficult was that sometimes too much was expected of me in terms of my ability. On one occasion (18 th March), I think the other receptionist was niggled by my constant questioning, but he didn't recognise that I needed reassurance in what I was doing. As I was generally confident in what I was doing, it was sometimes forgotten that I had only worked in each department for a short time. A weakness that my mentor highlighted was that I struggled to accept and act on criticism. From this point, I made an effort to take on board the comments of others, and spent more time thinking about what I was doing, and how it could be improved.
Having completed my placement, I aim to build on my strengths, and improve my weaknesses. At university and in future jobs, I will continue to tackle challenges with confidence and good organisation. I will also take pride in my work to maintain its quality. I will continue to refine my social skills by involving myself with different people in different situations. I need to reflect more on my performances and act on criticism to show acceptance. I also need to be more aware of other people's opinions, allowing myself to form a more considered opinion.
Before starting my work placement, I completed a learning styles questionnaire, related to the learning cycle adapted by Honey and Mumford (1992). I discovered that my preferred learning style was to take a pragmatic approach. I recently completed the questionnaire again, and discovered that although I am still a pragmatic learner, I am also more inclined to theoretical learning than I once was (Appendix 10). I feel that this is fairly accurate as I tend to find out how something should happen in theory, and then go on to find out what happens in practice. I need to become more of an active learner to become more balanced. In order to do this, I need to try to be more open to new ideas and be more spontaneous to try new things.
I have thoroughly enjoyed working for a year at Cowley Manor. The experience has opened my eyes to full time work, and the commitment it requires. Over the year, I have developed practical skills directly related to the roles I carried out, as well as personal skills that I will be able to transfer to future jobs and situations. The experience made me reflect more on the person I was, the way I worked, and my performance within work. I have used these reflections to change where necessary. I think my biggest area of development was my social skills. Although I initially felt they were good, reflection showed me where improvements were needed. I also feel that the experience has made me a more confident person on the outside and in my own ability. The work placement year has only been a positive experience for me.