Within all departments, some sort of cost and stock control needs to take place. The bar holds a wide variety of stocks, including spirits, soft drinks and beers. It is important to keep records of these stocks, their ordering and delivery. Another area to be controlled is the reconciliation of cash, room charges and credit card charges with the till printouts. This ensures that all drinks served have been charged for.
Every employee has to go through a certain amount of training, as every job differs slightly. According to Go et al (1996) "effective training is a basic ingredient of success in the hospitality and tourism industry." If staff aren't trained, then the business will be less successful, as the staff won't be as efficient. Training is the process whereby staff gain and develop knowledge through practical activities and instruction (Go et al, 1996). In an ever-changing industry, the training should be on-going to keep up with developments.
Cowley Manor is a Small Medium Enterprise (SME) as defined by the EU. It has less than 500 members of staff and is legally independent ( t.com, 2006). Training in SME's is notoriously different to the training that takes place in larger organisations. Often, the management in SME's play many roles within the organisation, and so don't have such a specific perception of training (Davies and Ryan, 2005). At Cowley Manor, there are only 7 managers, all of whom take responsibility for training in each of their departments, alongside the running of their department.
This report aims to make a competitive analysis of Cowley Manor against its main competitors. As the whole hotel is the product, the competitive analysis will be carried out across the whole hotel.
The analysis will concentrate on the facilities provided for the leisure market, as this is the market that Cowley Manor originally intended to attract. For Cowley Manor, the target market is young professionals, between the ages of 25 and 35, with a high disposable income, mainly from London (Fiona Hamilton Andrews, Sales Dept).
A competitive analysis is a means of assessing an organisation's capabilities against those of the competition (Boddy, 2002). As all strengths and weaknesses are relative, it is a very useful tool for an organisation. Strengths and weaknesses of a business are the key internal issues related to the running of a business (Boddy, 2002). A competitive analysis allows a business to compare themselves with the competition, and gives them a benchmark to aim for.
There are several criteria that will be used to compare the hotels. Firstly, the location of the hotels, both in relation to London, and local towns. The hotel facilities, the spas and the grounds of the hotels are major factors when deciding upon a leisure break.
Within any hotel, the standard of cleanliness should be so high that it's almost unnoticeable to the guests. This report aims to compare the quality of cleaning within the public areas and rooms at Cowley Manor, with the quality of cleaning in the spa. Lockwood et al (1996) state that guests have certain expectations of an experience, and if these expectations are met or exceeded, then the guest will have had a 'quality' experience. In relation to Cowley Manor, guests arrive expecting a certain level of cleanliness to be maintained in the public areas, the rooms, and at the spa. If the expected levels of cleanliness are not attained, then 'quality' will not have been provided to the guest. Quality can also be defined as "conformance to requirements' (Crosby 1984, cited in Lockwood 1996). In the hospitality industry, a key aspect of quality is reliability (Lockwood et al, 1996). A guest will expect the same level of cleanliness each time they visit Cowley Manor. For this reason, standardisation of cleaning processes is important. In theory, the guest should always receive the level of cleanliness that they are expecting as there is a set way of cleaning the various areas of the hotel (Understanding Hospitality Management Lecture 6, 2004).