Kirtlington Golf Club is a privately owned golf club located close to Kidlington in Oxfordshire. The golf club is member orientated, but welcomes members of the public to use its facilities. This development plan will be concentrating on the restaurant within the golf club.
The restaurant is made up of a lounge/restaurant and a separate bar, called the "Spike Bar." The restaurant has a maximum capacity of 120, but it is generally set up for 50 covers. The Spike bar seats around 20 people. Although called a restaurant, the room is multi-functional, and can be used for parties, meetings, conferences and dinners. The restaurant is open from 8am daily until dusk, although it can stay open later if requested and pre-arranged. This happens more frequently for golfing societies who combine golf with a meal (Appendix 1). Members of the club and the public can also hold events in the restaurant, but it's not advertised. A point to note is that if the public do use the restaurant as a venue, then the members can't be excluded from the club house, and have to have access to the Spike Bar.
Food is served throughout the day from a bar menu (Appendix 2). Food is ordered at the bar. The food is very traditional sporting English food, and quite basic. Examples include bacon rolls, burgers and sausage and mash. However, the menu available to the societies and events (Appendix 3) for pre-order is far more varied than the normal bar menu. Alcoholic beverages are available as well as soft drinks and hot drinks. The alcohol license runs until 12 midnight.
The main target markets for the restaurant are the members of the golf club and the societies that visit from all over the country. The majority of the members that use the restaurant are seniors (40% of golf club members), most of whom are men. At the weekend, there tends to be a younger crowd in the restaurant, both members of the club and the public. The younger people tend to be around more at the weekend as they're working in the week. Although members are the most frequent users of the restaurant, they are by no means the biggest spenders. The group spending the largest amount of money is the societies. At the weekend, a large sum of money is made from members of the public.
A PESTE analysis is a process whereby information is collected about trends and events that are relevant to the business from the outside environment (Teare and Olsen, 1992). It is used to develop courses of action to take advantage of beneficial trends or avoid detrimental trends. Understanding the macro-environment is essential when considering changes to a business (Morrison and Wearne, 1996). The factors taken into account are Political, Economic, Socio-cultural, Technological and Environmental (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). There are four steps to planning and using a PESTE analysis (Kotler, Bowen and Makens, 2003). These steps are determining the factors that are relevant to the business, then deciding how to collect the information, then implementing the data collection plan, and finally analysing the data. Below is a PESTE analysis for Kirtlington Golf Club Restaurant.
A customer audit trail is the process of evaluating a service experience first hand in both the case study organisation and its competitors. The identified competitors of Kirtlington Golf Club are the Bicester Golf and Country Club, Chipping Norton Golf Club and the Oxford Arms public house in Kirtlington. In order to compare the Kirtlington Golf Club (KGC) with its competitors, it is necessary to carry out customer audit trails both there and at all the competitors. A customer audit trail is a form of competitive analysis. The main reason for carrying this out is to identify a businesses strengths and weaknesses relative to the competition (Teare and Olsen, 1992), and use these facts to create a competitive advantage (Chambers and Lewis, 2000). The customer audit trail involves visiting each establishment in order to assess their facilities and quality (Mawson, 2000). (The customer audit trails for KGC, Bicester Golf and Country Club, Chipping Norton Golf Club and the Oxford Arms are available in Appendix 4).
Positioning maps are based on the results of competitive analysis (Morris and Shaw, 2000), and so ours is a result of the customer audit trails. A positioning map is "a visual illustration of how customers perceive competing services" (Lovelock and Wright, 2002 pp 221). A positioning map plots consumer opinions on attributes of a business, varying from price to location amongst others (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). Below is a positioning map for Kirtlington Golf Club and its competitors.
This positioning map compares the price of the cheapest main course at each establishment with the overall quality of the experience. The scale of the quality axis is 1= very good quality, 2= good, 3= average, 4= poor and 5= very poor. We decided to use these attributes to compare the competitive set as our interview (Appendix 5) highlighted that price is very important to the market. We chose overall quality because the perceived quality determines customer satisfaction (Johnston and Clark, 2001), that is to say that a product or service is perceived to be of high quality if it meets or exceeds the customer's expectations. From this positioning map, it can be seen that Bicester Golf and Country Club is in an unsustainable position, as their prices are low given the perceived quality (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). However, as the restaurant/bar is a secondary product to the Golf and Country Club itself, it may be supported by the income from other activities. The Oxford Arms, Chipping Norton Golf Club and KGC are all charging reasonable prices for their perceived quality, and operating within their price/quality product class (Chambers and Lewis, 2000.
A positioning statement is "a phrase reflecting the image the organisation wants to create" (Morrison, 2001 pp596). The purpose of a positioning statement is to highlight differences, advantages and benefits which make people perceive a business or product in a particular way (Morrison and Wearne, 1996). Below is a positioning statement that we have created, for the position in which Kirtlington Golf Club restaurant should be.
A SWOT analysis is an evaluation of a business' Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (Kotler et al, 2003). The internal evaluation is of the businesses strengths and weaknesses, whilst the external evaluation is of the opportunities created by the macro-environment and the threats it poses. A SWOT is used to develop strategies to exploit opportunities and minimise threats using your strengths and build on your weaknesses (Chambers and Lewis, 2000). Below is a SWOT analysis of Kirtlington Golf Club restaurant. The information on this SWOT has been drawn together from our PESTE analysis, customer audit trail and interview.
The following are recommendations for Kirtlington Golf Club to consider. The recommendations consider each element of the marketing mix. These elements are tools used by marketers to develop objectives for a company (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). The 7 element of the mix are product, price, place, promotion, people, physical evidence and process. The elements are used in conjunction with each other to develop the hospitality offer for the target markets.
There are four main purposes of measuring performance within a business. These are communication to staff, motivation of staff, control of processes and to see where improvement is needed (Johnston and Clark, 2001). The balanced scorecard comprises 4 areas where performance measurements can be made- financial, external, operational and development (Kaplan and Norton, 1992, cited in Johnson and Clark, 2001), and its suggested that managers create a balance of where performance is measured using these areas. The table below shows the performance indicators that should be implemented for the key recommendations.
Having researched the factors that affect the Kirtlington Golf Club, we have been able to conduct a PESTE analysis and a SWOT analysis. These have allowed us to make tailor-made recommendations to the Golf Club in order to develop the restaurant, and make it successful. The recommendations take into account all of the elements of the marketing mix, including promotion, where a detailed marketing communications plan has been developed. The recommendations will also allow the restaurant to better manage capacity. Tools such as the positioning map, the customer audit trail and the capacity management analysis have enabled us to identify areas where change may be necessary. By implementing the changes we have suggested, the restaurant can become a source of revenue for the golf club in its own right, rather than relying on the golf club for business.