Legionella pneumophila, a natural parasite of amoebae is an opportunistic pathogen of humans when inhaled in water droplets. The pathway taken in amoebae is the same as macrophage, with differences only in the entry. This, along with virulence factors expressed, is thought to be important to the survival in humans, a host that would usually kill the organism. It survives by creating conditions ideal for its growth and replication in its phagosome, then by induced factors fuses with the host lysosomes, creating another niche, and finally upon exhaustion of nutrient supply, lyses the host cell and moves onto another, causing pneumonias.
Legionellosis is a recently emerged disease. It was first found in humans in an outbreak of pneumonia at a meeting of the American Legion in 1976. It is a major concern with the 1000 US cases reported each year thought to constitute only 10% of the actual cases, which is steadily rising. Legionellosis accounts for about 2-15% of all community obtained pneumonias.
Cell mediated immunity in healthy individuals is able to control L. pneumophila lung infections. However, being the opportunistic pathogen that it is, in the elderly and those with previously compromised immune systems, pneumonias known as Legionnaires disease can arise. In these individuals it has the opportunity to replicate and consequently kill human macrophage.
Initial symptoms include intestinal disorders, high fever, chills and muscle aches, which are closely followed by pneumonia. When pneumonia arises respiratory failure is the major cause of death, in about five to fifteen percent of cases. However pneumonia is not always the result of infection. In many cases, the result is Pontiac fever. This can have either no symptoms, or brief mild headaches and fever. Without treatment this is self-limiting and clears in two to five days, and is thought to account for many of the undiagnosed infections due to its high attack rate, but zero mortality rate. It is not known whether this is caused by bacterial toxin or the result of a strong immune response to the pathogen.
Industrial settings and larger populations of immunocompromised people have brought about increased numbers of infections. The disease is usually caused by altering the environment for human benefit, so work to improve the water sources containing L. pneumophila could cause the occurrence of other opportunistic pathogens in human hosts.
Patients with Legionnaires disease are seen to have significant amounts of cell debris, and the organism can be detected. L. pneumophila is sensitive to the antibiotics rifamycin and erythromycin, and treatment is usually by erythromycin.
Legionella pneumophila is a thin gram-negative rod, of about 0.6m in diameter. It has complex nutritional requirements, including the need for large amounts of iron. It is a motile bacterium with one flagellum (either polar or subpolar). Figure 1 shows a cell infected with L. pneumophila.
L. pneumophila lives naturally, and multiplies in high numbers in fresh and potable water worldwide. The water must be warm (35-45 oC), and stagnant. Places it can be found include heated reservoirs, cooling towers, evaporative condensers, large air conditioning systems, hot tanks, clinical respiratory devices, showers, mist machines in grocery stores and whirlpool spas. The water in each of these sources is nutrient poor for L. pneumophila and induces the bacterium into stationary phase. The organisms are carried in contaminated water droplets, from which they are inhaled and consequently cause disease, however human-to-human transmission has not been observed.
Part of the support of transmission from water supplies to humans by aerosol droplets arises from the correlation of the peaks in disease in mid to late summer to the peaks in air conditioning use (7).
L. pneumophila is a parasite of amoebae, and the largest genus of bacteria to almost exclusively live as single-celled protozoa parasites. Amoebae are protozoa that inhibit bottom vegetation and moist soils in water. The life cycle of L. Pneumophila in amoebae strongly resembles that observed in macrophages.
L. pneumophila are very susceptible to dry conditions, but their encapsulation in cysts allows their transmission in water droplets. These cysts are very resistant to both chemical and physical agents, increasing their persistence in water supplies despite human attempts to eradicate them.
L. pneumophila exploit the host mechanisms that usually result in the degradation of invading microorganisms. Speculations are made, however the precise processes in which lysosome fusion is avoided are still obscure (7).
L. pneumophila is resistant to complement-mediated killing. The presence of specific antibody, and polymorphonuclear cells, are also unsuccessful in clearing the disease. A toxin has been found from the supernatant of E.coli with inhibited polymorphonuclear cell killing, which reduced the oxidative capacity of the cells and consequently directly prevented the oxidative killing (14). It is possible that a similar toxin is present in L. pneumophila.
Reactive oxygen species are present in the cells, generated by either bacterial metabolism or were present before infection. L. pneumophila produces several antioxidants that can catalyse the decomposition of these species, although it has not been proven whether these are compulsory for transmission.
Iron transferrin transports iron around the body and therefore only made when iron is present. In its presence IFN--activated human peripheral blood monocytes are not able to inhibit replication of L. pneumophila as they usually would. Therefore it is vital that the iron pool in the pathogen vacuole is of reasonable size to prevent L. pneumophila replication inhibition. L. pneumophila is thought to alter its pattern of gene expression in limited iron supplies.
In view of the evidential studies it can be said that L. pneumophila is a problem organism in a number of ways. It is a problem organism due to its ability to replicate in the human macrophage, despite this not serving as its natural host. It is convenient for the organism that the pathway used, and virulence factors expressed in amoebae, work incredibly well upon infection in alveolar monocytes.
L. pneumophila are able to exploit mechanisms of their host to evade the immune system in multiple ways. Firstly L. pneumophila is capable of avoiding fusion with lysosomes that usually follows phagocytosis. This allows the phagosome to express the ideal conditions for converting to its replicative form. Upon completion of conversion, loss of virulence traits blocking membrane fusion and lysosome fusion occurrence enables it to take advantage of a second niche for replication. Expression of an autophagy-like process facilitates host cells lyses by the high production of pores, and L. pneumophila has once again taken advantage of that host.
The surveillance of the intracellular environment to react to pH, iron and amino acid levels etc, enable L. pneumophila to express virulent traits such as motility and gene expression at the appropriate times to take full advantage of the host, including transmission between hosts on exhaustion of the nutrient supply.