Yield management is the process of maximising revenue by selling the allocating the right amount of capacity to the right customer at the right time (Kimes, 1989). This means setting prices according to the demand for a given period. In periods of low demand, customers can take advantage of lower prices, where as when demand is high, higher prices are charged (Ingold, McMahon-Beattie and Yeoman, 2000). However, it has been well documented that the process of yield management can be perceived to be unfair by the consumer, as they may be paying a different price to another consumer.
Yield management is a practice that is fairly widely accepted in the airline industry (Kimes, 1994). Kimes believes that this is because the practice has been happening for longer in the airline industry. Customers of the hotel industry find it hard to accept the fairness of yield management, as they often cannot differentiate the products received by themselves and others who may be paying a different price (Kimes, 1994).
When consumers pay for a product, they have a reference price for that product, which is the price that they perceive to be reasonable for the product they are receiving. This reference price is either gained from previous experience or what other people have paid for the same product (Wirtz and Kimes, 2003). In a hotel, a guest may compare their room rate with someone else's. When yield management is practiced, the room rates that people pay may be different, and so the reference price may be lowered for the person who paid more, and they hence perceive the rate they pay to be unfair (Wirtz and Kimes, 2003). Consumers consider a price to be fair when they feel that the price is reasonable, and that the firm is making a reasonable profit (Kahnenan, 1986). The price becomes unfair to the consumer when this balance shifts in favour of the firm. However, price increases can be acceptable. Consumers consider that price rises are fair when the costs increase for the firm or the market changes (Wirtz and Kimes, 2002).
Much can be done by firms to increase the perceived fairness of a yield management system. The main way to make the system seem fair is to differentiate the products in the mind of the consumer (Kimes, 1994 and Wirtz and Kimes, 2003). Restrictions can be applied to the hotel rates in order to reward those that can be more flexible with their dates, by giving them more favourable rates. A study by Kimes (1994) discovered that consumers felt that some restrictions were fair, as long as sufficient reward was available for the restriction being in place. An example of such restriction would be an advance payment with no or limited refund for cancellations. However, Kimes (1994) discovered that if too many restrictions were put in place, then they would be considered to be unfair. Another way to differentiate the product is to introduce rate fences (Wirtz and Kimes, 2003). These fences could include the length of stay in a hotel, or how far in advance the room is booked. The Marriott tests discovered that 87% of business and leisure travellers felt that their advance booking and purchasing system was fair (Hanks, Cross and Noland, 1992). Another way to make the price differences seem fair is to frame the lower price as a discount of the full price (Wirtz and Kimes, 2002). During the study by Wirtz and Kimes, it was discovered that consumers perceived the discount to be fairer than a surcharge that would be charged in times of higher demand. An example of this type of pricing is an 'early bird' discount in a restaurant, where a lower price is paid if customers eat before a certain time (Wirtz and Kimes, 2002).
Choi and Mattila (2004) studied the effect that providing information on pricing policies would have on the perceived fairness of yield management. It was discovered that consumers were far more likely to perceive the practice of yield management to be fair if a full explanation was given for the different rates, as it allowed the consumer to help themselves to get a lower rate. If the customer was only given the information that the rates varied, the practice was not deemed as fair, as there was no way of being able to 'work the system' to get a lower rate (Choi and Mattila, 2005). By making all their pricing information available, hotels are showing the customer that they are willing to be open about their policies, and are also demonstrating that there is a method behind the rates they charge and that they are not jus randomly generated (Choi and Mattila, 2005). One disadvantage to the hotel is the marginally increased cost of making the booking when the policy is explained to each customer, as the booking phone call could take longer (Choi and Mattila, 2005). However, Choi and Mattila (2004) believe that the benefits outweigh the costs as customers may be lost if they perceive the pricing policy to be unfair.
Wirtz and Kimes (2003) also suggested that the prices of rooms could be "bundled" so that the room price itself would be indeterminable. This removes the issue of fairness for the customer, as they are unable to compare the room rate with someone else who may have paid the room only rate. However, this method doesn't seem to address the issue of how fair the practice is.
Due to the extent of literature on this subject, the fairness of yield management clearly worries those that practice it. However, in the hotel industry, yield management is becoming more acceptable (Choi and Mattila, 2005). This is backed up by an updated study by Kimes (2002). Yield management can only help achieve long term profit if the consumer perceives the process to be fair (Wirtz and Kimes, 2003). Fair practices also have a positive effect on the service encounter, which will result in better customer satisfaction (Namasivayam and Hinkin, 2003). There are several ways that managers can make yield management appear to be fair. The products can be differentiated to justify their different prices, and it is important to make the pricing policy very clear to customers so they can make an informed choice. These methods will educate the customer, and hopefully make them more accepting of yield management as a practice in the hospitality industry.