What is perhaps most interesting about the responses that I received during a pair of loosely structured interviews exploring gender, is the extent to which certain 'common sense' opinions about differences between men and women appeared to the two participants to be self-evident and almost incontestable. For both of them, the web of assumptions and behaviours that constitute their gendered lives seemed so natural that they were quite dismissive of the whole gender debate. This is clearly a politicized area. In this essay I will reflect on my participants' thoughts, and attempt to relate them to some of the key theoretical perspectives.
In an echo of the dichotomy which Freedman describes as 'central to feminist analysis' (2001: 8), Anna, my female participant, stated stridently early on in our interview that "men and women are fundamentally different - I stress the word different, not unequal". Her world is somewhat binary: men are characteristically more instrumental and aggressive than women, and can usually "read maps"; women have more intuitive, emotional traits which make them "tuned in to people's feelings". Despite this separation into distinct spheres, Anna does not acknowledge a resultant inequality affecting her everyday life, perhaps because it appears that she sees the boundaries between male and female behaviour as permeable, even if this is done with a struggle. This was made clear when she recounted a time when she was competing with men at a local karate club - a very male-dominated environment. She admitted that "I had to be ultra-aggressive and the first to volunteer... in order to be taken seriously and given respect".
Anna's interpretation of the cause of what Connell has referred to as this 'character dichotomy' (2002: 40) in gender is emphatically sociobiological. "Society is changing", she claims, "and faster than the 50,000 years or so that it took for women to evolve to tend the campfires, cook, clean and raise babies... [while] men hunted". Sociobiology seeks to reduce gender practices to the evolutionary imperatives of natural selection. Men's and women's various ways of behaving become entrenched because of the direct or indirect reproductive advantage they provide, thus women develop an instinct for nurturing and men are sexually promiscuous to provide the best chances for their genetic survival (Connell, 2002: 31). Although these concepts have a seductive simplicity which may have driven their popularization in the media and 'pop psychology' literature of the 1990s, (ibid.: 31) they can be criticized on several fronts. Crucially, the arguments are biologically deterministic, and do not account satisfactorily for transgressions or rejections of gendered behaviour, such as Anna's displays of aggression in sport.
Peter's view of gender relates to a different tradition within sociology: functionalism. Growing up in the 1950s, he saw gender expressed in quite different ways to Anna. For him, little movement was possible or desirable between "men's work and women's work"; and transgression was almost unknown. While his mother stayed at home raising the children, his father laboured as a carpenter. "Everyone seemed surer of their place in society then, I suppose", he commented, going on to explain that although women might have had few opportunities to work outside the home, they were "given more respect - you would always give up your seat for a lady [on public transport]". He misses this. Insomuch as he thinks about gender at all, Peter feels that these defined sex roles underpinned the way families worked, and lays some of the blame for a more atomized society in the decline of this stability: "you knew where you were [and] there was more a path through life set out before you... it's less clear now". Functionalism would attempt to explain this situation by looking at the way in which fairly fixed 'sex roles' contribute to the stable functioning of other institutions in society, such as women's unpaid household labour supporting male paid labour (Connell, 2002: 123-4). This in turn is a fairly static view of society which does not go far towards explaining clear changes in these roles over the past 40 years.
Both participants' constructions of their gender identity go some way towards an explanation. My concluding thought is that despite these ideas being deeply ingrained, they are seldom actually reconsidered or tested, and embody a tacit acceptance of inequality between men and women.