The government in the UK is compiled of a two-tier system: central government and local government, in the form of local authorities. Local government revenue in England, Wales and Scotland is raised through a combination of local tax, charges for some services provided, central government grants and borrowing. Local government largely have power over the first two methods but since the mid 70s central government have been more and move involved in local government finance, in the form of grants, which have resulted in the bulk of money spent by councils coming from sources over which they have little or no control. It not only this they have little control, local government have to pass the majority of decisions through central government, which means they do not have as much control in the decision making process as they would like. More recently:
Central government grants come in the form of the Formula Grant System, which sets spending totals to take into account the costs to local authorities as a result of providing local services, specific grants, supplementary grants, transitional grants and the Revenue Support Grant (RSG), which is considered the most important. The RSG is an annual grant given by central government to local authorities and is the part of aggregate external finance that is not provided from business rates or specific and special grants. Around 48% form the majority of local government revenue and 25% comes from business taxation. The Government distributes this grant so that if every authority set its budget at the level of its formula spending share, then the council tax would be the same for all properties in the same valuation band throughout England. The formula spending share makes use of information reflecting the demographic, physical and social characteristics of each area.
The RSG is made up of its standard spending assessment (SSA), less the amount it will get from the national pool of business rates and the amount it would get if council tax is set at a national standard rate. The money raised goes towards the Local Government's responsibilities, which include: education, housing, planning applications, strategic planning, transport planning, passenger transport, highways, fire, social services, libraries, leisure & recreation, waste collection, waste disposal, environmental health, revenue collection.
Central government keeps financial control of local government in a number of ways, such as adjusting the level of its revenue support grant, the distribution of non-domestic rates, which are collected locally and returned to central government or setting a maximum level for council budgets. As a result, 75%-80% of local government finance is controlled by central government. It has been insinuated, by some, that governments of both parties have often manipulated these grants to favour areas where their own party predominates. The grant system only equalises for differences in needs and resources at one point, whereas spending equals the Formula Spending Share that the government calculates for each individual authority. A disadvantage of central government grants is that it reduces local authorities' independence, as stated by the Local Government Association (LGA):
Local tax is another method of raising local government revenue. This takes the form of council tax, which was introduced in 1993 and is a local tax on domestic property, collected by local authorities. Council Tax is simple to calculate: it is based on the market value of a persons dwelling: the price it would fetch if it had been sold on the 1 st April of that financial year, which means local people understand it and it is also easy to collect. This tax provides a stable and predictable income for local authorities. It was devised to keep a link between the users and payers as a replacement for community charges/poll tax. There are exemptions to council tax, such as a 25% rebate for one-person households and some property will be exempt from council tax, such as student houses. Thus, making it fair for the whole community. The actual tax levied will depend on the money needed by each local authority for its expenditure. Therefore, it is dependant on where you live, the value of the property and the number of people in the household, with reference to the authority you live in. According to the results form 1999/2000 council tax only raised 25% of total local authority revenue, which is only a small percentage to have control over. As stated by Professor Bramley:
As with most things, there are disadvantages with council tax. It has been pointed out that it is regressive; it is not a buoyant tax, as it does not automatically increase with economic growth. Therefore it has been stated by the LGA 'that it provides and insufficient safety net'
. Expanding on this view, Peter Kenway from the New Policy Institute explained that:
Fees and charges for various services also contribute to local government revenue, although it is parliament who decides which services they have to finance out of taxation and for which they have to make a charge. It is the services which benefit the consumer personally and directly, that give them choice whether to avail themselves personally or directly and those that allow for individual or household consumption to be measured. An example of this could be the use of public transport. It is up to the individual to use the facility and if they do they will be charged accordingly to the time and distance of their journey.
Local government borrowing is a source of local government revenue. Councils may borrow from any willing lender; in practice most borrow from the Public Works Loan Board (PWLB) or from a Bank. The amount that an individual council will be authorised to borrow will normally be limited to a maximum of 500,000 in any single financial year. 'The borrowing should be for a purpose that would be capital expenditure as defined in section 16 of the Local Government Act 2003." (No author, 2004)
Democracy, as defined by President Abraham Lincoln, is 'Government of the people, by the people, for the people'. Local government are the only political bodies, besides Parliament, that are elected by the people and play and important part in preserving democracy. I think if any system had to be selected as the best for protecting local democracy would have to be one which does not involve central government. This would suggest local taxes are the best source but even then it has all been passed though central government and intimately they have control. New sources of revenue, to either accompany or replace existing ones, have been suggested to help local authorities retain their independence, as mentioned by Trotman-Dickson in Economics of the Public Sector: 'The new revenue could be under the authorities' own control or represent a proportion of national taxation assigned to them. ' Different local taxes have been considered, such as local income tax, local sales tax, local motor vehicle tax and local payroll tax. The central government could assign a certain amount of any one of these taxes to local authorities. One problem with more local taxes is the extra administration and collection costs that are likely to arise, resulting in the local system becoming more complex.
It would be better if local agencies had to raise money locally and justify their spending to the local community: this would encourage community involvement as well as a better understanding for the people due to the involvement. The problem is that some local communities are much better off than others. The areas with the most acute law and order problems, health needs and training requirements would receive the least money. This shows that local governance is substantially dependant on central funding in some form or another. If the quality of local services depends largely, or in some cases exclusively, on the money that could be raised locally, the poorest areas, with the greatest needs, would have the least income for spending on public services. That is one reason why even elected local authorities, that do have their own tax raising powers, still rely on grants from the national exchequer for the bulk of their spending, in the form of revenue support grants.