Britain's trade with the European Union (EU) has grown from just over 40% of the country's total trade, in 1973, to 55% when we joined. Membership of the EU is central to stability, growth and employment: the UK stands to benefit from an enlarged Europe that is more integrated into the global economy. The Euro is a single currency arrangement that came into operation between 11 members of the EU in January 1999. On 1 st January 2002, 12 EU members got rid of their own currencies and introduced the Euro as their sole currency: the UK is yet to do this.
If the UK enters the single currency it could have drastic effects. Chancellor Gordon Brown has admitted: 'Volatility in the housing market is a problem for stability and a serious barrier to joining the Euro'. The UK housing market is considerably different from those in the rest of the European Union (EU).
'There's a higher level of mortgage debt and a greater reliance on variable rate mortgages that imply the sensitivity of household interest payments to changes in interest rates is higher in the UK than in any other EU country and considerably higher than in any other large EU economy'. (Miles, D-2004). If the UK becomes part of the Euro the country's interest rates, decided in Frankfurt by the European Central Bank (ECB), will be determined by the euro area as a whole: interest rates will not be sensitive to individual markets, which could lead to a lot of problems in the UK. The Treasury says: "If household's spending is significantly more sensitive to interest rate changes in the UK than in the euro as a whole, a common monetary policy could induce some relative instability in the UK housing market and household's spending'. Interest rates for all member countries have been set at a single rate by the ECB: the Euro countries consequently lost the opportunity to use interest rates to moderate house-price inflation.
In the EMU's study there are four main structural aspects of the housing market that would lead to differences of interest rate sensitivity and sensitivity of the consumption to housing wealth, in the UK and the euro area households. These are housing tenure, house price trends, mortgage markets and mortgage equity withdrawal. Looking at these four aspects with relation to the UK, housing tenure has considerably higher owner occupation in comparison to some countries in the euro, such as Germany, although lower than smaller countries, such as Spain. House price trends in the UK show real house price growth had been stronger than in other larger euro areas. This is linked to housing supply, which is not considerably high in the UK. As I have previously discussed, the UK suffers from high levels of mortgage debt, combined with the dominance of variable rate mortgages. This implies that the sensitivity of household interest payments to charges in interest rates is higher in the UK than the euro area countries. Finally, the competitive, liberalisation of the UK mortgage market makes it easier for households to access their housing wealth than it is for other euro countries, which is shown through the amount of mortgage equity withdrawal. This is confirmed by the view of the HM treasury 'The UK has seen a rapid rise in personal borrowing, which reflects the relative ease of achieving mortgage equity withdrawal in less regulated markets and trends in housing equity itself." People in the UK re-mortgage their properties so they can use the cash for personal use, such as spending and consumption. Therefore, the flexibility of the variable rate mortgage is much more appealing. There are also fewer restrictions on credit in the UK, which means lenders offer high loan to value ratios, which means households with smaller incomes can have larger, more expensive houses.
Since 1960s a lower than average national income, with reference to that of the EU, has been invested in the UK housing market, the result of this being an increase in house prices. Over the long term, they have risen, on average, two and a half percent a year. Owner occupation is 70%, which is similar to the EU average. With so much owner-occupation there is a high level of mortgage debt in the UK, considerably higher than within the rest of the EU: it's 60% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in the UK. One of the reasons for this is offered by the EMU study on Housing, Consumption and the EMU, is that 'that there are mortgages held by householders who are private landlords'.
'The problem for the UK is that the German and the British economies are the two biggest in the EU and have the housing markets with the least in common' (Essex, 2001). The high levels of home ownership and mortgage debt in the UK suggests that the household income after mortgage payments is likely to be more sensitive to interest rate changes than in the rest of the EU. Interest rates affect household incomes differently depending on the amount fixed or variable rate mortgages that are held. Variable rate mortgages are prevalent in the UK, with over 60% of UK mortgages being of the variable kind, which move closely in line with base rates, and only 7% are at long-term fixed rates. Thus, causing major problems for the UK, if it joins the EU, as the ECB can change interest rates every two weeks, which would make things extremely volatile. In comparison to other countries in the EU, where fixed rate mortgages are more prevalent, a constant change in interest rates would not be so disruptive. Joining a currency union with no monetary flexibility requires the UK to have more flexibility in labour markets and in the housing market. The UK rented sector is too small to be a flexible substitute for owner-occupation. The UK has instituted within the Bank of England a very effective apparatus for managing interest rates. The EMU will remove this policy lever, along with removing the opportunity for exchange rate policy.
Interest rates directly affect a household's cash flow: a change in interest rates alters the immediate burden of mortgages interest payments. If interest rates increase it will directly affect a households disposable income, the increase could lead to lower consumer spending in the short term. Interest rates also have an indirect impact. Changes in interest rates will impact on housing demand and supply, which will lead to a change in house prices and housing wealth. There is also evidence that such changes in housing wealth are a key determinant of consumer spending.
With relation to Gordon Brown's five tests of entry into the EU, the first test asks 'Are business cycles and economic structures compatible so the we and others could live comfortably with euro interest rates on a permanent basis?" This is the question that is of most significance when looking at the UK housing market and the euro. Housing has a central influence on whether the UK meets the first of the five tests on convergence because the UK housing market is much more sensitive to changes in interest rates than other countries in the euro zone. This is due to the UK's preference for short term, variable rate mortgages, which means changes in interest rates will have a correspondingly big impact on the UK economy: 'we cannot yet be confident that UK business cycles are sufficiently compatible with those of the euro area to allow the UK to live comfortably with the euro area interest rates on a permanent basis' (HM Treasury, 2003)
Euro entry could be very destabilising, given the volatility of the UK's housing market. There is said to be little tendency for the types of mortgage product available to change and become similar across the different countries.
According to economists, joining the euro would spark a dangerous house price boom. This view is backed up by Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) 'the volatility of the UK housing market makes euro entry risky '
: they estimate that house prices will increase by 30% upon entry. Part of what makes entry risky is  'the loss of interest rate control, which is likely to result in increased house price volatility with consequential detrimental effects on overall macroeconomic stability. However, this should not be overstated, and should be considered against the potential long-term microeconomic benefits from eliminating exchange rate uncertainty and transaction costs.' (Unknown, 2001)
If the UK joins the euro interest rates will decrease as they are lower in the EU. This means that mortgage rates will also decrease; thus borrowing will increase and house prices will rocket leading to a boom in the housing market. As with most things after a boom comes the slump and the economy would go into recession.
The Keynesian Theory of Consumption, which has been looked at with reference to the UK by the HM Treasury have discovered that on 'balance they support the view that the sensitivity of household spending to housing wealth and house prices is higher in the UK than elsewhere'. With the potential constant change of interest rates the housing market will become very sensitive.
In conclusion I don't think the UK, in its current state, should join the euro. The system of financing mortgages and the issue with regards to the lack of supply of new housing needs to be resolved before the UK can safely join the EU. 'Mr Brown is looking into ways of freeing up the planning system to boost house building, as well as encouraging people to make more use of fixed rate mortgages.' (John Hawksworth, 2001) I think this suggestion is just one of the things that needs to be carried out in order to prepare the UK for membership.