Government and politics operate at a number of levels: making it far from self-contained. 'The new world of local governance is more complex than the old system of local government. The old unequal two-way relationship between central and local government has now been replaced by a more complex multi-layered system of governance.'. Governance is generally taken to comprehend institutions of government: it is essentially about the process rather than institutional structures:
Local governance increasingly involves multi-agency's working together in partnerships and policy networks, which cut across organisational boundaries. In local governance, elected local authorities are still the most important public bodies and they have the potential to play the leading role.
Governance, today, doesn't just include those, who as ministers, civil servants or elected councillors are part of government, it also involves a wide range of organisations, including former state institutions and activities, which have been privatised, central and local government departments but also quasi-autonomous non-governmental organisations (quangos), which are independent as they aren't part of government departments, nor directly accountable to ministers: finally, not forgetting the voluntary sector. From this, one can see that governance is both multi-agency and multi-level. Multi-agency networks operate at and between various levels of government.
Local governance is part of a much wider process, which involves a growing interdependence between levels: multi-level governance. Public services have to work with well-networked community groups, often to find they are replaced by them. An example of the different agencies that are involved in a public service could be the provision of local health services/care, which is now the main responsibility of hospital trusts and primary care trusts. Other examples could include local transport and the police service. Even where elected local authorities retain statutory responsibility for a service it may actually be provided by another organisation, such as a voluntary body largely funded by the council, by a private company under contract or by another public agency. Refuse collection, cleaning, ground maintenance, laundry services now provided by private firms under contract although the services are still publicly funded and regulated.
In the UK there is a unitary rather than a federal state. Supreme power is not divided: it is concentrated in the hands of the central government, which causes problems as there is no longer direct contact between Central and Local Government and this is responsible for local decline of power. The role of local government is strictly subordinate and its relationship with central government is very unequal.
The British state has been eroded by the European Union (EU) as it has been continuously increasing, its influence over British policy. This process began in 1973 when the United Kingdom joined the EU and as a result of this, decisions taken in Westminster and Whitehall are now controlled and revised by powers located in Brussels, Strasbourg and Luxemburg. Other super-national bodies have an influence also, as well as by the power of global capitalism and devolution, decentralisation and fragmentation, which adds to the levels in governance.
'There is no one process of management change as individual organisations and service sectors respond differently to system-wide triggers for change. '5 Management change is a non-linear process, involving continuities between old and new approaches, movements forwards and backwards along with change at different levels. Management change has political significance, impacting upon relationships between government and citizens at the local level. Leach and Pacey-Smith believe 'there is need for both horizontal integration of a wider range of local agencies and interests, and a vertical integration of different levels of government.'
The English Local Government Act 2000 changed the formal management of local democracy in England, the most radical change being directly-elected mayors (or the mayor and cabinet option), which was adopted in only a small number of towns and cities. The London mayor and the operation of Greater London Authority, which operates more at the level of regional rather than local government and has a range of strategic rather than delivery powers
Only ten councils out of almost 400 have adopted the 'mayor and cabinet' option. Under England's mayor and cabinet system alongside, the directly elected mayor a wider group of councillors is also elected to the council. The mayor, in the UK, does not have direct sway over the administration of the council, which remains independently headed by a non-political official, usually called the chief executive, appointed by the whole of the council. The introduction of a directly-elected mayor is a significant constitutional change as the Government believe all local people should be able to have their say before a council adopts a constitution involving a directly elected mayor.
The new third way management is also significant: it involves networks and partnership rather than the traditional public administration associated with hierarchy, bureaucracy, command and compliance on the one hand or the new right solution of competition, consumer choice and markets on the other.
Recent reforms of structure, along with changes in operational responsibilities have increased public confusion over responsibility for local services and decisions. Continuing reforms of the local government committee system have led to some significant upheavals in the town halls. Over the last few years there has been the introduction of directly elected mayors, London is a good example of this. 'If elected mayors are able to provide effective leadership, using their status and legitimacy to bring together interests and agencies into effective coalitions, city governance could be transformed. ' A lot of the modernising agenda seems to involve centralising power in 'the hands of the few' within local communities, a mayor or local executive.
With reference to Oxford, it's the Oxford Community Partnership who are responsible for improving local services in the city.
'This partnership tackles strategic issues across the County. An example of what it does is outlined in the agreement between the OCP, public service organisations, voluntary sector, community groups and local residents. The agreement consists of five priorities that need to be delivered to the communities. These are: Children and Young People, Economy and Enterprise, Healthier Communities, Older People and Safer and Stronger Communities.' ()
Planning is unique in the way it operates at all levels government: European, national, regional, county, district and neighbourhood levels. Planning stretches across a range of governmental levels but also non-governmental organisations, as part of governance. The UK planning system is intended to provide guidance, control and incentive in the use and development of land. The current form of national advice for planning, in England, is contained within a series of national planning policy guidance notes (PPGs). The planning process is managed and implemented by national and local tiers of government and is hierarchical in policy framework. Central government's policy requirement is very clear: local planning authorities must follow the statements within PPGs with reference to carrying out their planning duties. The planning polity now comprises at least four different systems within the four different countries of the UK. Britain still possesses a UK government and policies are formulated within the UK government on certain topics for application across the whole of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. When it comes to planning decisions they are delegated to planning officers then the Local Area Committee (LAC) before being passed onto the strategic development Control Committee and finally the Local Plan is referred to.
If one looks at the recent planning and development that has occurred in Birmingham, it can be seen that one of their planning aims to regenerate and redevelop the inner city. The Mailbox is a prime example of this. The building is that of an old Royal Mail sorting office with one of the cities canals running alongside, which was bought by the local government for redevelopment. The new mixed-use building opened just prior to Christmas 2000 and consists of designer shops, restaurants and caf bars along with two new hotels and luxury apartments. The upper levels also provide office and residential accommodation. This process of redevelopment involved Royal Mail, the local government, British Waterway's, private investors, such as residential and retail owners and developers. The actual transformation by the business involved many businesses, reflecting local governance.
In Oxford the Planning Department formulates recommended goals, plans, policies and ordinances that provide orderly growth and development for the city. This department assists the public with matters regarding rezoning, annexation, subdivision of property, and historic preservation. Oxford Prison Site is an example of redevelopment where had taken place, which has involved many actors within local governance and beyond. It is national catering and brewery companies that have been the major actors in this development but also local government as they were owners of some of the land. It is private companies that have been responsible for some of the construction, public sectors have also been involved.