Education within the field of architecture is underpinned both by academic and practical work. This essay should try to summarise the experience that I gained whilst being a part of professional team(s). I will try to identify the issues related to running a "design business" within current socio-economic climate that I have encountered. Also, my aim is to address the skills that I have obtained during the time that I spent working in practice.
The following description and analysis is split into two parts. The first section concentrates on looking at architectural office as a business venture; trying to recognise and discuss the issues that I have encountered within the categories of practice management, design development and workspace culture.
The second section looks into specific skills that I have learnt through the involvement in a number of projects. It will try to show how certain knowledge about different stages of job running is the result of cumulative experience. In other words, how similarities and divergences of projects that went through the same stages of development process have helped me to gain a particular skill.
Since finishing my undergraduate degree, I have been involved with two design companies. Between August 2003 and December 2003, I was an intern at Thomas Heatherwick Studio in London. After my internship programme was finished, I have taken up a position of an architectural assistant at White Design Associates in Bristol, where I stayed until December 2004. It is through these two organisations that I became exposed to realities of running a professional practice.
Within this section I will briefly explain the background of these two practices. Following on, I will try to analyse their organisational structure and practice management strategies. Finally, by comparing and contrasting these two organisations I will try to reach conclusions regarding the issues that I became aware of and that relate to running a professional business.
Apart from getting general insight into architecture and design as a from business venture, I have also gained or developed particular skills during the time spent in practice. These can be defined as tasks that I have been introduced to and that I have executed individually or as a part of an office team.
The following section concentrates on these tasks. Rather than focusing on individual projects or on project stages as defined by RIBA Plan of Work, I will try to indicate how each of the mentioned skills developed through my involvement in various projects.
The reasons for organising the section in this manner are twofold. Firstly, the small - scale project that I have managed did not go through the development stages as defined by Plan of Work due to its size. Therefore, trying to organise my experience according to this plan would be difficult, as the actual stages of project development in some instances have significantly parted from it. Secondly, as I have been doing similar tasks on various projects, organising the section according to projects would mean that many observations would be unnecessarily repeated. Hence, the following paragraphs elaborate on particular skills. Projects that are cited within the main body of the text are briefly described within the Appendix 2.
The skills have been placed into three categories. These are: