For this assignment I will be describing and analyzing an interaction. I will discuss my role in the interaction, what I learnt and how I felt throughout the interaction/experience. I will create a hypothesis that reflects what I think about what was going on. I will discuss different theories and apply them to the interaction/experience. I chose to focus on this particular observation because I was interested to look into what appeared to be a 'normal' interaction, to see if I could learn about any underlying issues or influences. This will hopefully help me to be aware of extra issues e.g. attachment or regression in my future practice. For the purposes of this assignment the young girl will be called Susie, this is not her real name, but is being used for confidentiality purposes.
A nine year old girl called Susie came onto the ward one morning for her tonsillectomy later on that day. Her mother was with her; her father was not there as he was away on business and had been for the previous 6 weeks. Susie was a private patient which is why her operation was happening on a weekend. Susie's sister had had her tonsils removed 2 years previously; therefore the procedure was familiar to Susie's mother. Susie had a strong allergy to medical tape and plasters; this made Susie a 'special' case straight away as preparations needed to be altered to work around her allergy. Susie was a very intelligent girl; she looked and acted older than she was.
Susie's mother seemed confident and calm. Susie's mother had a tendency to answer questions for Susie; to begin with I found this difficult as I was mistakenly treating Susie older than a nine year old, luckily I was soon talking to Susie without her mother present and I realised that Susie wasn't as old as I had previously thought. Susie's mother seemed to pressurise Susie into a premature maturity also, making comments such as "Susie is becoming a young lady quite quickly", however, in a later conversation with Susie's mother she stated that she realises that Susie gets perceived as being older than she is, and that she wouldn't want for Susie to grow up too quickly, for example, if she were to start a singing career.
Susie had her anaesthetic with little complaint and just a few tears. When walking back with Susie's mother she revealed that she was quite anxious about Susie regarding the anaesthetic as her other daughter had made a huge fuss when having a cannula inserted and was anticipating the same thing. This conversation made me realise that Susie's mother had been quite anxious but had tried very hard not to show this in front of her daughter.
Once Susie was back on the ward having had a standard tonsillectomy, Susie acted appropriately as she was tired and sleepy. I took regular observations, and this gave Susie's mother and I opportunities to talk as Susie was very dozy. The conversations that I was able to have with Susie's mother were very interesting as how she responded to me was quite different in comparison to earlier that day. Susie's mother was much more willing to talk to me and even seemed to keep me at the bedside for longer than necessary. Susie's mother took great pleasure in talking about Susie and verbalised to me the high hopes that she has for her daughter, although she did not want her daughter to know about these ambitions too soon. Once Susie was waking up more often she would complain about being in pain and was only drinking miniscule amounts of water as she said it hurt too much. Susie's mother was encouraging Susie to eat and drink more as she wouldn't want her to have a drip because that is what her sister had, which had caused a lot of pain and aggravation. Together they found that drinking was easier when swallowing food at the same time. Susie's mother constantly spoke of how her other daughter had not responded in this way and was 'bouncing off the walls' after her operation. Susie's mother clearly had expected the same outcome from Susie and often discouraged crying from Susie as she saw that this did not help the situation.
Throughout the day I had been aware of the fact that Susie had a fear of being sick, and at one point Susie was sick, this was well controlled by Susie's mother and me, reassuring Susie that she would feel better after being sick and is unlikely to be sick again. Susie continued to complain of great pain, my mentor then assessed her, and found nothing out of the ordinary regarding the tonsil wounds. The private doctor came to the ward and briefly reviewed Susie, also finding nothing out of the ordinary and he was happy with the operation. This seemed to please Susie's mother, yet Susie continued to make a 'fuss'. When Susie was in pain and crying, she would get a great deal of attention and close cuddling with her mother. I am sure that Susie found this very comforting and appreciated the affection that was being shown.
The main nursing role for the care of Susie and her mother was given to me. I was able to admit them to the ward, answer their questions, organize a session with the play specialist to explain about the procedure to Susie, I was able to care for both Susie and her mother whilst they were on the ward. I built up a rapport with them both and they used me as their point of reference when they required anything. I was aware of there being a stigma in my mind about the family as Susie was in for private surgery, however, both family members treated me with much respect, even though I thought they would see me as 'just a student'. I feel that I was able to prove myself to them through my knowledge being evident through relevant conversations. Susie's mother would often repeat what I had said to encourage Susie or to explain the reason behind something, for example, why she may have been sick.
In my opinion, the thoughts and feelings of all involved greatly influenced the behaviour, especially the behaviour of Susie. Susie's pre conceived fear of being sick may have caused her to be more anxious about the whole scenario. The anxiety from Susie's mother regarding cannulas, medical tape, recovery expectations etc could likely have been picked up by Susie. The NC state University wrote about recognizing stress in children, here they state that:
It could be argued that Susie was aware of possible outcomes of her operation, e.g. vomiting, and this could have made her more prone to the negative experiences. On the other hand, my own thoughts and feelings could have influenced the experience also as I was in two mind sets of being wary that the recovery was not going to plan, and also the mind set of being aware that Susie could have been playing upon her slow recovery.
I can learn from this experience that people will not always respond to me in the way I initially think they would, be that positively or negatively. I can learn from this experience that parents and children, whatever their background, need support, information, care and vital comforts when in hospital. I can learn that it is vital to be aware of surrounding circumstances within a family, e.g. Susie's father being away from home for a long period of time. And to be able to recognize the effects that this could have on a family, e.g. Susie's mother needed support and time to be listened to, possibly more so than if her husband was with her.
If I were to look after a child/adolescent who was experiencing regression of a stronger form then I would reflect back to this experience regarding what I have learnt through reading about regression, as Freud has always stated that regression should be treated with normal sympathetic objectivity, and that carers should not give into the patient's longings. (ref: Balint 1968)
Physically, Susie was developing at the usual rate for a nine year old, she was just approaching puberty. (Peter Smith, Helen Cowie & Mark Blades, 1998). The NNCC - National Network for Child Care states that at the age of nine, children may enjoy being members of clubs, and could have an increased interest in competitive sports. (ref: NNCC.org, 1995) Susie was a member of many school activities; however, her competitiveness seemed to lie in her vocal talent as apposed to sporting activities. The NNCC states that the intellectual development of a nine year old would be capable of understanding concepts without having direct hands-on experience, which it seemed that Susie was able to do when the play specialist explained to her what would be happening. Susie seemed to understand this and was aware of what would be happening. Susie was at her expected developmental level.
I believe that Susie was aware of the side effects of having a tonsillectomy as I am sure she understood the conversations that would have happened between a doctor and her mother. I also hypothesize that Susie was aware of the increased attention and affection that she received from her mother at this time. As I have previously mentioned, I observed that Susie may have pressure upon her to become more mature before her time, as she is intelligent and accomplished (having many talents), it seemed that people/family almost expected more from her than that of an average nine year old. I hypothesise that Susie used this opportunity of being in hospital as regressing back to a younger stage, where she needn't be brave and mature, but where she could cuddle her mother and cry, and for that to be okay.
Changing minds.org state that:
Although this refers to adults becoming more like children, I believe that it can also mean children moving backwards in their mind state. M. Balint (1968) talks about regression being a minor mechanism of defense, and that it is much less important than repression.
In my opinion, Susie has a secure attachment with her mother, however, there are a couple of signs that would suggest that their relationship is nearer to the avoidant side of secure, however, there are no observed signs to say that their relationship is at all ambivalent. For example, Howe et al (1999) state that children who experience rejecting, interfering and controlling parents would show avoidant attachment patterns, however, in my opinion, only one of the three experience criteria would fit to this relationship, as, in my opinion, Susie's mother was controlling, especially over Susie, therefore this may bring on some avoidant characteristics according to Howe, yet not enough to make any conclusions. Howe also states the characteristics of a securely attached relationship as children being able to approach their care givers knowing that their distress or upset will be recognized and responded to with comfort. This was evident in Susie and her mother's relationship as it could be argued that Susie was fueled from this recognition and response from her mother.
Susie was beginning to enter into the transitional period of puberty and developing independence and identity. This will involve a change of school, possibly changes of friends and social circles, and her relationships with her parents and siblings would also be affected. (Ref: John Schulenberg, 1999)
Susie would sometimes be affected by her mother leaving her for a short while, however, at other times, she would not be affected by her mothers leaving. Bowlby (1992) discusses separation distress/anxiety. Susie did not show as being highly distressed when her mother left her, however, on occasions, she was more distressed when her mother left her in comparison to when her mother was at her bedside.
University of Toronto, (2005) state that other influences could be temperament, socioeconomic status, mental health of family, day care, birth of sibling, family conflict, divorce etc. Bornstein (1989) discusses sensitive periods in development, this is an aspect of the attachment between Susie and her mother that I cannot comment on, as I have no knowledge of the bonding that may have happened early on in Susie's life.
A documentary has been created focusing on the stresses upon children and young adults, Guinevere Tufnell, a psychiatrist stated that children are vulnerable to stress and goes onto say that parents often do not help the matter. Although Susie is mainly securely attached to her mother, I feel that this relationship could change as Susie gets older and as more pressure is put onto her. This pressure may come from her mother or from her surroundings and education. An article from ProQuest online states that:
As the statement indicates, adults need to be watching for the signs of their children suffering from mental health problems. The family should be educated as to what this means and what to look for. As I have previously mentioned, the relationship between Susie and her mother is going to alter at some point due to Susie's development, however, I feel that if Susie's parents are aware of the pressures and changes on her life, then they may be able to help to alleviate some of the tensions and help to maintain a secure base that Susie will feel comfortable leaving and returning to.
In conclusion, I have been unable to discover any literature that reinforces my original hypothesis, yet there are small aspects of different theories that are supported in this case, however, not enough to make a decision or diagnosis with. When researching regression I found that the literature would highlight regression in adults returning to a child like state and literature referring to children with e.g. ADHA or Autism having regression symptoms rather than evidence of children without a mental illness regressing into past years.
In my opinion, alterations and slight abnormalities in attachment is a common and usual occurrence. I feel that Susie and her mother were nothing different from the 'norm' and will learn as they live and experience different influences in life.
Susie mainly shows the attributes of a securely attached child, for example, by having a high self-esteem, socially competent and being popular (University of Toronto, 2005) however, I observed rare occasions when Susie showed signs of regression and a slightly avoidant attachment.
Bowlby (1907-1990) stated that attachment is an evolved mechanism to keep infants close to their care giver. This was apparent from Susie and her mother as they had a close relationship with each other. Looking into this interaction in more depth will hopefully help me in my future practice, because I will be more aware of any underlying issues that may be present could be playing a part in the actions of the child and family. This does not mean that I will by psycho-analysing every family that I meet, simply that my awareness can be more raised.