In this assignment I will look at how a family that I cared for on the ward setting coped under the stress of having a young daughter in hospital. I chose this family because this was a family that I have had most involvement with, I was able to spend many shifts with them which allowed me to have continuity in the care and to be aware of all cares and to gain a greater understanding of the processes - medical processes and processes of the family.
I have chosen the Neuman's systems model to use to help explain the assessment process and to guide me when reflecting upon what affected this family. This model was chosen because it
I will begin by giving some background information on the family, I will then go on to identify the various stressors and explain how the framework can be applied. This reflection will then move onto how and what the nursing staff can/could do to provide help and support to facilitate the families coping, followed by an evaluation upon interventions used, ending with a conclusion.
The family will be given the pseudo name of the Stacy family, and the patient will be called Elle and her brother will be called Sam.
Elle is a 4 year old girl who came to the ward after being diagnosed with pneumonia which turned into a pneumorthorax. She was originally at her local hospital, and then got transferred to our ward to have a chest drain. The drain was inserted on day one of her admission.
The Stacy's are an articulate and educated family. Mrs Stacy has a gentle character, yet showed assertiveness. Mrs Stacy cares for the children at home, Elle and her Elle's younger brother Sam. Mr Stacy works full time in a small company. I was given the impression that he plays an important role in this company, although this fact is unknown. Both Mr and Mrs Stacy were in there early 30's. Both grandparents live relatively close by; a 1-2 hour drives away. Both grandparents are married and have seemingly good relationships with Elle as Elle would often say that she "wants Nanny". On various occasions the grandparents would come and spend time on the ward with the family. Mr and Mrs Stacy appeared to have a strong and stable relationship, they seemed to be supporting each other and continued to be affectionate to each other. No blaming or emotional exploitation was observed. Mr and Mrs Stacy would talk to each other often, in person and on the phone. Both parents were willing and open to talking with health care staff and were compliant and polite.
Whether Mr or Mrs Stacy had siblings is unknown. Many of the possible life activities that the Stacy's may be involved in are also unknown.
When caring for Elle and the Stacy's I would often stay and talk with Mrs Stacy and try and spend time with them to build up a good relationship with them. There are a few issues that I picked up on through conversations that I consider to be stressors for the family and in my opinion, the family would agree with these observations.
When the doctors came round on the first day to review Elle, Mrs Stacy was good at asking questions to the doctors, one of her concerns was regarding the length of stay and recovery for Elle. The doctors told Mrs Stacy that hospital stays can vary with children with chest drains and that it can range between 4 days to 10 days, and that one week is the average length of stay. I stayed back to talk with the family and to make sure that they understood everything that the doctors had said and to ask if they had any further questions. I was able to encourage Mrs Stacy that she had asked the doctors good questions and I was able to reassure her that she wasn't being too fussy. On reflection I can now see that this was Mrs Stacy trying to look ahead to be able to plan ahead for the stay in hospital. At a later date, when the doctors were reviewing Elle again - once she had the chest drain in, Mrs Stacy asked again what date the doctors estimated that Elle would be discharged from hospital. The doctors were able to reassure Mrs Stacy that Elle was making a good recovery, but that at this stage they were still unsure. Being in hospital was obviously largely disruptive to every day life for the Stacy's, however, being able to plan for the next few days seemed to be a way of coping for Mrs Stacy. From conversations with Mrs Stacy and the above examples I would identify 'uncertainty' as being a stressor for the family, especially for Mrs Stacy. Drawing from the Neuman systems model, this stressor would have been influenced by environmental factors, this specific stressor coming from the internal environment, an intrapersonal stressor within the Stacy's, especially Mrs Stacy. To add to the uncertainty, Elle seemed to deteriorate from Sunday to Monday; Elle had less energy and was more lethargic and less bubbly, like her normal self. Another aspect of being in hospital and brought uncertainty was the fact that Elle's bed or room was changed 3 times. Elle was moved twice in the bay of beds and then finally into a side room away from the nurses desk. Mrs Stacy reported to liking the new room away from the ward, yet felt it hassle to be moved 3 times. I think that Mrs Stacy originally liked being away from the busy noise of the ward and to the room out of the ward, but soon realised that there is less to do and less people to talk to away from the ward. I noticed Mrs Stacy talking more with me once they had been moved to the side room, this may have been because she was lonely, but it also could have been because we were getting to know each other more and Mrs Stacy was more comfortable around me. Mrs Stacy once said to me whilst talking that I must have other things that I need to be doing rather than talking to her, once I had reassured Mrs Stacy that I was free for a bit, she continued talking and we were able to discuss in more depth Elle's drain, how it works and what the changes meant. E.g. the change of fluid colour and the 'spiral' effect that could be seen in the tube.
Sam, Elle's younger brother who is only 6 months old was being cared for at home by Mr Stacy's parents whilst Elle was in hospital. He was being bottle fed expressed milk that Mrs Stacy was able to express on the ward, using the wards express pump. Sam was brought in to hospital on the second day of Elle's admission and a few more times over the next couple of days. Some nights Mrs Stacy was able to go home and care for Sam and get a good nights rest whilst Mr Stacy was in hospital with Elle. I have observed in other families that parents understandably find it difficult having one child at home and another child in hospital, having no children of my own I have not experienced this but I attempted to speak to Mrs Stacy about how she is finding it being away from either child. Mrs Stacy said that she found it difficult being away from Sam but she did not expand much on the topic and seemed preoccupied. As Mr Stacy works full time and Mrs Stacy looks after the children at home, I imagine that she organises many of the activities of the week with her children and is able to know what is going on at all times. To have her children separated for so long would have been a great change in Mrs Stacy's day to day life. Mr and Mrs Stacy would have had to organise and think about who is going to care for Sam, how the breast feeds going to get from the hospital to home and on top of that, they had to keep in mind who would be with Elle, and which grandparents would be able to support them. Having a 6 month old baby at home whilst Elle was in hospital was definitely an added stressor for this family. Here I can see Mrs Stacy using her organisational line of resistance and altering this skill to continue to cope through different circumstances. (Neuman 1995)
For the first 4 days of Elle being in hospital, Mr Stacy was able to have time off work to help support Elle and Mrs Stacy, and to look after Elle's younger brother, however, as they had been in their local hospital for 3 days previous to being admitted to our ward, Mr Stacy could not have any more time off work. Mrs Stacy said "there is only so much time off work that his boss can give him". This can be considered a stressor for the family as Mrs Stacy was now faced with being in hospital without her husband and also with one less person to look after their 6 month old son, Sam. Fortunately Mrs Stacy was able to call upon both her and her husbands parents for support. As Mr Stacy's parents had already been caring for Sam at home so that they could both be in hospital with Elle, so now Mrs Stacy was able to rely on them more so now that her husband had to return to work.
Elle was a very compliant young girl who would rarely complain about us health professionals poking and prodding her at all hours of the day. At times Elle would be almost too compliant and would not tell us if she were in pain, as she wanted to be better and also did not like some of the oral medicines that we gave her, e.g. codeine. Elle frequently said that she wasn't in pain when she was. Mrs Stacy, I and my mentor had to be very observant of Elle and aware that she would sometimes not tell the truth so as to avoid medicines. Elle was sensitive to her drain when it was being changed, or medications were being administered into the drain. Distraction by parents, my mentor, or myself was often used with good effect. Elle and her family seemed to "get used to" the drain that was coming out of Elle's body. It was a stressor to begin with, during the first few days of having the drain, but towards the end of Elle's stay in hospital, the Stacy family were much more relaxed when we were carrying out procedures that involved the drain, e.g. attaching a new drain cylinder.
Through observation and discussions with the family members I observed the following issues as possible stressors for the family;
A component of the NSM looks at different types of stressors; these are called the intra-, inter- and extra-personal aspects of the system. This part of the system helps to relate and recognize different stressors occurring at different levels.
Uncertainty was a large stressor for the Stacy family, for them to be waiting around and not knowing how long they will be in hospital for, and at times seeming not sure how to pass the day. To minimise this stressor I made an effort to let them know (especially Mrs Stacy) of each step by step, and what the next thing to "wait" for would be, e.g. antibiotics at 1600.
Elle having a chest drain in was initially a stressor for the family, Elle had to put up with us interfering with her at various times in the day - Elle like stickers, as an aim of helping Elle to cope and have something to look forward to and enjoy I created a sticker chart to reward Elle for being good and brave. I was able to build up a good rapport with the young girl and family; I was able to let Elle know what was going to happen and what we were doing with her and her drain. My mentor and I often asked Elle how she was feeling, keeping in mind that she had a tendency to hide her pain from us so that we could keep on top of her pain management. This is an influenced by the internal environment (Neuman, 1995) between Elle and Mrs Stacy, having a drain in would have altered how Mr and Mrs Stacy could cuddle and comfort Elle. The family worked around this issue and 'got used to' the drain and adapted accordingly.
Mr Stacy had to go back to work 4 days after Elle's admission, this left Mrs Stacy with a gap in her support network. To work alongside the family to facilitate Mrs Stacy's coping we encouraged breaks and welcomed other family members to help and be there for support. The Stacy's were fortunate enough to have a very well built family support network. The Stacy's were able to call upon this support system when they needed someone reliable to look after Sam and also when Mr Stacy had to return to work, Mrs Stacy needed more family support on the ward.
Having another child at home was a stressor upon the family, and the fact that he required breast milk added to this stressor. To facilitate the families coping we were able to supply Mrs Stacy with a breast pump for her to express milk for her son, she was able to keep this in Elle's room and use it when she required it with some level of privacy.
Drawing from the NSM (Neuman, 1995) the Stacy's lines of resistance appear to be very strong and established, as the family were managing under the stressors. The family was able to use their lines of resistance, e.g. family support, organisation and planning ahead to cope under the stressors.
To minimise the stressor of uncertainty the doctors and nurses made 'mini goals' for Elle and her family to aim for. For example, one morning my mentor and I had removed Elle's drain for the 4hour break that was the followed procedure for chest drains. We encouraged Elle to make the most of this time of being unattached from a drain and made 'mini aims' of being up and dressed by a certain time, we then suggested that if she felt well enough, for her to move onto a chair for a while. We were able to move on to set mini aims of going to the play room and doing colourings. I tried to consciously remember to explain a plan of the day to Mrs Stacy, so that she would know what to expect. I perceived Mrs Stacy as appreciating this and found it helpful as she said thank you when I told her the next thing that will be done and at what time, her expression gave me the impression that giving this information over was a positive thing, therefore I continued to do so. I feel that Mrs Stacy and I listened to each other well, I would listen to her questions and remember to get the answers for her, and Mrs Stacy would listen to me when thinking out loud regarding my understanding of something. I felt that Mrs Stacy gave me space and time to wonder and talk through my thoughts and understanding with her, I was always sure to reassure Mrs Stacy that if I didn't know the answer to something, I would find out for her. See appendix 2 for a model that can be easily applied and practised when trying to communicate. This model explains the process of listening to each other, interpreting what is being said and asked, and then taking action and doing what needs to be done. I have found this model a simple yet useful pattern to follow in practise.
For Elle and the Stacy's the chest drain was a stressor at first, and the pain that Elle felt throughout her stay in hospital from the chest drain was a stressor for the family. It didn't help Mrs Stacy or the nursing staff to think that Elle was keeping her pain hidden from us. I made Elle a sticker chart as a way of rewarding her for going through the uncomfortable times of having the chest drain. Elle responded well to stickers and when nursing Elle I continued this practise, however, as I had made the chart, I didn't feel confident enough to encourage other nurses to do this with Elle. Sticker charts were greatly used in my previous placement and every nurse would use the sticker chart if one were there for the child. So to come onto a ward where sticker charts are used less regularly, I hadn't faced asking nurses to continue this before, therefore, it was not used to its full potential.
As Mr Stacy had to return to work, other family members were called on to support Mrs Stacy, Elle and Sam. As nurses we encouraged other family members coming to the ward. I aimed to make family members feel welcome, and I attempted to explain what I was doing for Elle to other family members also, to help them feel involved and to give them more of an understanding. Hopefully this would enable them to feel able to be with Elle on her own so that Mrs Stacy could leave the ward, and would also reassure Mrs Stacy that other family members will understand Elle's condition and be able to care for her as well. My mentor and I encouraged breaks from the ward and offered to keep an eye on Elle or for someone, either ourselves or other care staff to sit in with Elle. Mrs Stacy would often take advantage of Elle sleeping and take the time to have a wash and get a coffee. As the nursing staff we were sometimes limited by other responsibilities as to how much time we could offer to spend with Elle.
I feel that it was very beneficial that the ward was able to offer Mrs Stacy a breast pump to use. I feel that this would have made the stressor slightly smaller for the Stacy's as it enabled the juggling of hospital life with home life that slightly bit easier. When Sam was on the ward staff and myself were willing to help in any ways we could, we didn't want the family to feel that Sam or family were not welcome on the ward as we recognized that it was important for the family to be together, especially at this stressful time. From a nursing point of view it felt like there was not a great deal that we could do to minimize the stress of having two children in separate places, as explained when describing this possible stressor I attempted to talk with Mrs Stacy about this, however, I feel that a family member or someone who would understand how she felt more would have been a more appropriate person to talk to her about this. However, in other experiences I have not found my lack of experience a problem, as some mothers and fathers are very open to talking with anyone. Memmot et Al (2000) explained the outer most solid circle as being
Due to the Stacy's strong lines of resistance and defence to stressors, their flexible line of defence (that protects the normal life of defence) (Neuman 1995) held up when stressors were prominent. The families' ability to cope shows the NSM working at its best, the lines of resistance and the level of defence that the Stacy's coped with was evidently high and strong, this may be due to many factors, e.g. young age of parents and grandparents, they may have minimal financial concerns. This would help their line of defence to "act as a protective buffer system for the families' normal or stable state" (Neuman 1995, page 27)
The NSM also looks at different levels of prevention; primary, secondary and tertiary levels. This concept can be readily used in the nursing profession. For example, as nurses we can attempt to reduce the possibility of stressors occurring, e.g. help with organizing daily routine/activities. This will help to strengthen the flexible line of defense for the family. Memmott et al (2000) state:
This explains how we can put the framework into practice as health care professionals. I found this part of the NSM helpful and realistic when put into practice. Through looking at the Stacy family in more depth, had I thought about all the different issues and influences of stressors at the beginning of my care for them I would have done some things differently. Using the NSM has made me look at the family in more depth and now, in future when trying to asses a family I feel that I will asses in more depth and I will have a greater understanding for why I am assessing the family. It is all part of holistic care of a family; Neuman stated,
For my future practise I will take more notice of what else could be going on in a families daily lives, e.g. school runs, clubs, social groups, other influential relatives. I will encourage breaks for parents/families more often, so that families really would feel supported and that the help is available to them. I will make sure that I continue to spend time with families, to leave room for conversations and concerns to be communicated. I will take the time to listen to families and be pro-active in looking for ways that I can minimize stressors.