Contents 1
1 Introduction 2
2 A review of the literature 2
2a Why the case-study approach? 2
2b Chinese Learners of English 3
2c Writing at Graduate level 3
3 Method 4
3a Case Study Profile 4
3b Interviews 5
3c Triangulation 6
4 Findings 6
4a Sunny's views on her own learning attitudes and difficulties 6
4b Differences between Sunny's Academic experience in China and Britain. 7
4c Sunny's views on native speaker interaction 7
4d Sunny's tested level of English and academic skill 7
4e Sunny's tutors' views 7
4f Demands of Sunny's future course: Masters in International Management8
5 Discussion 8
5a Cultural and academic acclimatisation 8
5b Writing skills: Moving towards participation in an academic community 9
6 Conclusion and Recommendations 10
7 Limitations of this study 10
References 12
Appendix 1 15
Appendix 2 15
Appendix 3 16
There are currently more than 300,000 international students studying at Higher Education institutions in the UK. This figure is set to increase dramatically as Universities and the government are making every effort to attract more international students into the country (BBC, 2006) The largest single country providing these students is China, and these international students are entering Postgraduate courses here in increasing numbers. (BBC, 2004) Consequently, Universities have had to provide much greater levels of English language and academic skills support, and in the last decade an increasing number of Universities have initiated Pre- Masters English for Academic Purposes (EAP) courses. One such University is Oxford Brookes, whose English Language Centre offers a Graduate Preparation Diploma (GPDip), and it is from this course that my subject was chosen.
This paper will take the form of a case study of an individual Chinese student at the beginning of the second semester of her G.P.Dip course, planning to start her Masters Course in September of this year. Although many other issues were dealt with during the course of this study, for the purpose of this assignment, the main issue emerging was whether the subject's primary difficulties stemmed from differences in cultural and academic norms and expectations, or merely from some gaps in linguistic competence. Due to the constraints of the assignment in terms of length, the focus will further be narrowed to her research, and particularly writing skills and how they might meet the standards required. Certain tentative conclusions will then be drawn both as to the possible present effectiveness of her current study programme, and any recommendations as to how her time could best be used in the interim period between the end of this semester and her Masters Programme.
A large amount of data was collected during the course of the case study, and while attempting to maintain the impartiality necessary for such a study, for the purposes of this assignment I will focus on some of the key areas emerging from the interviews and the other contacts made during the course of the study.
This study, although extremely limited in scope, has been a useful insight into the life of an EAP student who is wishing to pursue her Graduate career in Britain. Sunny has successfully passed all assessment criteria, and is likely to be accepted on the course she wishes to study in International Management. Her experiences do demonstrate very clearly that even while developing very successful study skills, the time taken for a non- native student to reach Masters' level can be significant. The sheer volume of new skills to be learnt, the assimilation into the life of the university as well as the challenge of meeting deadlines can mean that progress in linguistic terms may be slow. It is difficult to determine the implications of this finding. Does this mean that a much greater level of attention should be paid to linguistic development in EAP courses, obviously at the expense of the development of other skills? What can certainly be seen is that the individual needs of one student may differ greatly from another. I feel, therefore, that there should be much more flexibility built into EAP courses, where students can be guided into the areas they really need to study. This perhaps might have implications in terms of assessment, with fewer long assignments at the beginning of the course, but may allow students to develop with less pressure the meta-cognitive and linguistic competence they will need. The advent of more academic e-learning materials (eg Cauldwell, Streaming Speech) will, I feel assist greatly in this process, where students can work independently on their own areas of need. This of course means that much will have to be done in terms of producing quality academic software, in particular for the reading and writing skills needed at this level. Returning to our individual and the main focus of our study, Sunny could spend her time now immersing herself in her reading lists for her course, as well as analysing the method of discourse familiar to this academic community. She could also work though such academic course books as Bailey's Academic Writing (2003), which may help her to enrich the number of linguistic choices available to her in her future assignments and papers.
Although interesting, this study cannot be said to have major implications for course design. It was extremely limited in terms of time, access to student and tutors, and number of informants. Sunny's possible need to focus on her grammar and linguistic competence may not be representative of other members of her group or of EAP students in general. For a more effective study, at least two more cases, possibly from different ethnic backgrounds could be examined in order to compare the reactions of the participants. I also felt the length of time and the amount of meetings possible gave only a superficial view of her life at Brookes. For a more faithfully naturalistic and ethnographic study, I would have also liked to shadow her for at least a day, observing classes, visiting the library and noticing her interaction with classmates and tutors. The process of tracking students through their EAP course and into their Post-graduate studies as a longitudinal study is one as yet not widely explored. . To truly assess the success of an EAP course in preparing a student, such a retrospective view of the student already involved in their Masters course would surely be a useful and fruitful area for further research.