This hypothesis testing was aiming on detecting the difference in the length of the little finger of male and female students. Bias, confounders were considered when designing the test. Methods used in this test generally followed most biological hypothesis tests. 'Win episcope' program was used for the suggestion of the sample size. Statistically the data was analyzed by using student t-test. The calculated 't' value suggested that there does not exist difference in the length of little finger of male and female. The limitations might lead to significant random errors cause failure of detecting the difference.
Hypothesis testing is used to compare observed and expected results, or to compare two or more sample means. Null hypothesis is usually set up that biologists would like to try to refute. For example, in this case study, a null hypothesis (H 0) was given: "There is no difference in the length of the little finger of male and female students."
Since some observational studies take samples by chance instead of testing whole population, there occurs random error. Bias is another type of error may take place in observational studies. Systematical bias leads to raise or lower the significance of associations incorrectly. Confounder is a special type of bias. Confounders occur when more than one variable is associated with an outcome and the two variables are associated.
In order to summarise raw data so that can present in an understandable way, statistical methods are introduced into biological studies. For different purpose of studies, biologist need to decide an appropriate statistical methods which suitable for specific biological study. This test simply compared the computed values of the arithmetic means using the spread of individual measurement about the mean. It always needs to decide accuracy of the hypothesis study when designing the test. The confidence level for biologists is usually set as 95%, 5% level of significance. The power of the study depends on the probability set up of detecting a difference between two samples. It is usually set at 80 or 90% in biological studies. If say the power is set as 80%, which means there is a 20% probability of failing to detect this difference. As there is an accuracy level statistically, error level has to be considered to present a more reliable result.
To design a hypothesis study, it is good to start with the case definition. This study is an analytical observational study. The length of little finger is defined as the distance between the crease between the little finger and the palm to the tip of the little finger. Each individual was measured in same way by using the millimeter ruler. Male and female were set as two independent sample groups. The sample was randomly collected in order to avoid bias. There were a few confounders have been considered in this study, such as body height, and right-handed or left-handed. To avoid confounder of right-handed and left-handed, both hands were measured out of each individual. Since the sampling sizes are influenced by the prevalence of the outcome affects, they need to be decided for different study purposes. In this hypothesis testing, for comparing means, expected means of samples and expected standard deviation are required enhance to get the estimate sampling size by using the 'Win episcope' program. Statistics is following after data collecting out of the best-fit sample size for the hypothesis testing,
To analyze the data, firstly, it always needs to quantify the accuracy of measurement, accuracy of calculation. The accuracy of the measurement of little finger here was in millimeter due to the scale of the ruler in use. As most other biological studies, the confidence level of this test was set as 95% and power was 80%. Secondly, an appropriate statistical method was introduced to work out the hypothesis. In this hypothesis test, student t-test was used to compare two means of continuous data. The calculated value of 't' was compared with the tabulated value of 't' for n x+n y-2 degrees of freedom at 95% probability. If the calculated value is greater than the tabulated value, then the two means are significantly different from each other at the 95% probability level.
In order to work out an appropriate sample size for this study, previous data collecting of 10 samples of each sample groups were firstly recorded. Thereby, the expected sample means were 61.4mm and 57.5mm, and expected standard deviation was 4.3. As 'Win episcope' program suggested that at 95% confidence level and 80% power, for two tailed independent samples, the best sample size was 22 observations per group. Thus, the degree of freedom of student t-test was determined as 42. The critical t value at 42 degree of freedom for 95% probability is 2.02. After 12 more samples taken for each group, the sample mean of male turned to 60.7mm, while the sample mean of female was 58.6mm. Thus the difference between the means was 2.1mm. Therefore, the 't' value was calculated as 1.91 upon the equation shown below:
The calculated 't' value was smaller than the critical 't' value. Therefore, for degree of freedom at 95% confidence level, there does not exist difference in the length of the little finger of male and female students. Therefore, the null hypothesis was proved. Furthermore, standard error is the standard deviation of the means of the samples. Here, the standard error was 0.62.
Due to limited resources and time, there were only 10 samples of each group had been measured to determine the expected means and expected standard deviation. The limited expected data collecting might result in poorly estimating the population size and its variations. Consequently, the sampling size was influenced and raised random error of the hypothesis test. Since the ruler used in this testing was limited as millimeter-scale, this probably raised random error too.
Since the confident level was set as 95%, which means there was a type 1 error (alpha) that was 5% of the probability of declaring a difference to be statistically significant when no real difference exists in the population. Type 2 error (beta) is the probability of declaring a difference to be non-significant when a real difference exists in the population. In this test, due to power is 1-beta, there was a 20% type 2 error. The sampling size would be tremendous and very hard to achieve for this test if statistically higher accuracy is required.
Confounder of body height could not calculate into the results. The data of body height of each individual were recorded and attached in appendix in order to reconsider or reference if any need.
All these limitations might effect on the accuracy of hypothesis testing. The errors might even influence the possibility of detecting the difference between two sets of samples. Because the calculated 't' value was very close to the critical 't' value, it was possible that was failure of detecting the difference between male and female's length of their little finger.