Research in healthcare is essential if evidence is to be generated to give assurance that clinical interventions are being made in the patient's best interests. Commonly referred to as evidence-based practice (EBP), this has in recent years gained greater emphasis as professional practice moves away from relying solely on personal experience, clinical intuition and traditional practices and procedures (Sim and Wright 2000:5). Individual clinical expertise is of course still needed and furthermore the clinician will want to include the preferences of their patient in order to find a strategy most appropriate to the patient. EBP therefore uses a combination of these factors; best available clinical evidence, individual clinical expertise and patient preferences (Craig and Smyth 2002:156).
A vital step in the implementation of EBP is the appraisal of clinical research in order to make a decision on whether to use it as evidence to inform practice (Hicks 2004: 4). To provide the beginnings of an understanding necessary to appraise clinical research, two articles that are examples of two different types of research have been examined. This essay is the result of that examination and will describe and discuss the strengths and weakness of the methodology of each article.
One article, entitled 'An investigation into the immediate impact of breathlessness management on the breathless patient: randomised controlled trial' (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005), is an example of quantitative research using a hypothetico-deductive approach to test theory (Sim and Wright 2000:11). This approach has the underlying philosophical assumption of a single objective reality. When applied to clinical research, this assumption can be integrated in the philosophical model known as critical rationalism. Developed from positivism, it assumes 'that the methods used to study the physical world can be used, with some modification, to study the social world' (Sim and Wright 2000:8).
The other article, entitled 'Living with chronic lung disease and the effect of pulmonary rehabilitation' (Toms and Harrison 2002), is an example of qualitative research that generates theory by inductive reasoning. As each individual patient may have a different experience of chronic lung disease the philosophical assumption in this research is one of multiple constructed realities, known as phenomenology (Sim and Wright 2000:9, Craig and Smyth 2002:147).
Theory is tested in the quantitative article by use of the hypothetico-deductive approach, which a testable hypothesis is deduced from a theory (Sim and Wright 2000:11). The hypothesis implicit in the quantitative article is that breathlessness management training affects the patient's perception of breathlessness.
Data is generated to test the hypothesis by the specific application of methods. In the case of the qualitative article the principle data collection methods are the RCT in conjunction with the modified Borg test. Data from the Borg measurements are used to generate inferential statistics in an attempt to infer this variable is dependent upon the independent variable; whether or not breathlessness management training was administered during the trial (Hicks 2004: 13).
As a hypothesis is deduced from a theory and there may be countless other explanations for observations, theory can never be proved only disproved (Sim and Wright: 12) and consequently interferential statistics are used in an attempt to disprove a theory. If however, the statistical test fails in this attempt and there are no errors in the methodology(Hicks 2004: 103), support is generated for the independent variable having a causal effect on the dependent variable, which can be used as evidence in EBP. The authors' of the quantitative article conclude that their results 'suggest that one session of physiotherapy training has a significant effect on reducing a patient's level of perceived breathlessness' (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 183). This claim can be investigated by examining the strengths and weakness of the methodology of their research.
The data from the modified Borg tests are summarised by descriptive statistics in table 3 (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 182), which appropriately for ordinal level data give the central tendency by median and the variability by range and interquartile range (Gilchrist 2006). It is apparent from this table, and the associated box plots in figure 4 (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 183), that the median Borg measurement after staircase ascent and descent are lower in the group that had received intervention compared to the group that had not.
The choice of the statistical test is dependent on specific aspects in the design of the trial, primarily the data level of the dependent variables (Greene and D'Oliveira 1982). The design of the experiment described by the quantitative article had a single dependent variable, the modified Borg scale, which was considered by the authors to be ordinal level data (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005:179). This together with the fact that the experiment was a RCT, which consisted of two groups that underwent different treatment, means the authors' choice of the two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test is an appropriate statistical test (Greene and D'Oliveira 1982: 51).
The Mann-Whitney method was used to calculate the statistical significance of the difference in median Borg measurements between the groups. These significance values are the results of the RCT and are presented in table 5 in the article (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 183). As the significance of the values after staircase ascent and descent are both below the test standard set to 0.05 (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 179), the null hypothesis was rejected and hypothesis was left intact.
The strength of the RCT as a method for testing theory is that it has the potential to eliminate bias and as such can produce the strongest quantitative evidence where existing evidence is lacking (Greenhalgh 2006: 53). Bias is reduced by randomly allocating subjects to different treatment groups (Campbell and Machin 1990: 9). Ideally the randomised control trial should be conducted using double-blind procedures (Hicks 2004:93) whereby neither the subjects nor the staff are aware which subject has been allocated to each group. Although complete blinding is not always possible, the authors of the quantitative articles acknowledge that the assessment could have been blinded and that this was a weakness in their methodology (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 184).
Although randomisation can reduce the bias between the groups it does not eliminated it completely as one group could have a disproportion number of subjects with a particular characteristic that affects the results. Therefore to further reduce bias, a RCT requires strict inclusion and exclusion criteria to reduce the variation within the sample population (Hicks 2004: 93). In accordance with this requirement the quantitative article describes strict inclusion and exclusion criteria, an example of which was to exclude patients whose background level of breathlessness was not constant (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 180).
The extent of other extraneous variables can be reduced by tight control of the procedure of the experiment. One such control described by the quantitative article was to push all subjects in a wheelchair to the base of the flight of stairs before being asked to ascend (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 180). In this way variations in walking distance for the patients were eliminated.
It is these aspects of a RCT that give the potential for reliable and valid testing of theory. Reliable because given the tight control, the results could be verified by repeating the trial (Bowling 2002: 147) and valid because by reducing bias between the groups the theory can be tested without interference from extraneous variables (Sim and Wright: 89).
Although the RCT method has the potential to produce strong evidence, the strength is dependent on the specific application of the method (Hicks 2004: 92). For example as the modified Borg test was used as the primary measure of outcome, its reliability and validity are pivotal to that of the trial. The subjective nature of the modified Borg test could be seen to be at odds with the objective nature of quantitative research however the authors argue, using other research as evidence, that it is a reliable and valid measure of perceived breathlessness. They acknowledge other parameters, such as objective measurements of respiratory rate and oxygen saturation, could have been used to provide a understanding of the physiological response to intervention however they assert 'they would not have added to the main aim of this investigation, that being the response of intervention to the perception of breathlessness' (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 184).
The tight control required by the RCT can also be seen as a weakeness of the method as it makes application difficult in clinical practice (Hicks 2004:92). The strict control imposed to reduce variation within the sample population may result in problems finding a sample population of a sufficient size required for statistical tests. If the inclusion and exclusion criteria are relaxed however in order to gain sufficient numbers, the variance amongst the sample population may reduce the reliability and consequently the validity of the trial. It is also difficult to maintain a high degree of control in a clinical setting that involves human subjects and complex interactions (Hicks 2004:94). This is reflected in the terminology used by the authors' to describe the design; a 'pragmatic randomised controlled study' (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 178).
Another problem with the RCT method is that many topics within clinical practice cannot meaningfully be reduced down in order to generate testable hypotheses (Hicks 2004:94). Furthermore it can only be used to generate quantitative data useful for theory testing research. The qualitative article by contrast used a focus group to generate qualitative data in order to build theory.
The strength of the focus group method is that a number of people can be interviewed together and interactions can be observed (Bowling 2002:394). Also the nature of a group discussion can have a facilitating affect whereby one member's rendition of an experience sparks off the memory of a similar experience in the memory of other members. Social interaction encourages participation and all members of the group can be made to feel that their contributions are valued (Taylor 2006).
A weakness of the focus group method however is that participants may choose to show conformity to the group and not reveal their true feelings. It can be difficult to ensure all participants are heard and the discussion can be more superficial than that possible with a one-on-one in-depth interview. Also the data produced from a focus group may be complex to transcribe and analyse.
Before implementing data collection methods, both articles used methods to generate their sample population. Both in fact used the same method of purposive and convenient sampling and both focused on breathless patients, although with their different inclusion and exclusion criteria the samples were not the same (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 179, Toms and Harrison 2002: 608). The strength of the purposive and convenient sampling method is that the sample is suitable for the purposes of the study and can be conveniently generated without having to search the entire target population (Bowling 2002: 187).
In terms of the possible implications for EBP the target population for both articles could include all breathless patients who may benefit from breathlessness management training or other pulmonary rehabilitation. Although this target population was not accessible to the researchers, the sample population for both articles was so limited by their inclusion and exclusion criteria that random sampling was not feasible in either case. This lack of random sampling means the sample population in both cases were not necessarily an adequate representation of the target population (Sim and Wright 2000: 113) and as such is a methodological weakness when attempting to generalise research findings to the target population.
The pragmatic RCT described in the quantitative article used a sample population that was conveniently limited to purposively chosen breathless patients within a single hospital over a period of time sufficient only to find an adequate number of patients, as determined by a power analysis exercise, to provide statistical significance (Hochstetter, Lewis and Soares-Smith 2005: 179). Consequently although the results from this study could be internally valid for these particular patients they cannot with any degree of confidence be said to be externally valid for a wider population that includes all breathless patients (Bowling 2002: 150).
The lack of random sampling is not such a methodological weakness for qualitative article as the aim was to understand complex phenomena, rather than applying findings to a wider population (Bowling 2002: 187, Toms and Harrison 2002: 608). In fact the terms validity and reliable do not generally apply to qualitative research. The concept of validity only really applies when there is a single testable 'truth', which is the basis of the hypothetico-deductive approach of theory-testing quantitative research (Sim and Wright 2000: 134). However, the theory-building research described in the qualitative article is based on the assumption that different subjects will have different attitudes and experiences; i.e. multiple constructed realities (Craig and Smyth 2002: 147). These experiences and attitudes may also change, so rarely is qualitative data precisely repeatable in the same way as quantitative data, therefore neither is the term reliability so appropriate. Furthermore, theory is built in qualitative research by inductive reasoning; by people interpreting the data in order to see how it fits in the wider picture (Sim and Wright 2000: 134). Therefore neither can the terms reliability and validity be applied to the process of qualitative data analysis.
When assessing the strength of qualitative evidence, the methodology is examined to determine the trustworthiness of the evidence (Taylor 2006), rather than its reliability and validity. Various rigorous strategise are employed in qualitative methodologies to strengthen trustworthiness by enhancing the credible, transferable, dependable and confirmable of the evidence (Craig and Smyth 2002: 147). The rigor of the methodology described by the qualitative article is discussed below with respect to some of these strategies and effect they have on the criteria for trustworthiness.
The credibility of the evidence is strengthened by the purposive sample, which consisted of patients who had experience of living with chronic lung disease and who had participated in a particular pulmonary rehabilitation programme. The purposive nature of the sample also strengthens the transferability of the evidence (Taylor 2006) however the transferability is weakened by the fact it was a convenient sample consisted of only patients who had participated in this single pulmonary rehabilitation programme.
The credibility of the evidence is weakened because neither the data nor the analysis were checked by the members of the sample (Craig and Smyth 2002: 147). The aim of this qualitative research was to understand human experience and the researchers attempted this by interpreting the subject's interpretation of their experience. Consequently this lack of member checking also weakens the confirmability (Taylor 2006) of the analysis. The confirmability is however strengthened by collaborative analysis (Taylor 2006), involving the moderator, assistant moderator and rehabilitation therapist (Toms and Harrison 2002: 610).
The credibility of the evidence is strengthened by triangulation of method and also data (Craig and Smyth 2002: 147). This was achieved by exploring two related experiences; that of living with chronic lung disease and that of participating in a pulmonary rehabilitation programme. The findings from these two parts of the research question are brought together to show shared themes in table 2 of the article (Toms and Harrison 2002: 611). This table, and its discussion in the findings section (Toms and Harrison 2002: 610) of the article, provide rich description by inclusion of quotes from the participants, which strengthen the confirmability of the analysis and the transferability of the conclusions (Craig and Smyth 2002: 147). The descriptive statistics of the participants provided in table 1 (Toms and Harrison 2002: 609) also assists the transferability of the conclusions and completes the data presentation of the qualitative article.
The qualitative article includes a section on background (Toms and Harrison 2002: 606), which gives the stance of the primary researcher as the co-ordinator of the particular rehabilitation programme used to generate the sample. This information allows the reader to assess the dependability of the evidence presented in favour of on-going pulmonary rehabilitation for chronic breathless patients and this transparency can actually strengthen the dependency of the evidence (Taylor 2006). Not included however is reflection by this researcher on the impact of their presence in the focus group; a person who could seen to have power over whether the participants continue in pulmonary rehabilitation. This omission and the lack of other reflexivity weakens not only the dependability but also the credibility and confirmability of the evidence (Taylor 2006).
Other strategise can also be used to enhance the trustworthiness of qualitative evidence although rarely will they all be used in any single piece of research as the appropriateness of the various strategies are dependant on the research question and the specifics of the subsequent methodology (Craig and Smyth 2002: 146). Furthermore even if a particular qualitative methodology does not rigorously incorporate all applicable strategies, which is the case for the qualitative article, it does not mean the evidence produced cannot be trusted to inform practice in some context. The evidence presented in the qualitative article has implications for the clinician in terms of their appreciation of the experience of breathless patients before and after a pulmonary rehabilitation programme. It does not however attempt to answer clinical questions concerning whether the pulmonary rehabilitation programme is the cause of the increased confidence patients experienced. This type of question requires a quantitative methodology with similarities to that described in the quantitative article (Sim and Wright 2000: 21).
The evidence presented by the quantitative article also has implications for clinical practice albeit in a different way. This evidence has implications to the clinician in terms of their appreciation of the effectiveness of breathlessness management training. The evidence does not however answer clinical questions concerning the long-term effectiveness of such breathlessness management training, which could be answered by further research.
By examining the strengths and the weakness of the two articles an appreciation has been gained of the process of appraising clinical research articles. This is a necessary step in order to implement EBP, which serves to provide assurance that clinical decisions are made to maximise patient care.
(2748 words excluding citations).