The following report aims to inform Monarka Hotel Group of potential people management strategies for the Monarka Hotel unit in Kathmandu, Nepal. The report compares and contrasts business environments. It is shown how Nepal's business environment differs from the UK's. The major divergences lie in the fact that Nepal is a very poor and underdeveloped country in comparison to the UK. For instance, its economic and political situations are very unstable. Indeed, Nepal has an extremely low GDP per capita and literacy rate compared to the UK, as its unemployment rate is nearly ten times higher than the British. The Nepalese culture, compared to the UK's using Hofstede's dimensions scores a higher power distance, a lower masculinism and individualism.
It is recommended that Monarka should adopt an ethnocentric orientation during the first years of operation in Nepal, then to move to a polycentric orientation to finally reach a geocentric approach. The organisation should adopt a human resource management approach as much as possible, as opposed to a personnel management approach. By doing so, the company will be more strategically oriented and will focus on long-term performance by investing in training, rewarding and by considering its employees as assets. Resourcing the organisation will be a challenge, considering the weak condition of the labour market, but will be possible through a well define work design, and through a horizontal specialisation. It is recommended that the company adopts a diversity management approach when dealing with the differences between the employees (sex, religion, culture, etc.) in order to make best use of these differences by using them as competitive advantage. All these recommendations are taking into account the unique features of the business environment and of the local culture, in order for the human resource strategy and for the company to be integrated as much as possible in the new environment.
The dynamic competitive international business environment of the twenty-first century has brought companies to manage daily operation in different countries, with different cultures. The present report follows the decision of Monarka Hotel Group to open a subsidiary in Nepal. Funded in 1952, Monarka hotel group is a UK based hotel chain which operates 3 different brands in all continents, including Asia. A recent marketing study has shown the viability of the Monarka Hotel brand in Nepal (appendix 1).
Nepal is one of the poorest countries of the world. Nevertheless, as the land of the lord Buddha, its culture and history is very rich. Considered by the UNESCO as a natural museum for its genuine diversity, it is also a geographical sanctuary, with eight of the ten highest peaks in the world, including the famous Everest Mountain. Nepal's capital is Kathmandu, which is located in a valley at a 1'310 m altitude and has a population of 1.5 millions (NTB, 2006).
The Monarka brand in Nepal would be located in Kathmandu, Nepal's capital, offering 135 rooms. The five-star hotel aims to provide a unique customer experience through operational excellence, and targets a westernised luxury market, that is the affluent American and European market. To provide a great work environment is also part of the organisation's mission statement.
The present document analyses the different challenges of managing personnel in Nepal compared to the UK, and proposes several alternatives and strategies to effectively manage people.
In order to evaluate how different is the business environment in Nepal compared to the UK, a comparative analysis is conducted. The comparative analysis is particularly appropriate in this case because, even though many aspects of the personnel management will be the same, i.e. the key functions, some aspects will be different since they are influenced by country specific factors and circumstances (Harris et al. , 2003). The comparative analysis enables to point out which are those main differences. The most suitable framework to compare both businesses environments is the PESTE analysis, since it also allows identifying growth opportunities (Johnson et al. , 2006). The following analysis contrasts the Political, Economical, Social, Technological and Environmental factors in a human resource perspective for the company to adapt its strategy to Nepal's environment.
The way employees are managed in an organisation hugely influences a business success, all the most in the service industry where a great part of the service consists in the interaction between the customer and the employee. In terms of management of the workforce, two main approaches exist: they are human resource management and personnel management. Before choosing which one is the most suitable for Monarka in Nepal, it is important to understand its differences.
Tyson and Fell (1986) proposed 3 different approaches to manage the workforce through different roles: the clerk of work corresponds to a routine personnel administration, the contracts negotiator which has a short term tactical approach and is most suitable when dealing with trade unions (McCourt, 2003) and the architect role, which makes long-term strategic choices (Martinez and Martineau, 1998). According to McCourt (2003), the contracts negotiator approach is most suitable in an industrialised context or in countries where trade unions are strong, since it is an inflexible and centralised approach to staff management. This approach corresponds to a personnel management approach, which is bureaucratic, reactive and short-term oriented (appendix 4). As the personnel management approach proposed formal defined roles and has a low-trust and collective approach toward the employees (appendix 4), it is probably most suitable in countries with a high uncertainty avoidance, since the employees autonomy is minimised through well defined tasks.
The architect role, helping determine organisational strategy (Torrington and Hall, 1996), closely relates to a human resource management approach. Indeed, this approach is more strategic, as it is long-term and proactive focused (appendix 4). It values commitment from the employees and high-trust by having flexible roles in the organisation. Consequently, this approach is most appropriate in countries with low uncertainty avoidance since employees act with more independence.
Nepal, as in the UK, has relatively low uncertainty avoidance (appendix 3), meaning employees are able to cope with new situations by taking required actions. Also, being a luxury-hotel aiming to provide best service to its clients, the nature of the Monarka brand requires employees to be able to take initiatives in order to satisfy the customer. Indeed, the human management approach is the most suitable for the company. However, as the brand is a strong brand (appendix 1), the services need to be standardised to a certain extent, but it is most important that managers give autonomy to employees in order to give best service to the customer. As the luxury hotel product is intangible dominant (as opposed to tangible dominant), the amount of discretion required by the employees is high, as well as the need to delight the customer (Lashley, 1998). The company needs also to choose if it adopts a hard or a soft approach to its human resource management. A hard approach views labour as a resource whether a soft approach considers it as an asset (Lashley, 1998). Monarka in Nepal will adopt a soft approach, since it believes its success lies in the commitment of its employees.
The main disadvantage of choosing a human resource management approach is that it requires higher qualified employees, which, according to the labour market situation, is a scarce resource in Nepal. The company will need to offer excellent working conditions to recruit and keep those qualified employees, since they must be highly in demand by other units in the competitor set. Even though the availability of qualified workforce might increase in the future since the Hotel Management Academy started a new bachelor program in 2003 (Nepalese Ministry of finance, 2006), it will be necessary to recruit home or parent country nationals to manage the hotel, at least in the beginning. It will also be important that managers have an open mindset about trade unions. In fact, evidence suggests there are trade unions in the Nepalese hospitality industry, but they are still developing. It is nevertheless important to ensure that managers know how to trade with them (General Federation of Nepalese Trade Unions, 2002).
To understand how companies manage their activities, Perlmutter (1969) proposes a "network-based" model (Beardwell et al. , 2004:615) that categorises organisations depending on the extent to which they adapt their practices to the host country (in this case Nepal) versus to the parent country (UK) (Harzing, 2004a). The strategic orientation greatly depends of which category of employees the firm employs for its key managers. The three choices are host-country nationals (HCN), i.e. from Nepal, parent-country nationals (PCN), i.e. from the UK, or third-country national (TCN), i.e. managers from another country than the host or the parent (Dowling and Welch, 2004). Most of the authors focus on three strategic orientations: ethnocentrism, polycentrism and geocentrism. A forth orientation, the regiocentrism approach, is rarely covered in the literature, and will not be discussed as a potential choice since there are no Monarka hotels in the Indian subcontinent. Hence, it would be irrelevant to consider this alternative. One of the deficiencies of these approaches is that it is unclear how a company can pass to one state to another (Beardwell et al. , 2004)
The resourcing process is concerned with making an effective use of the internal labour market, as well as "attracting high-quality" external applicants (Beardwell et al., 2004:175). Price (1997:90) defines resourcing as the "process by which people are identified and allocated to perform necessary work" in the organisation. Resourcing will be seen as part of the strategic business planning (Iles, 2001). In order to formulate appropriate policies and practices, the environment, as well as the labour market must be understood (Torrington et al. , 2005). Resourcing Monarka in Nepal will then be influenced by the strength, the diversity and the skills of the labour market, as well as by the work design, the organisational structure and the flexibility required by the employees. Forecasting of demand must also be taken into account, and complicates the resourcing process since, as it will be highly seasonal (appendix 1), it will require higher flexibility.
Offering a luxury product that requires skilled staff and aiming to have highly committed workforce, Monarka in Nepal will have to offer appropriate motivation and rewards. There are two main types of reward: extrinsic (associated with monetary returns and benefits) and intrinsic (internally driven, linked to work satisfaction, challenge) (Kessler, 2001). Extrinsic rewards are those specified in the contract, whether intrinsic rewards are more psychological as they are related to the job and often are the reasons why people stay with one particular company (Torrington et al., 2005). To offer advantageous reward is also beneficial to the organisation since it will allows it to recruit higher quality staff (Torrington et al. , 2005). Monarka will provide both types of reward to its employees, though to a different level between operational and managerial staff. The intrinsic rewards will, for the operational staff, mainly be composed of the salary, which will be time-based (rate/hour). The managerial staff pay system will be different. It will be a fix remuneration (per year) with a performance based bonus at the end of the year. The performance bonus, though it is difficult to evaluate since it is often intangible, will be given equally, according to the global performance of the hotel. This approach will enhance manager's tendency to work in synergy through a common goal. Informal rewards also have to be considered. In fact, due to the nature of the industry, employees have access to substantial amounts of informal rewards as staff meals, tips, fiddles and knock-offs (theft from customers or from the employer) (Mars and Mitchell, 1976). According to Lynn (1997) tendencies to tipping will vary in different cultures. The Nepalese culture, with its low uncertainty avoidance and its emphasis on social relationship is more likely to have tipping. The salary structure will be hierarchical and the minimum wage of the organisation will be above the Nepalese minimum wage. As the Nepalese culture is medium in masculinity (appendix 3), the employees will not be motivated only by extrinsic rewards such as pay, but also by intrinsic factors. It will then be important to ensure that employees feel they have advancement possibilities in the organisation, and that sane relationships are created between the workforce. It will not only be beneficial for the motivation of the employees, but also to provide a great work environment, leading in increased productivity and satisfaction from the employees as well as from the clients.
As the strategic orientation will first be ethnocentric, Monarka will need some expatriates (PCNs) as key managers. Expatriation refers to the process of international transfer of managers, although the term expatriate is mostly used to describe PCNs (Harzing, 2004a). Even though recruiting PCNs as key managers has many advantages as the familiarity with the home office's policies and practices, it also has disadvantages (appendix 6). When recruiting PCNs, it will be important to ensure they will be able to cope with the Nepalese culture in order to minimise failure risk. As English is the business language in Nepal, it is not necessary that the PCNs speak Nepali, though it would be a great advantage and would facilitate their integration. In order to recruit qualified managers from the UK and to keep them, Monarka will offer them compensations such as housing allowance, automobile, home leave, family allowance and probably hardship and mobility premium. These offers will be negotiable in order to suit each manager's need and requirements, as much as possible.
In order to ensure that the employees will be able to deliver the promised level of service to the client, the training of the workforce will be highly important. Training can be seen as a long-term investment, as it enhances the employee's commitment toward its employer, and diminishes the tendency of the employee to voluntary leave the organisation (Torrington et al. , 2005). In fact, as Price (1997:190) points out, "human resource development (HRD) is a strategic approach to investing in human capital". As discussed previously, a human resource management approach will be taken toward the employees, as opposed to a personnel management approach. This implies that the company will consider training as an investment and will aspire to improve the quality of its recruits. Also, with the low uncertainty avoidance feature, the company will focus on empowerment of the staff, i.e. the ability to take decisions independently. Nevertheless, formal on-the-job training will be crucial for the operational staff. In fact, training in Monarka will be seen as an integral part of the organisational strategy. As the company aims to move from an ethnocentric orientation to a polycentric and, with strong internal labour market, it is logical that the company promotes continuous development of its workforce in order to encourage promotions within the organisation. It will be important that the international managers (PCNs) are trained or have worked in another Monarka hotel before having the opportunity to go in Nepal. To receive training on the Nepalese culture would also minimise the potential inability to cope with the cultural difference. Moreover, as the local workforce is very low-skilled and as the organisation wants to integrate with the local culture, it will refer to local organisations, governmental and institutional programmes for the training of its core workforce. Finally, as the organisation wants to move toward a geocentric approach, it would be appropriate to provide the chance to some local managers to benefit from a training experience in other subsidiaries in Europe or Asia.
With globalisation, frontiers between countries are dissipating as their population gets more culturally diverse. Minority groups face disadvantages and organisations must develop policies and strategies in order to minimise discrimination and to maximise the potential opportunities created by this diversity of the workforce (Torrington  et al. , 2005). Organisations can, whether opt for an equal opportunity (EO) approach with the purpose of reducing discrimination, or a diversity management (DM) approach, in order to maximise the potential of each employee (Torrington  et al. , 2005). In fact, as the EO approach focuses on specific groups, the DM approach concentrates more on the individual (appendix 7). Even though both approaches seem contradictory, there is a consensus that both tendencies are valid (Hyman, 2004). Even though both approaches are needed to ensure progress, the organisation must focus on a particular one. As Monarka opts for a human resource management approach and a horizontal specialisation (Hales, 1987) approach for its operational workforce, it is logical that it tends to focus on the DM as well. In fact, in the DM approach, employees are expected to work in harmony, and line managers are considered as the key managers. The DM focuses on the individual by giving opportunities to all its employees. This characteristic suits the strong internal labour market orientation by giving the opportunities to operational staff to become managers. As the Nepalese population is very multicultural (U.S. Department of State, 2006), by adopting a DM approach, Monarka wants to consider the individual differences as an opportunity and use them in order to create a unique competitive advantage. No discrimination, "directly or indirectly, against older or disabled people, women, ethnic minorities or people with different sexual orientations" will be tolerated, nor in the organisation, or in the recruitment process (Torrington et al. , 2005:538).
The following research proposed viable recommendations for a people management approach of Monarka hotel, a luxury brand, in Kathmandu, Nepal. The document first performed a review of the different business environments (UK and Nepal) by comparing them, and then justified human resource management strategies in term of strategic orientation, human resource management approach, resourcing, rewarding, training and managing diversity.
Although the Nepalese environment presents several lacks, the most important of them being a very weak and low-skilled labour market, the analysis showed the viability of an effective human resource strategy.
The research being conducted in the UK, it is based on secondary data only. Nepal being underdeveloped, some information seems not to be available at all, which limits to some extent the strength of the analysis. Furthermore, the validity some sources can be questioned since a lot of information on the country has been found on government websites, which could tend to modify some information to their advantage. Nevertheless, substantial theoretical research has also been conducted, which provides a strong basis for the viability of the proposed Monarka human resource strategy in Nepal.