Funded in 1952, Monarka Hotel Group is a leader in the hospitality industry and the pride of the United Kingdom. It operates worldwide 3 different brands (see appendix 1 for details), mainly through management contracts. The most spread and appreciated brand, Monarka Hotels, is present in every continent including Asia, and mainly targets a westernized luxury market (i.e. United Kingdom, Canada, U.S.A and Australia). Monarka Hotels aim to be the best provider of customer service in the luxury market by delivering a unique customer experience through operational excellence and by providing a great work environment. In fact, the brand targets a European, American and Australian market; a westernised market which corresponds to the high-class level of the society.
The Monarka Hotels brand would now like to expand its activities in the Indian subcontinent, and the country that seems the most suitable for the company, mainly because of its particular geographic situation, is Nepal, the Himalayan country. Bounded by China and India, Nepal is a constitutional monarchy, the land of the lord Buddha, and one of the poorest countries in the world. Famous for its landscapes, it contains eight of the ten highest mountains in the world, including the Mount Everest (Nepal Tourism Board, 2006). Its capital, Kathmandu, has a population of 1.5 million and is located in a valley, at an altitude of 1'310 m (Nepal Tourism Board, 2006).
The present document is an analysis of the viability of a brand (Monarka Hotel) of the Monarka Hotel Group in Nepal.
In order to evaluate and compare the business environment between the two countries (United Kingdom and Nepal), the PESTE analysis is employed. The Political, Economic, Socio-cultural, Technological and Environmental factors are contrasted, and the results are presented in appendix 2. PEST analysis is suitable to compare the business environments since it helps considering growth opportunities (Johnson et al. , 2006). Even though businesses have almost no control over these factors, they nonetheless influence consumer behaviour; thus demand (Bowie and Buttle, 2004), and the company must be aware of the differences between the two countries to adapt its strategies to Nepal's environment.
Nepal being one of the poorest countries in the world (CIA, 2006, Country Watch, 2006a) and the UK being one of the most powerful nations (CIA, 2006, Country Watch 2006b), their economic environment present very few similarities. First of all, one of the major differences that the business will have to cope with is the level of corruption in Nepal, which is much higher than the UK's. Corruption in Nepal substantially reduces the attractiveness for investment, especially as the government process in delivering permits and other official documents is often illegitimate (Country Watch, 2006a). Hence, it may be necessary to find an insider to help the company with those processes. In fact, the Asian Development Bank (2006) has categorised Nepal's political and economical future as ambiguous.
Another major difference lies with the general barriers that companies have to face, which is measured with the Index of Economic Freedom. While England is in the 5 th position (free), Nepal is on the 125 th (not free) position on 157 countries (Miles et al. , 2006). This massive variance means the entry barriers to the country, the banking system and the fiscal policies are much more complex and problematic for businesses in Nepal than in the UK (Miles, 2006). Then, the government is much more likely to intervene in the business all the more all the banks belong to it, while it is not the case in the UK (Miles, 2006). The Nepalese workforce is also very different than the UK's and will affect the way business is conducted. In fact, there is a severe lack of qualified workforce in Nepal. Given that the literacy rate is below 50% (CIA, 2003) and that Nepal's unemployment rate is nearly ten times higher than in the UK (see Appendix 2), the search for a qualified workforce will certainly be more complex. Also, the management of the workforce will have to be done in a different way than in the UK since Nepal presents a culture that is higher in collectivism and in power distance (see Appendix 2).
One important similarity between the two countries is that both are democratic, though to a different level. According to Usnier and Lee (2005), democracy is one of the most important factors for a positive marketing environment. However, Nepal being still an agriculture economy, offers a technological infrastructure which is minimal. A lot of the businesses processes might be affected by a limited technology. For example, the delivery of the goods might be complex and not always consistent. Also, in the marketing process, the means used to reach the Nepalese population, if necessary, will be very different than in the UK. Foreign investment is welcomed in both countries, but precisely in the tourism sector for Nepal, where the process is eased to encourage it (U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service, 2004). Regarding the environmental factor, one major difference is that only half of Nepal's population has access to improved water, whether it is not even a concern in the UK. This might represent additional costs for a hotel in Nepal which want to provide improved water for all its clients. Also, tourism has led in environmental degradation in Nepal. It is also the case in the UK, but since the overall infrastructure is better to prevent and resolve it, the impact is not as important.
Finally, though Nepal and the United Kingdom present some similarities in their business environment, particularly in the political factors, the way business is managed in Nepal will be very different, particularly because of the very high corruption and because of the weak economical and workforce condition of the country.
As the business environment is always changing, hospitality managers need to evaluate the factors influencing the demand for tourism. Middleton and Clarke (2001) propose a framework to do so, evaluating different "determinants of demand" in a particular market (economic, demographic, geographic, socio-cultural, mobility, government, media and communication factors) (Middleton and Clarke, 2001:54). Also, Bowie and Buttle (2004) segment the hospitality market in four types of travellers: leisure international and leisure domestic; business international and business domestic. It can be deducted that Middleton's determinants of demand will directly influence each segment differently since their needs, purpose of travel and expectations are distinct.
According to Porter (1985), the bargaining power of suppliers, of buyers, the threat of substitute product, of new entrants and the rivalry among competitors are the five forces that drive competition in an industry. Porter provides a framework enabling managers to determine the strength of each of these forces, and to evaluate how each of them interacts with each other (Porter, 1985). The understanding of competition is at the core of strategy formulation (Porter, 1979) since it provides a basis to differentiation.
The elements to consider when evaluating market attractiveness can be classified in two categories: the "environmental characteristics" and the "firm characteristics" (Lee and Carter, 2005:95). Being an underdeveloped country with much political instability (appendix 2), Nepal as a new market for Monarka presents a certain risk. However, the geographical attributes, the rich culture, the variety of activities and the outcomes of the demand reveal certain market attractiveness. In fact, the growing tourism and the facilitated processes of entry by the government, as mentioned previously, make the destination attractive. This, on the other hand, causes a relatively high threat of new entrants in the industry. It is also important to consider the high corruption rate and the unqualified labour market as an important risk of doing business in Nepal. Regarding the firm characteristics, Monarka Hotels has a successful international experience until now and to have Nepal as a new market would meet the firm's objectives for internationalisation (appendix 1). According to the evaluated country risk, a suitable market entry mode can be chosen: ownership, franchise or management contract.
The identification of the target markets must be strategic, according to the analysis of demand, of competitors and of the company's resources and values (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). The main driver of demand for tourism is clearly the international leisure segment, followed by the international business segment. As shown in appendix 2, there is a significant growth for the European travellers and for the leisure segment in general. Also, the United Kingdom tourists represent the most important part of the European market (appendix 3), followed by Germany and France. However, the Indian arrivals are the most important, and must not be neglected, as well as the Americans'. Because of Nepal's overall weak economy and unstable political condition, it is not expected that the country's market will be significant in the leisure, but certainly in the business segment.
The hotel group being global because of its international presence, it still targets a niche market for its luxury brand. It will target, for the leisure segment, the customer described by Plog (2001) as a near-allocentric traveller. Geographically, the first market the hotel group should focus on is the westernised tourist; and as a second target, the westernised business segment, which makes it targeting a global market as a primary market.
Centricity, defined as an "approach to international management", influences global performance and business behaviour in a several manners (Roper et al. , 1997:199). The centricity of a firm is determined, amongst others, by the country of origin and the methods of growth the company chooses (Bowie and Buttle, 2004). The table in appendix 7 presents the different forms of centrism in a marketing perspective. The level of centricity varies into the firm, and it is very rare that a firm adopts a pure model. Generally, there is a predominant model, with some influences of the others (Lee and Carter, 2005).
According to Wind et al. (1973), the ethnocentric orientation is the most suitable when the international demand is low, since it targets only home-country consumers (appendix 7). It is most appropriate for a small company entering a new market, and that can not afford to target international markets. This orientation often reduces a lot of costs, but it might also discard lucrative international opportunities (Wind et al., 1973). This situation does not apply to Monarka, which desires to target a global market. The polycentric approach has most of its activities centred upon the host-country (i.e. Nepal) as it takes into account the local cultures in terms of pricing and marketing policies (appendix 7). This approach might not be suitable for a company who desires to be highly standardised since each subsidiary has a higher range of autonomy (Wind et al., 1973). It is not an appropriate option for Monarka, mainly because of the low demand for the local market.
Both regiocentric and geocentric orientations expand their target market further than the national frontiers (appendix 7), requiring a higher standardisation of the processes, but also creating greater economies of scale (Wind et al., 1973). The geocentric approach allows the firm to adopt one marketing strategy, since it targets similar customers in term of culture and socio-demographic characteristics (appendix 7, Wind et al., 1973) worldwide. It is the orientation that is the most suitable for Monarka in Nepal since it aims to target global customers, i.e. the westernised leisure luxury market.
In order to be competitive, the company must have a well defined brand image, which is reinforced by its competitive positioning strategy. The positioning strategy of Monarka in Nepal can be achieved by analysing the features of the competitors (appendix 4), and then determining distinct characteristics that will position Monarka as offering a highly differentiated service compared to its competitors.
This marketing research aimed at analysing the viability of a brand of Monarka Hotel group in Nepal. Despite the agricultural state of the economy, there is still substantial demand for tourism in the country, mainly due to its unique geographical attributes. Nevertheless, the research has shown a highly unstable and corrupted environment, as opposed to the UK. These conditions suggest that the country is still too unstable and weak for the firm to enter the market. However, very recently, a peace accord was signed between the Maoist rebels and the Nepalese government, putting a term to a revolution that had been lasting for more than 10 years (BBC, 2006). This accord has the potential to substantially stabilise the country, creating a much more favourable business environment for the proposed venture. Hence, it is recommended that the firm should go ahead with the proposed venture if the situation remains stable.
The research being conducted in the UK, it is based on secondary data only. Nepal being underdeveloped, some information seems not to be available (e.g. occupancy rates, RevPar) at all, which limits to some extent the strength of the analysis. Furthermore, the validity some sources can be questioned since a lot of information on the country has been found on government websites, which could tend to modify some information to their advantage. Nevertheless, substantial theoretical research has also been conducted, which provides a strong basis for the viability of the Monarka brand in Nepal.