Reperfusion strategies after myocardial infarction (MI) within the UK consist of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and thrombolytic therapy. Thrombolytic therapy is most commonly used for reperfusion of the infarct related artery (IRA) within the NHS (Spiers 2003). Reperfusion of the IRA after thrombolysis is not always successful, with 25% of patients remaining with an occluded IRA, and up to 70% of patients fail to gain reperfusion after 90minutes (Kucia and Zeitz 2002). TIMI (thrombolytics in myocardial infarction) flow describes the extent of occlusion of the IRA in relation to flow through the IRA. TIMI 3 flow represents normal coronary flow, with a large decrease in 30 day mortality rates, at 4.4% and with greatly improved left ventricular function, compared to TIMI flow <3 with16.3% mortality (Oldroyd 2006). ACC/AHA has set a guideline, that a maximum of total ischemia should be no longer than 120 minutes; any longer than this an increase in mortality rate is observed (Antman, Anbe, Armstrong et al 2004). Therefore, it is critically important to identify patients with successful/ failed reperfusion as quickly as possible with accuracy, in order that alternative surgery or further thrombolysis, if required, could be performed to reduce mortality and improve left ventricular function (Spiers 2003 and Tough 2005).
The persistence or reduction in pain felt by the patient during MI has been suggested to be successful in the prediction of TIMI flow of the IRA and is used clinically to predict patency. Studies have shown that a correlation between decreases in perceived pain and reperfusion, offers a 57% predictive value for TIMI 3 flow in comparison with TIMI 0-2 flow. However, variation in patient pain thresholds and the release of opiod-like peptides endogenously, will ultimately cause variation in diagnosis (Oldroyd 2006). Ethical issues also arise, as routinely patients are administered opiate analgesia, which may mask the occlusion of the IRA and will not accurately predict patency (Speiers 2003 and Tough 2005). In addition, a large study highlighted that a third of the patients diagnosed to have acute MI, did not have chest pain (silent ischemia) upon arrival at the hospital (Kucia and Zeitz 2002). In conclusion, clinical markers can be used in conjunction with other reperfusion markers for diagnosis of patency of the IRA, but clinical markers are not accurate enough to predict reperfusion after thrombolytic therapy.
Coronary angiography is considered to be the gold standard for the detection of reperfusion as it provides an accurate visualisation of the occluded IRA and predicts TIMI flow. Dibra and colleagues used a TMP grading system that compared TIMI 2/3 flow with TIMI 0/1. Figure one shows the results from the study highlighting myocardial salvage, infarct size and 1 year mortality. The results clearly show that TIMI 2/3 flow generally reduces 1-year mortality rates (P=0.11), reduces final infarct size and increases myocardial salvage. Therefore, coronary angiography can accurately predict IRA patency, leading to a prognosis for failed/successful reperfusion. However, angiography only represents IRA patency at one moment in time and the process of thrombolysis is dynamic and re-occlusion may occur after angiography observation. In addition, IRA patency does not necessarily predict micro-vascular flow, thus ventricular dysfunction may occur due to a false positive diagnosis (Dibra, Mehilli, Dirschinger et al 2003, Kucia and Zeitz 2002, Kovac and Gershlick 2001 and Matetzky et al 1998). In light of the evidence, coronary angiography can be used to accurately to detect IRA patency, but further observations of TIMI flow are required due to due to increase the accuracy of diagnosis.
12 lead electrocardiograms (ECG) are used to monitor changes in the electrical activity (PQRST wave) of the heart during thrombolytic therapy to detect coronary reperfusion (Kucia and Zeitz 2002, Oldroyd 2006 Kovac and Gershlick 2001 and Speirs 2003). ECG analysis of the QRS wave has identified that when Q waves are present R-wave regression develops, a measurement of the extent of infarct can be calculated. The Selvester QRS scoring system measures infarct size and has been found to predict ST recovery in patients with patent IRA according to QRS observations (Uyarel, Cam, Okmen et al 2005). Early T-wave inversion in the ECG has also been shown to indicate IRA patency, with increased left ventricular function (Matetzky, Barabash, Shahar et al 1994).
In addition, ECG monitoring highlights ST-segment elevation during MI, due to a segment of the heart being under ischemic conditions, preventing repolarisation of the ischemic myocyte tissue (Guyton and Hall 2000). Figure two shows an example of ST-elevation. A correlation between perfusion of the myocardial tissue and ST-resolution, accurately predicts reperfusion. It has been shown that a reduction in ST-segment elevation by >50% is a good predictor for patency, although other studies have suggested 25% or 75% decreases in ST-elevation, as the optimum predictor of IRA patency (Kucia and Zeitz 2002, Oldroyd 2006, Kovac and Gershlick 2001, de Lemos and Braunwald 2001). Prediction of failed thrombolysis by ST-monitoring has shown to reach probability values of 86%; with failure to reach 50% ST-resolution increasing mortality rates. However, reaching 50% resolution does not guarantee TIMI 3 flow (Oldroyd 2000 and Purcell, Newall and Farrer 1997). A debate has occurred on when to perform ECG monitoring, at the 60, 90 and 120minute point after thrombolysis initiation. However, with up to 70% of patients not gaining reperfusion after 90minutes; is the 60 or 90 minute observation accurate enough to detect reperfusion (Kucia and Zietz 2002 and Spiers 2003). Moreover, ECG monitoring only detects changes in electrical activity of the heart e.g. ST-resolution, at a given time. In conclusion, 12 lead ECG monitoring is accurate for detecting reperfusion via changes in the various PQRST segments, but due to non-continuous observation, accuracy for the detection of re-occlusion decreases.
Therefore, continuous ST-segment monitoring is preferred, as it constantly monitors the ST status, which ultimately increases accuracy for detecting continuous and sustained reperfusion of the IRA (Kucia and Zeitz 2002 and Kovac and Gershlick 2001). However, differences are found between anterior and inferior MI in relation to ST-segment resolution. Anterior MI does not produce as large ST resolution compared to that of patients with inferior MI, due to technical factors, and infarct size normally being larger in anterior MI. Therefore, ST monitoring for anterior MI would then be less accurate than for inferior MI. It has then been suggested that different thresholds be used for anterior and inferior MI, with 70% ST resolution for inferior MI and >50% for anterior MI. Complete ST resolution equal to and above 70% only gives a predictive value of 70-80% of obtaining TIMI 3 flow. Therefore, whilst complete ST-resolution predicts a patent IRA, it does not predict TIMI 3 flow with 100% accuracy (de Lemos and Braunwald 2001).
The presence of collateral coronary arteries may perfuse the ischemic region supplied by the IRA to some degree. Thus ST resolution may occur due to the reduction in ischemia, with the IRA still occluded, producing a false positive, resulting in the wrong prognosis (Habib, Heibig, Forman et al 1991). It has also been shown that the ST-segment may elevate just before reperfusion occurs, which is thought to be caused by reperfusion injury (Kucia and Zeitz 2002).
In conclusion, ST-segment monitoring has proved to be an accurate predictor of reperfusion when ST-resolution occurs. However, the extent of ST-resolution required for accurate diagnoses of reperfusion is not clear, and depends on the site of infarction (inferior or anterior MI), thus further research is required.
Studies have shown that after reperfusion of the myocardium, ventricular arrhythmias, such as ideoventricular rhythm, non-sustained ventricular tachycardia and bradycardia have occurred. Not all patients develop ventricular arrhythmias after reperfusion and when they do, they can persist for many hours after reperfusion has occurred. Therefore, reperfusion arrhythmias should not be used on its own for the detection of reperfusion after thrombolytic therapy, but to be used in conjunction with other reperfusion markers (Kucia and Zeitz 2002, Spriers 2003, Kovac and Gershlick 2001).
Studies have shown that once the IRA becomes patent after thrombolytic therapy, an increase in concentration of biochemical markers for moyocyte injury can be seen in patient serum. The most commonly used markers clinically, are CK isozymes, CK-MB, troponin I and troponin T. Randomised studies have shown that all of these biochemical markers, are raised significantly higher than serum baseline concentrations when reperfusion of the IRA occurs, with relatively high sensitivity and specificity (Matetzky et al 1998 and Tanasijevic, Cannon, Antman et al 1999).
In addition, early rises in biochemical markers are caused by the abrupt washout from the ischemic cells, which represent the patency of the IRA; it does not however, predict perfusion of the myocardial tissue, due to the possible occurrence of the 'no flow' phenomenon. This is caused by swelling of endothelial cells, capillary plugging by erythrocytes and leukocytes and vessel spasm causing micro-vascular dysfunction (Kovac and Gershlick 2001 and Matetzky et al 1998). The early rise in myoglobin and the different isoforms of troponin have a greater clinical application than CK activity, as it peaks at ~12 hours post thrombolysis, this then becomes too late for alternative reperfusion methods such as rescue PCI to be implemented, according to guidelines form symptom onset to balloon in 90 mins (Antman, et al 2004). In contrast a small elevation in serum CK-MB, especially just above serum base line, is considered to be an indication of infarction and is strongly related to mortality. Therefore, a rise in CK-MB in serum does not indicate coronary reperfusion, but a clinical cut off concentration; should accurately predict reperfusion (Alexander, Sparapani and Mahaffey 2000).
Tanasijevic and colleagues demonstrated that with the use of clinical cut off point  a certain ratio, comparing baseline concentration of the biomarker at T0 to the concentration at T60, they could accurately predict patency of the IRA. The highest probability of 90% was recorded; however prediction of IRA occlusion was significantly lower, with a probability of just 37%. Serum concentrations of the biomarkers were statistically higher in patients with TIMI flow 2-3 than in patients with TIMI flow 0-1. However, there was no significant difference between serum concentrations at TIMI 3 flow than that of TIMI 2 flow. Therefore, biomarkers can accurately predict patency of the IRA but they can not accurately predict failed reperfusion (Tanasijevic, 1999).
In conclusion, biochemical markers are accurate for detecting reperfusion, when early increases in serum concentration are detected above that of a 'clinical cut off point'. However, slow increases are indicative of prolonged ischemia and persistent coronary occlusion. Early rises in serum concentrations only predict myocardial IRA patency; however it does not predict myocardial salvage and ultimately ventricular function. Therefore, biochemical markers should not be used solely as a predictor of IRA patency and ventricular function.
Jurlander and colleagues have evaluated the combination of the rate of ST-resolution and the rise in moyoglobin. The study concluded that if ST-resolution occurred with a rise in myoglobin serum levels then this was an accurate indicator of both the patency of the IRA and the perfusion of the infarct related myocardial tissue. However, if there was any disc-ordinance between the two markers, this highlighted a less and ideal therapeutic effect, inviting further investigation (Jurlander, Holmvang, Galatius et al 2003). Similar examination into the concordance of early peak CK and ST-resolution was undertaken by Matetzky and colleagues in 1998. Shah and colleagues looked at the combination of pain decrease and ST-resolution and confirmed that together they could predict TIMI 3 flow (Shah, Cercek, Lew et al 1993).
De lemos and colleagues combined the ST-resolution, chest pain resolution and early washout of serum myoglobin to predict failure to achieve TIMI 3 flow with a probability of 78% with the use of a scoring system. French and colleagues have also developed a model that can predict the probability of the achievement of TIMI 3 flow at 90 minutes after 60 minutes from initiation of thrombolytic therapy. The model incorporates data from ST recovery >70%, serum concentration of troponin T, CK-MB and myoglobin, in which a score between 1 and 8 was awarded to each patient. Figure two shows the results collected from the model.
Figure three shows that as the score increases, the probability of achieving TIMI 3 flow at 90 minutes after the initiation of thrombolytic therapy decreases. A score equal to or below 2, gives a 4% prediction of failure to achieve TIMI 3 flow; with a score >7, a probability of achieving TIMI 3 was 10%.
This model has the potential to be successful in allowing clinicians to predict TIMI 3 flow at 60 minutes for the 90 minute point after initiation of thrombolytic therapy (French, Ramanathan, Stewart, et al 2003). Therefore, the need for rescue PCI could be predicted at the 60 minute point in order that the guideline 90 min from door to balloon could be met (Antman et al 2004).
Coronary echocardiography, Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), Cardiac Computed Tomography scanner (CT) and transthoracic Doppler echocardiography
(TTDE) are just some of the emerging techniques used by clinicians to accurately evaluate IRA patency, providing information on coronary reperfusion. However, due to limited resources and complications with the transfer of patients to available facilities, these techniques have to be developed to be more accessible and provide by-the-bed diagnosis (Kucia and Zietz 2002, Lima and Desai 2004, Furber, Genee, Delepine et al 2005 and Lee, Yutaka, Minagoe et al 2003).
In conclusion, it has been shown that the techniques used to detect reperfusion after thrombolytic therapy, are accurate. However, the combination of a variety of techniques has been shown to increase accuracy and provides information on both IRA patency, but also the perfusion of the myocardial tissue. The techniques also lack in there ability to distinguish between TIMI 3 flow and TIMI 2 flow. In addition, each institution has varied procedures for the detection of reperfusion after thrombolyis. Improvements would involve the possible use of clinical cut off points, scoring systems, improved accuracy for distinguishing between TIMI 3 flow and TIMI 2 flow and that each procedure listed above is available to each institution, to improve the detection of reperfusion after thrombolytic therapy.