Bone, cartilage and tendons are collectively known as connective tissue (P. G. Bullough, 1984), providing strength and the stabilisation of limbs and joints. However, bone has its own unique identity with a whole range of functional requirements such as the protection of internal organs, support and the assistance with locomotion (providing the framework for muscles) (E. N. Marieb 1998). In addition, bone also takes an important role in mineral storage, calcium homeostasis and blood formation (E. N. Marieb 1998). There are however, 206 bones within the human body (J. A. S. McCann et al, 2003), all of which vary in some way, in structure and composition, to meet specific functional requirements. For example, the femur, compared with metacarpal bones (a small collection of bones in the wrist- W. Kapit et al, 2001) is able to cope with a greater amount of stress, due to its structure and chemical composition, which is in relation to its specific functional requirement.
One of bones functional requirements is to resist forces placed upon it in order that it can continue to meet the demands of the body. There are three main loads/forces, in which a bone has to cope with. These are 1) tension, 2) compression and 3) shear, which are created by body weight, muscle pull and gravity (E. N. Marieb 1998). There are different elements that make up bone, which are suited to resist different forces. For example, collagen is a fundamental component of bone, providing resistance against tensile forces (P. G. Bullough, 1984) and calcium phosphate/ hydroxyapatite provides the strength to resist compression (E. N. Marieb 1998). There are two different types of bone, which differ structurally and chemically, providing different mechanical properties. The two layers are known as compact bone and trabecular bone. With different anatomical sites, structural differences and chemical composition can be seen, matching the type of bone (e.g. flat bone) with its specific functional requirement.
Collagen is the most abundant protein found in vertebrates (approx 90% of which is type I), and forms the bases of teeth, bone, skin, and tendons (J. R. Mckee, 2003). The collagen molecule itself is three left-handed polypeptide (tropocollagen- J. D. Currey, 2002) helices, twisted to form a right-handed triple helix (J. R. Mckee, 2003). It is approximately 300nm long and 1.5nm wide (J. R. Mckee, 2003). Collagen molecules can withstand tensile forces but cannot withstand great pressures of bending or compression (J. R. Mckee, 2003). The collagen molecules are embedded in the extracellular matrix, which contains calcium phosphate/calcium hydroxyapatite (crystallised calcium) (P. G. Bullough, 1984). They are approximately 2 x 9 x 25nm in size (P. G. Bullough, 1984). The calcium hydroxyapatite gives the characteristic stiffness of bone but it is brittle, so it cannot withstand high tensile forces. Therefore, the combination of collagen and calcium hydroxyapatite provides resistance to tension, compression, and bending (a combination of the two forces- E. N. Marieb 1998).
Moreover, bone consists of two different layers denoted as compact/cortical bone and trabecular bone (also known as spongy/cancellous bone) (E. N. Marieb 1998). Compact bone is situated upon the outer layers of bone and consists of many lamellas ('little plates'- tube like structures) (E. N. Marieb 1998). These structures contain the calcium hydroxyapetite and collagen fibres (E. N. Marieb 1998). The collagen fibres embedded in the matrix of the lamella are orientated in one direction, however, in adjacent lamella, the collagen fibres run in the opposite direction (E. N. Marieb 1998). This arrangement of collagen fibres is designed to resist torsion/twisting forces (E. N. Marieb 1998), helping to prevent the bone from fracturing. Trabecular bone is formed by lamellae forming on pre-existing trabeculae (L. Slomianka, 2004), which is arranged in a different manner to that of compact bone. Trabeculae are pillar like structures, made up of dense fibrous tissue, collagen being the main constituent (L. Slomianka, 2004). They are formed along lines of stress on the bone (E. N. Marieb 1998), to help resist tension/compression and prevent fracture. Figure one shows the stress-strain curve of the two different types of bone (trabecular and compact bone).
From the stress-strain curve above, an understanding of the biomechanical function of the two types of bone becomes evident. Compact bone requires a large amount of force in order to produce a small change in length, whereas trabecular bone does not require large forces to produce any changes in length. Therefore, compact bone is biomechanically suited to resist compression and is stiffer than trabecular bone, which allows a greater amount of movement, thus being suited in bones where greater tension forces occur.
Compact bone is highly dense with 5-10% porosity, compared to that of trabecular bone where >50% porosity is observed (University of Michigan website, 2006). Figure one shows a femur bone, with an external force being applied onto the femoral head. The diagram shows the line in which bending forces may occur and the arrows at the diaphysis (E. N. Marieb 1998) simulate the type of force being exerted onto that part of the bone. What is shown is that, as the force reaches the central part of the bone (trabecular bone) the individual forces cancel each other out, reducing the amount of force exerted onto the trabecular bone. Therefore, the requirement of highly dense material (such as dense lamella containing many crystals) is not required, saving the body on resources. Cylinders are also better at resisting bending forces (R. James, 2006).
There are different classifications of bone other than long bone. Short bone, irregular bone and flat bone make up these other classifications. Flat bones functional requirement is to protect internal organs, such as the rib cage protects the heart and lungs, and the skull protects the brain. The structure of flat bone consists of a layer of trabecular bone surrounded by two layers of compact bone (E. N. Marieb, 1998). Due to flat bone not being placed under stresses like that experienced by long bones, the structure is varied by a thinner layer of compact bone being present, in order to meet its own specific functional requirement. Irregular bones, such as the vertebrae are used to assist bending of the back and short bones are bones situated normally around specific joints, such as the wrist or ankle. Short bones contain mostly trabecular bone with a thin outer coat of compact bone, indicating that predominate forces placed upon short bones are tensile forces, in which it is ideally suited. Table 1 and 2 and figures 2 and 3, show the results obtained from 64 autopsies where the chemical composition of trabecular bone from different anatomical sites was measured.
Figure two, clearly shows that there is a clear difference in calcium percentage between the femur and the other types of bone. This result correlates with the femurs functional requirement, which is to assist with locomotion, support body weight and resist gravitational forces. Table two, and figure three, show the results of the different concentrations of hydroxyproline (the result of collagen being hydrolysed- ) found in the different types of bone.
Figure three, clearly shows the lumbar region containing a greater amount of hydroxyproline, indicating that the collagen levels were greater than that of the other anatomical sites. This again corresponds to its biomechanical function. Since the vertebrae are extensively used for bending, the high levels of collagen with the addition of hydroxyapetite enable the vertebrae to withstand these compression and greater tensile forces. Calcaneus is denoted as the 'heel' bone, and is situated in the foot (J Aerssens et al, 1997). Figure three shows that this bone has less hydroxyproline (collagen) content than the other bones, but has similar calcium concentrations, indicating the bone is mechanically suited to resist compressive forces, which matches its functional requirement.
Bone is not a static tissue and it is constantly remodelling in reaction to new stresses in order to maintain the highest protection against fracture (E. N. Marieb, 1998). A study on pre-pubertal gymnasts compared with controls was set up to distinguish whether there was any difference in bone mineral content and the cross-sectional area of the most used bones (K. A. Ward et al, 2005). The overall results were that the gymnasts had a greater bone cross-sectional area and thicker layers of compact bone (K. A. Ward et al, 2005). Bone strength was increased in the gymnasts, however, there was no significant difference in bone mineral content between the controls and the gymnasts (K. A. Ward et al, 2005), indicating that bone strengthening is partly due to bone cross-sectional area. The tendon attachment sites (through the periosteum- E. N. Marieb, 1998) of the bones of weight lifters are also adapted, by a dramatic increase in size to cope with the extra stresses (E. N. Marieb, 1998). The remodelling of bone is described in Wolff's law, in which he states that, a bone grows or remodels in response to forces or demands placed upon it (E. N. Marieb, 1998). The bone size can also decrease in size due to the reduction of stresses placed upon it. For example, Jerry Linenger (an astronaut and physician) lost 13 % of his bone mass in a four-month space trip; this is enough to double the risk of bone fracture (V. Loppesti, 2002). Bed ridden people also experience the same bone atrophy as experienced with astronauts (R. James, 2006). The disease osteoporosis weakens the bone by the imbalance of bone replacing and done dissolving (P. G. Bullough, 1984). Resulting in a decrease in bone cross-sectional area, reducing its ability to resist stresses and to resist fracture. Age also has an effect on bone-cross sectional area, where the older an individual is, (generally) the smaller the cross-sectional area (R. James, 2006), reducing the bones ability to resist fracture.
In conclusion, the structural and compositional changes that occur in different anatomical sites provide the body with a variety of different bones, mechanically suited for specific functional requirements. However, there is a hugely dynamic system allowing the alteration of chemical and structural changes (seen with increase in exercise) in compact bone and trabecular bone. This helps prevent fracture of the bone and increases the ability to cope with a variety of stresses.