Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is a condition caused by a novel strand of coronaviruses, which is likely to have crossed a species barrier to form what is now known as SARS-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV). The first cases emerged in late 2002 and early 2003, with the first confirmed infections at the Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong. The virus is highly contagious, and is thought to spread via aerosol droplets within respiratory secretions and faecal matter. SARS-CoV has caused ~8000 infections with a mortality rate of ~9-10% (Wong and Hui 2003, Tseng, Tseng, Perrone et al 2005, Liang, Zhu, Guo et al 2004). The clinical symptoms associated with SARS-CoV infection is high fever, rigors, headache, malaise, myalgias, diarrhea and respiratory symptoms, such as dyspnea, dry cough, interstitial infiltrates and respiratory failure (Khater and Moorman 2003).
SARS-CoV virus is an enveloped, single stranded positive sense RNA virus that infects respiratory and gastrointestinal epithelial cells, which are thought to be the viruses' main target (Glass, Subbarao, Murphy et al 2004, Tseng et al 2005, Khater et al 2003). Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) has been isolated as the functional receptor for the S-protein present on the enveloped surface of the virus. Two amino acids have been isolated as probable mutation points for the cross species movement, which binds to human ACE2 receptors (Qu, Hao, Song et al 2005, Li, Moore1, Vasilieva et al 2003, Prabakaran, Gan, Feng et al 2006). The mechanism of binding and fusion of SARS-CoV is shown schematically in figure one. ACE2 receptors have been shown to be abundantly expressed on the surface of lung and intestinal epithelial cell membranes, which fits with the pathology of SARS-CoV (Tseng et al 2005).
The pathogenesis of SARS-CoV is still largely up for debate and a lot is still to be understood, as many other diseases express the same clinical symptoms and present similar histological appearances as SARS. Due to the high mortality rate associated with SARS and its contagiousness, it is important to understand the pathogenesis of SARS and its affect on respiratory function, in order that management of SARS may be improved, to try to reduce mortality rates.
Franks et al, Hwang et al, Tse et al, Ding et al and Nicholls et al all carried out histological evaluation of pulmonary tissue collected from autopsies from suspected SARS patients. A concurrent observation associated SARS pathology with that of diffuse alveolar damage (DAD). DAD has been termed the morphological equivalent of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which is associated with extensive pulmonary oedema (Moreau 2006). Another observation made by the majority of these studies was that there seemed to be a shift in the histological appearance in correlation to the duration of the illness. Figure two shows an example of the pulmonary pathology at both acute and organised phases of DAD (Hwang, Chamberlain, Poutanen et al 2005, Nicholls, Poon, Lee et al 2003, Franks, Chong, Chui et al 2003, Ding, Wang, Shen et al 2003).
The histological examination of the pulmonary tissue highlighted extensive pulmonary oedema caused by SARS. This was caused by pleural effusion and a dramatic increase in the permeability of pulmonary capillaries, due to an increase in the release of pro-inflammatory mediators from neutrophiles and other immune cells. Producing a net movement of fluid, initially to the interstitial space, and once the lymphatics become too overloaded and the pressure of the interstitial space increases beyond capacity, fluid leaks into the alveolar space. Pulmonary oedema effects both mechanical respiratory function and gas exchange. Alveolar oedema reduces the volume of the effected lung units, causing a downward shift in the pressure-volume curve, reducing total lung capacity. Interstitial oedema is also thought to contribute to stiffening of the lung, by altering the elastic recoil properties (West 2003, Tse et al 2004). Fick's law describes the factors that determine the rate of diffusion of gas (CO 2 and O 2) from the alveoli space, into the surrounding blood. Alveolar oedema would affect these factors, such as increasing the distance for diffusion, ultimately reducing gaseous exchange (Levitzky 2003, West 2003).
The epithelial cells of the lung consist of type I and type II pneumoctyes. Type I pneumocytes are thin cells that line the alveolar space, allowing for efficient gaseous exchange and serve as mechanical support for the lung. Destruction of type I pneunmocytes, due to SARS-CoV infection, would result in a reduction in the mechanical resistance/ elastic recoil of the lung; thus leading to an increase in alveoli susceptibility to collapse. This is apparent as alveoli act in mechanical support to maintain the patency of adjacent alveoli in a process known as alveoli interdependence (Levitzky 2003, Taylor, Rehder, Hyatt et al 1989). Type II pneumocyte function consists of the production and secretion of surfactant, which acts to reduce alveolar surface tension created by water molecules being attracted to one another. Surfactant reduces surface tension of the alveoli from ~75dyn/cm 2 to ~45dyn/cm 2, which greatly contributes to the elastic recoil and compliance of lung (Taylor et al 1989, West 2003, Levitzky 2003). Therefore, destruction of type II pneumocytes both by apoptosis due to viral infection or lysis by viral budding would result in a reduction of surfactant production, and an increase in surface tension. Mechanical support alone in a normal lung is not enough to resist increases in surface tension. Therefore, a reduction in mechanical support due to type I pneumocytes destruction, would see an increase in alveoli susceptibility to collapsing.
In addition, air space consolidation has also been shown to occur with SARS patients using chest radiograms. This may be due to extensive migration of interstitial infiltrates of inflammatory cells, the increase in interstitial and alveolar macrophages, neutrophiles and the atypical pneumonia associated with SARS. The immune cells release proteolytic enzymes that may attack the protein components of the interstitial space (collagen, elastin), resulting in alveoli fusing to make one large alveoli. Vascular congestion/ infarction shown to occur with SARS, by histological examination, along with collapsed alveoli and air space consolidation would lead to ventilation/ perfusion inequality, which results in a low arterial partial pressure of O 2 and an increase in CO 2 partial pressure (Levitzky 2003, Hui et al 2003). Ventilation/ perfusion inequality describes the mismatch of gaseous exchange between the alveoli (ventilation) and the capillaries (perfusion). Therefore, if the alveoli collapse, no airflow will reach the affected alveoli, although blood flow is still maintained.
In addition, with SARS it is thought that a miss match of up to 50% can be observed, greatly reducing arterial partial pressure for O 2 causing hypoxemia, and increasing CO 2 partial pressure leading to hypercapnia. Acute areas affected by ventilation perfusion inequality can be counteracted by hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, directing blood flow to areas of the lung with increased ventilation. However, the combination of collapsed alveoli, extensive alveolar oedema and vascular congestion/ infarction, hypoxemia is inevitable (Levitzky 2003, West 2003). Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and creatine kinase (CK) have also been found to be at high concentration in SARS pateints. LDH and CK are both associated with anaerobic conditions of metabolism, therefore, increases in concentration indicate an increase in anaerobic metabolism, with CO 2 as a by-product.
SARS-CoV infection produces an extensive immune response, and immunohistochemical staining has highlighted increased numbers of alveolar macrophages, interstitial macrophages, neutrophiles and T-lymphocytes in the alveolar and interstitial walls. However, the interferon (IFN) dependent induction of cytokine production is thought to be inhibited by SARS-CoV infection, whilst activating an IFN independent cytokine pathway. The inhibition of the IFN dependent cytokine pathway reduces the beneficial effects that IFN has, such as binding on neighbouring cells, increasing resistance to viral infection (Glass et al 2004, Chang et al 2005). IL8, a chemoattractant and a potent angiogenic factor, and CD68, a promoter for phagocytosis and the recruitment and activation of macrophages are both expressed during SARS-CoV infection (Chang, et al 2004, Ding, et al 2003).
Lung compliance refers to the change in lung volume with a change in transpulmonary pressure. The higher the lung compliance the greater the changes in lung volume with a set change in transpulmonary pressure. Figure three shows how in different disease states, lung compliance is affected. Acute-phase DAD in SARS results in extensive pulmonary oedema, hyaline membrane formation and the extensive migration of interstitial infiltrates of inflammatory cells. In the organised-phase of DAD the histological appearance highlights type II pneumocyte hyperplasia, squamous metaplasia, formation of multinucleated giant cells and extensive fibrosis. Both Acute an organised states of DAD cause a decrease in lung compliance, however organised-phase DAD will decrease lung compliance further, resulting in an increase in energy required to extend the lungs large enough to supply basic oxygen needs.
The reduction in lung compliance along with the affects of ventilation/ perfusion inequality would cause respiratory symptoms such as dyspnea and if untreated, diaphragm fatigue may occur, causing hypoventilation, decreasing arterial partial pressure of O 2 and increasing CO 2 partial pressure.
Furthermore, interstitial oedema and bronchopneumonia, associated with bronchiole epithelial denudation will cause bronchiole obstruction and ultimately reduce the circumference of the bronchiole. Neutrophiles and other immune cells recruited to the affected area release histamine and leukotrienes, which act of -adrenergic receptors embedded in the bronchial epithelium, causing bronchoconstriction. Since resistance is inversely proportional to the radius to the forth power, any small changes in the bronchial radius, causes a dramatic change in resistance. For example if the bronchiole's radius was reduced by half and eight fold increase in resistance would be observed. This would vastly increase the energy required to distend the lungs sufficiently for gaseous exchange, which is one of the reasons why with mechanical ventilation of SARS patients, an extraordinarily high distending pressure is required (Levitzky 2003, West 2003).
Moreover, respiratory pathology of SARS patients highlights a restrictive type disease such as fibrosis, as extensive pulmonary oedema, pneumocyte hyperplasia and extensive fibrosis all occur in SARS. Restriction and reduction in lung compliance will ultimately reduce total lung capacity (TLC), expiratory residual volume (ERV) and the residual volume (RV). RV helps to maintain alveolar patency by preventing all the air to be expelled, so a reduction will further increase the susceptibility for alveolar collapse. TLC is dramatically reduced, which along with extensive ventilation/ perfusion mismatch described earlier a further reduction of arterial partial pressure for O 2 is observed.
However, there are some problems associated with the attribution of the changes in respiratory function described above to SARS. Peiris and colleagues performed a study on SARS patients, which concluded that viral load decreased after a week of SARS-CoV infection due to immune clearance. However, some patient's respiratory function continued to deteriorate. They postulated that the clinical progression might be due to immunopathological damage; not due to uncontrollable viral replication (Peiris, Chu, Cheng et al 2003). A study on AIDS and non-AIDS patients for the infection pneumocytosis carnii pneumonia, revealed that AIDS patients had a lower mortality rate at 10-15% compared to the non-AIDS patients with ~50%. This supports the hypothesis that a hyperimmune response is responsible for the increased damage and mortality (Wright, Gigliotti, Finkelstein et al 1999)
In conclusion, SARS drastically affects respiratory function, which has been shown with radiographs, histological examination and clinical symptoms such as dyspnea and respiratory failure. Interstitial oedema, fibrosis and pneumocyte hyperplasia affect respiratory function mechanically. Alveolar and interstitial oedema and bronchiopneumonia all contribute to obstruction of the airways and increasing resistance. Vascular congestion/ infarction is caused due to migration of immune cells, causing platelet activation and fibrin formation. All of these pathological events lead to ventilation-perfusion inequality, which causes hypoxemia, decreasing arterial partial pressure for oxygen and increases arterial partial pressure of CO2; shown by the increase in lactate dehydrogenase. If left untreated lung failure occurs, resulting in multiple organ failure leading to death.