Coronary heart disease (CHD) is and continuous to be the leading cause of mortality in the world, with ~7.2 million people dieing from the disease each and every year (Helfond, Carson and Kelley 2005). Hyperlipidemia is a condition that is termed by an elevation in blood lipids (160mg/dL), such as cholesterol and cholesterol esters (hypercholesterolemia), phospholipids and triglycerides (Hypertriglyceridemia) (AHA website, Williams 2004, ATP III final report). A prolonged elevation in plasma lipid concentration can lead to the pathological process of atherosclerosis, increasing the risk and incidence for CHD events. Hyperlipidemia can occur due to genetic conditions such as familial hypercholesterolaemia or occur due to a sedentary lifestyle and high dietary cholesterol intake (Simon Broome Register Group, American Heart Association). An increase in plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) is directly proportional to atherosclerosis formation; however, an increase in high-density lipoproteins is inversely related to atherogenesis. Therefore, the type of lipoprotein is important in the potential target of pharmalogical agents for the treatment of hyperlipidemia (Brown and Goldstein 1985, Tulenko and Sumner 2002). Figure one shows a schematic representation of an LDL molecule with the cholesterol ester core; the cholesterol and phospholipid outer core and the lipoprotein Apo B-100.
Until the introduction of statins (lovastatin) in 1986, the only treatment available for hyperlipidemia where pharmalogical agents that yielded a reduction in plasma LDL by <20% and the only treatment that drastically reduced plasma LDL was surgical procedures such as an ileal bypass, which reduces the absorption of dietary cholesterol. Statins (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme reductase inhibitor-HMG-CoA) have revolutionised treatment for hyperlipidemia, where with newer potent statins such as atorvastatin and rosuvastatin, a reduction of >50% in plasma LDL-C has been observed. This in itself has contributed a large reduction in CHD events (Monge 2006).
However, only 38% from a 5000 patient study using statin therapy reached target LDL-C concentration, currently set at <100mg/dL. However, recent reports from the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) indicates a more aggressive approach for the treatment of hyperlipidemia is required, as clinical trial data indicates a reduction of LDL-C <70mg/dL in high-risk patients, increases clinical outcome (Jeu and Cheng 2003, Balbisi 2006). Also increase in the incidence of obesity and diabetes type II in industrialised countries is resulting in an increase in the prevalence of hyperlipidemia and ultimately CHD events (Selvin, Wattanakit, Steffes et al 2006). Therefore, in spite of the excellent safety and tolerability record of statins, and their effectiveness at reducing plasma LDL-C, new pharmacological therapies are required to further reduce plasma LDL-C and ultimately reduce CHD events (Monge 2006).
Figure two, shows the biochemical pathway, where HMG-CoA reducatase is the rate-limiting step for the production of cholesterol, membrane-associated proteins and ubiquinone. Statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors) competitively inhibit HMG-CoA reductase activity by binding and reorganizes several catalytic residues within the enzyme-statin complex, preventing substrate (HMG-CoA) binding (Istvan and Deisenhofer 2001, Maron, Fazio and Linton 2000). The inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase ultimately reduces intracellular cholesterol, reducing the concentration of cholesterol in the phospholipid membrane. This causes the production of transcription factors, which bind to sterol regulatory elements (SRE), causing an up regulation in the production and expression of LDL receptors on the surface of the cell. This up regulation causes an influx of LDL and LDL precursors to bind LDL receptors via apo B-100 (the physiological ligand), and enter the cell from the blood by endocytosis. This is mostly seen within the liver as it has the largest capacity for the production and secretion of cholesterol into the blood (Masters unknown, Brown et al 1985, Tulenko et al 2002, Brody et al 1998, Stancu and Sima 2001, Myerson, Ngai, Jones et al 2005, Maron et al 2000, Olsson, Pears, McKellar et al 2001).
Hepatic secretions of VLDL and TAG have been shown to decrease with simvastatin treatment. The possible causative mechanism is that statins may activate peroxisomal proliferatoractivated receptor (PPAR), which leads to the increase oxidation of fatty acids, with a reduction in TAG synthesis and VLDL assembly (Myerson et al 2005). A comparative study of clinical trial data in table one compares the lipid lowering ability of a variety of statins at maximum dose (80mg). The most potent statin is rosuvastatin (synthetic statin), producing the highest LDL-C reduction at any dose range (Helfond et al 2005). Olsson and colleagues observed that rosuvastatin produced LDL-C reductions of ~34%-65%, at an 80mg dose over a 6 week clinical trial. However, even at 5-10mg dose range LDL-C was reduced by 43%-51.19%. Moderate increase of ~5% in plasma HDL-C is observed with the majority of statin treatments. However, plasma HDL-C increased by ~8-12% with rosuvastatin, with larger increases when original baselines HDL-C are low (Olsson 2001, White 2002). The improvement of LDL-C concentrations observed with rosuvastatin treatment, are due to its unique pharmacologic and pharmacokinetic properties. Additional enzyme-statin binding domains, increases its affinity for HMG-CoA reductase, and a bioavailability of ~20% is observed with rosuvastatin being poorly absorbed into extra hepatic tissue due to hydrophilic properties (White 2002).
Ezetimibe (class representative of 2-azetidinones) is a potent and selective pharmalogical agent that actively inhibits intestinal cholesterol and phytosterol absorption, reducing the delivery of cholesterol to the liver by ~54%, causing an up regulation of hepatic LDL receptors. An increase in LDL receptor expression, as with statin treatment, will cause an influx of LDL and LDL precursors from the blood into the hepatocytes by endocytosis (Bruckert, Giral and Tellier 2003, Hawes, O'Neill, Yao et al 2006, Jeu et al 2003). The molecular structure of ezetimibe is shown in figure four.
Ezetimibe undergoes extensive glucuronidation in the intestinal wall and the liver and is subject to possible enterohepatic recirculation, resulting in an elimination half-life for ezetimibe and the conjugate of ezetimibe and glucuronide at ~22 hours, allowing for a once-daily dose (Bruckert, et al 2003, Hawes et al 2006). The conjugate glucuronide has also been shown to be more potent than non-glucuronidated ezetimibe, which is thought to be as a result of the addition of a hydroxyl group onto the 3-phenylpropyl side chain, improving the compounds affinity for NPC1L1 (Hawes et al 2006). In addition, recent studies have shown that one of the molecular targets of ezetimibe is Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 (NPC1L1). Calvo and colleagues used labelled ezetimibe glucuronide, where they bound specifically to a site in the brush border membranes of enterocytes, where NPC1L1 molecules are abundantly expressed. NPC1L1 knockout mice revealed the significance of NPC1L1 as a key regulator within the mechanism of sterol absorption, as ezetimibe treatment did not reduce plasma LDL-C in NPC1L1 knockout mice (Calvo, Lisnock, Bull et al 2005).
However, Kramer and colleagues have completed a subsequent study and have identified aminopeptidase N (APN) as the protein component responsible for sterol absorption and ultimately the molecular target for ezetimibe. Analysis using photoaffinity labeling with photoreactive ezetimibe analogues identified the 145Kda APN integral membrane protein. Further analysis of the sight of binding revealed that none of the protein components in which ezetimbe had bound to matched NPC1L1; therefore, the exact molecular target for ezetimibe is still up for discussion (Kramer, Frank, Corsiero et al 2004).
Moreover, a pooled analysis of 399 patients receiving either a placebo or ezetimibe at 0.25, 1, 5, or 10 mg once daily showed a median percentage of LDL-C reduction of ~0%, 12.7%, 14.7%, 15.8%, and 19.4%, respectively (Sudhop and Bergmann 2002, Brucket et al 2003). Another study involving pooled analysis from two phase II trials, highlighted 67.8% of patients achieved  15% reduction in plasma LDL-C levels with a 10-mg dose of ezetimibe and 22.0% achieved  25% reduction, with the 5mg ezetimibe dose yielding a significantly (P <0.05) lower percentage decrease at both levels (Gagn, Bays, Weiss et al 2001). HDL-C has been shown to increase by ~1% with total cholesterol (~13%) and triglycerides (~9%) both showing to decrease with ezetimibe monotherapy. A review of the literature indicates a moderate reduction of plasma LDL-C of ~15-20%, at a normal dose range (5-10mg) (Knopp, Gitter, Truitt et al 2003, Ballantyne 2002, Brar 2004, Bruckert, et al 2003, Jue et al 2003, Bays et al 2002). Therefore, ezetimibe is an effective pharmacological agent that targets cholesterol absorption, providing a moderate decrease in plasma LDL-C levels.
Nicotinic acid (pyridine-3-carboxylic acid), a water soluble vitamin (B3) compound, along with derivatives such as NADP and NADH are extensively involved in metabolism of viable cells. Administration of high nicotinic acid doses (grams) for the treatment of hyperlipidemia moderately lowers plasma LDL-C by ~15-20%; however, increases of ~25-35% in plasma HDL-C can be observed (Rosenson 2005, Drood, Zimetbaum, and Frishman 1991, Pan, Van, Chan et al 2002, Brody et al 1998). However, new extended-release niacin has been shown to decrease side effects associated with the high dose niacin, with similar effects on the plasma lipid profile (Pan et al 2002). Extended-release nicotinic acid (1g/day) has also been shown to retard atherogenisis in carotid arteries, measured by the carotid intimal-medial thickness (CIMT) (Grundy 2004). The mechanism of action of nicotinic acid is still largely unknown. However, it is thought that increases in lipoprotein lipase activity along with decreases in free-fatty acids release from adipose tissue results in a decrease in hepatic absorption of free-fatty acids, thus causing decreases in hepatic free-fatty acid re-esterification. The production of very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) is ultimately reduced, causing a decrease in LDL production, the terminal point of the lipoprotein pathway (Tulenko et al 2002, Brody et al 1998, Drood et al 1991, DrugBank 2006). Extended-release nicotinic acid has been shown to particularly increase apolipoprotein A-I in HDL-C molecules, which is associated with an increase in antiatherogenic properties (Sakai, Kamanna and Kashyap 2001).
The EXPLOYER study involved 469 patients from the USA, Africa and Europe, who where randomly assigned rosuvastatin (40mg) or rosuvastatin and ezetimibe (10mg) combination therapy over a six week period. The combination of rosuvastatin and ezetimibe provided an LDL-C decrease of 69.8%, compared to 57.1% rosuvastatin monotherapy. The success rate for reaching the 2003 European LDL-C goal (<2.5 or 3.0 mmol/L (97 or 115 mg/dL) for the combination therapy was 94% compared to 74% with the monotherapy (Monge 2006, AstraZeneca 2006). Combination therapy trials of ezetimibe and atorvastatin resulted in LDL-C reductions of 50%-60%, triglyceride reductions of 30%-40%, and HDL-C increases of 5%-9% and concluded a higher percentage of patients reached the <100dL target, than atorvastatin monotherapy (Stein, Stender, Mata et al 2003, Ballantyne, Houri, Notarbartolo et al 2003). Although ezetimibe does not match the lipid lowering ability set by statin monotherapy, the two pharmacological agents may be used in conjunction, as both mechanisms are complimentary to each other. Little or no interaction occurs between ezetimibe and other drugs as ezetimibe elimination is not through the Cytochrome-P450 (CP-450) enzymatic system (Jue et al 2003).
Statin and nicotinic acid are in theory two ideal drugs, as potent statins (e.g. rosuvastatin) drastically reduces LDL-C even at low doses and nicotinic acid produces large increases in HDL-C. A combination of clinical trials have revealed with combined treatment of statin (simvastatin and pravastatin) and nicotinic acid LDL-C levels where reduced between 29%-44%, TAGs where reduced by between 15%-39% and an increase in HDL-C levels between 14%-36% where observed. The combined mechanisms of both these drugs would dramatically reduce the incidence of CVD events as both LDL-C and HDL-C levels are significantly altered toward more optimum concentrations, ultimately improving clinical outcome (Talbert 2004, Tsalamandris, Panagiotopoulos, Sinha et al 1994, Stein, Davidson, Dujovne et al 1996, Balbisi 2006).
Phosphatidylinositol (PI) is an anionic phospholipid that occurs in every cell and are the main source of diacylglycerol (DAG), a signalling molecule, which causes kinase C production via a cascade pathway, which modulates cellular function including metabolism (Lipid Library 2006, Burgess, Boucher, Neville et al 2003 ). PI is a minor constituent of lipoprotein; however, PI-enriched HDL causes an increase in the net negative charge of the molecule, increasing the efflux of cholesterol from 'donor' membranes into the HDL core. This promotes reverse cholesterol transport (RCT) where by unesterified cholesterol (free-cholesterol) is transported from the periphery to the liver and to bile, which is excreted within the faeces. Burges and colleagues highlighted that with an oral dose (5.6g) of PI with food, an increase of HDL-C of 18% was observed over 2 weeks, and a significant increase in apolipoprotein A-I concentration, and a reduction of 36% in plasma TAG concentration (Burgess et al 2003, Burgess, Neville, Rouillard et al 2004).
Metabasis, a biopharmaceutical company has produced MB07811, which is a novel agonist, which is orally active; developed for the treatment of hyperlipidemia. The company's HepDirect(R) prodrug technology has enabled them to target a -subtype-selective thyroid hormone receptor (TRB) in the liver, without interaction with the -thyroid hormone receptors (TR-), which is abundantly expressed in heart tissue (Johan 2004). Activation of thyroid hormone receptors causes alteration in metabolism by altering cellular function via transcriptional factors. Preclinical data suggests that MB07811 could be as effective as statin monotherapy at reducing LDL-C. TRB agonists have been shown to reduce plasma cholesterol in animal models, however, at doses associated with cardiac and other non-hepatic toxicities (Metabasis 2006). Therefore, results from phase 1 clinical trial may reveal MB07811 ability at lowering LDL-C in humans within a safe dose range.
Nuclear receptors LXR and LXR regulate gene expression that involves all parts of cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism. Agonists such as GW3965 actively bind these receptors, stimulating bile acid synthesis, caused by the up-regulation of genes encoding ATP binding cassette transporters A1 (ABCA1) and G1 (ABCG1) in macrophages, increasing cholesterol efflux in macrophages. Inhibition of dietary cholesterol absorption is also observed; LXR agonism however causes, lipogensis and hypertriglyceridemia in animal models, which ultimately puts doubt on future clinical application (Naik, Wang, Da Silva et al 2006, Groot, Pearce, Yates et al 2005, Rigamonti, Helin, Lestavel et al 2005, Joseph, McKilligin, Pei et al 2002).
In conclusion, the new and emerging drug therapies are unlikely to replace the long standing statin monotherapy, as a wealth of clinical trial data exists on statin therapy and no new drug has produced as dramatic LDL-C reductions. However, with roughly only 30% of patients reaching target lipid concentrations (<100mg/dL), new drugs are required to further improve patients lipid profile. It is then for the foreseeable future, that combination therapy should be the option used for treatment of failed lipid targets, producing greater reductions in LDL-C and increases in HDL-C, decreasing the incidence of CVD events and improving clinical outcome.