In Douglas' book, 'Implicit Meanings' I have chosen to review chapter three titled 'Pollution'. I hope to link the reading with past and present theoretical approaches relevant to the reading and give an overview of the topic of pollution and its relevance to anthropology today. Douglas notes that pollution has always been linked to non - religious, magical behaviour especially in order to distinguish them from "the rules of holiness protecting sanctuaries, priests and everything pertaining to the gods" (Douglas, 1975, p.47). Sir James Frazer, author of The Golden Bough, she goes on to note formulated two principles of magic, action by contagion and action by likeness. Magic is linked to primitive notions of contagion and was ruled by supernatural ideas before the notion of religion was in place. Therefore it is another word for ritual. This is highly related to Durkheim and the functionalist theory. Durkheim also developed an idea that "magical injunctions are the consequence of primitive man's attempt to explain the nature of the universe" (Douglas, 1975, p.48). For that reason we can call magic and its relation to pollution a social fact since it is "determined by the body of custom transmitted within the social tradition" (Layton, 1997, p.19)
Another way, her essay is linked to a Durkheimian perspective is the fact that it is a way of keeping social control and order and Douglas also mentions this. In her fieldwork on the Lele of the Kasai (formally the Belgian Congo not the present-day Democratic Republic of the Congo) she notes how pollution is a way of keeping law and order. It linked to the collective conscious an idea that Durkheim coined. Since pollution "challenge[s] us to discover how we ourselves have constructed in collusion the constraints which we find out universe" (Douglas, 1975, p.5), Douglas talk about how the sacred must be protected from the profane, this happens in the form of ritual of separation, in other words in the appearance of magic. As she succinctly put it in her book Purity and Danger (1966), Douglas states that taboo confronts the ambiguous and shunts it into the category of the sacred.
We cannot however just see pollution as the distinction between 'us' and 'them' or 'ours' and 'theirs' because this is overly-simplistic. How can we really understand other peoples' notions of pollution? Douglas thinks the key word is the "ancient, primitive, and still current 'dirt'" (Douglas, 1975, p.50). She notes how Lord Chesterfield defined dirt as matter out of place. This is interesting for the idea that pollution is a contravention to ordered relations of a society. Thus dirt equals a social structure, again much like Durkheim's thinking. However it is also a symbolic and structuralist approach too, perhaps one which she developed from Evans-Prichard while at Oxford university. The concept of dirt is implicit (funnily this is the title of the book) but it also blurs boundaries and classifications. Many people have different understandings to what constitutes dirt because they live in different societies, it is a cultural phenomenon. The perception of dirt, transcends the idea of pathogenicity and is therefore likely to have universal applications.
The idea of perception is one which helps us understand why the concept of pollution is important. If someone perceives something to be dirty others will assume it too, "the learner recognises and absorbs cues which harmonise with past experience and usually ignores cues which are discordant" (Douglas, 1975, p.51). This is the same for spoken language, where ambiguity can have serious repercussions for effective communication. So the same can be said for pollution, a process of discrimination and evaluation must take part for 'pollution development' within an individual. This links back to the earlier idea that pollution is used, in primitive societies, as a pressure to conform. To evaluate this conformity Douglas believes we need to look at the functions of pollution beliefs. Since dirt implies a system Douglas sees dirt avoidance as "a process of tidying up, ensuring that the order in external physical events conforms to the structure of ideas". Additionally pollution can be seen as an "extension of the perceptual process" (Douglas, 1975, p.53).
Since "all reality is social reality" (Douglas, 1975, p.5), Douglas looks at sanctions that are used when pollution rules are not followed. Since culture is collectively interested in pressing for conformity, deviants can be punished in various forms from political decrees, for example when homosexual acts were forbidden or by grave and trivial sanctions such as making the transgressor clean up other people's mess, for example graffiti street cleaning for offenders. However, in more primitive societies that may not be as sophisticated as ours - "pollution beliefs not only reinforce the cultural and social structure, but they can actively reduce the ambiguity". Again, this is a Durkheimian viewpoint since by understanding notions of pollution and purification we are trying to develop a social theory of knowledge, something Durkheim tried to do by looking at reasons for suicide.
Pollution tends to be applied to production or functions of human physiology therefore "blood, excreta, vomit, hair clippings, nail clipping, cooked food" etc are all major forms of pollution. In some communities, menstrual blood is feared and women cannot cook food and are often sectioned to a particular house in the village for the duration of their period. In others however it doesn't incur any pollution worries and this shows that there are not universal or common patterns in pollution observances but within each society their own rules must be adhered to otherwise dire consequences might occur since pollution concepts guard "threatened disturbances of the social order" (Douglas, 1975, p.55). This is why the role of the anthropologist is so important since they try to understand these essential rules of other societies. In Van Gennep's Les Rites de Passage (1909) he states how pollution behaviour lies outside the realm of our own experience which might be a reason why we react so strongly when pollution sanctions are not adhered to. To sum up, Douglas notes that "pollution beliefs protect the most vulnerable domains, where ambiguity would most weaken the fragile structure" (Douglas, 1975, p.58) they may not be rational or even conscious but without them society may not function its best capacity possible.
Word count: 1,028 words