Gifts and exchange are integral to everyday life, for special occasions such as birthdays, doing well at a particular sport and religious festivities such as Christmas, baptism, confirmation and many more. Even on a day-to-day scale exchanges are taking place all the time in the form of telephone calls, letters, dances, dinner parties and just conversations in general. Gifts can express relationships, mark changes of status (motherhood) and other important events. Exchange can also make important changes in lifestyle for example in marriage. But what are the social implications of this? How are we to know how much to give, how to wrap it, how to receive the present and how to repay the giver?
Sometimes gifts can be given to show power, prestige, status and sometimes to achieve credit in continuing relations. Why people give gifts and use exchange will be examined in this essay and how these reveal broader information about their social organisation will be addressed.
In 1924 Marcel Mauss in his 'Essai Sur le don' argued that a free gift is a contradiction and that there are "spiritual mechanisms" which "obliges us to make a return gift for a gift received" (Mauss, 1950 p. 5). There are many ways in which one can return a gift and Mauss refers to this as "total prestations". According to him there has never been a "'natural' economy" but that "it is groups and not individuals, which carry on exchange, make contracts, and are bound by obligations" (Mauss, 1950, p. 5).
But what does this tell us? We need to look at certain forms of gift exchange to understand what Mauss is trying to explain.
In the case of Malinowski, circulation of white shell bracelets (Mwali) and red shell necklaces (Soulava) known as the Kula as a form of exchange, is an important part of lifestyle in the Trobriand Islands to ensure communication between the various communities on different islands. These two articles are constantly travelling in opposite directions and "every detail of the transactions is fixed and regulated by a set of traditional rules and conventions, and some acts of the Kula are accompanied by an elaborate magical ritual and public ceremonies" (Young, 1979). The Kula is a deeply rooted essential part of the Trobriander's lives. The articles never stay for long periods of time on each island since they are always travelling and changing hands. Special canoes are created each year in August as the expeditions usually take place between February and April. The canoe is subject to magical rites performed by specialists which ensure a safe journey for those onboard, "The magical rites aim successfully at the expulsion of a wood spirit (tokway) from the tree to be felled: at the imparting of the stability, swiftness and good luck to the canoe by direct sorcery or by the unwitting breaking of taboos" (Young, 1979, p. 172).
So why is the "decorum of the Kula transaction strictly kept, and highly valued"? (Young, 1979, p.170) There are many reasons for this, most importantly though, it maintains connections which would otherwise be lost by the distance between the islands. It welds the tribes together for a common reason, "Finally, in the overseas expeditions, the kula contributes the only amicable link between unrelated and potentially hostile islands" (Singh Uberoi, 1962, p. 70) It also gives prestige to a certain tribe since a fine article must be replaced by one of equivalent value and not by several minor ones. There are even rules concerning 'basi', an intermediary gift and 'kudu', a clinching gift. Malinowski himself has shown the great importance of the Kula "Many men died because of it" (1922, p.359), he also stated that if a just equivalent is not given over for a gift received "deep resentment" would appear. There are some points that should be noted here though, Malinowski was a very male-orientated person and his views can be seen to have an andocentric side formed from his male bias. "Bronislaw Malinowski was born of aristocratic patronage in Poland in 1884" "One of his favourite expository devices id to exploit the observing 'I' by self-dramatisation, to place himself squarely in the event and describe what he sees. Such devices enabled him better to convey his understanding of an unfamiliar idea or custom, and they heighten the reader's interest by their engaging effect." (Young, 1979, p. 5)
Mauss placed strong emphasis on the three obligations of gifts and exchange, these are giving, receiving and repaying. The obligation to give is best shown in potlatch (meaning 'gift') of the North-West American coast in the late 19 th and early 20 th centuries. "A chief would give a potlatch for himself, his son, his son-in-law, or daughter and for the dead" (1924, p.37) and the "only way to demonstrate his fortune is by expending it to the humiliation of others, by putting them 'in the shadow of his name'". The obligation to receive is no less confined here either, "One does not have the right to refuse a gift or a potlatch. To do so would show fear of having to repay, and of being abased in default". Lastly, the obligation to repay is the fundamental nature of the potlatch, it "must be returned with interest like all other gifts" (p.40). Mauss notes the imperative nature of this repaying "Face is lost for ever if it is not made" (p.41). The potlatch therefore gives us a great inside view of the social organisation of the Kwakiutl societies and can be reflected in societies throughout the world. Mauss, even goes far enough to say that a person who cannot return a potlatch "loses his rank and even his status of a free man".
Another huge form of exchange is marriage and is sometimes viewed as one of the biggest forms of exchange. Not only are there wedding gifts to the couple (in Western societies such things as useful house appliances are given to the bridal couple) and the exchange of rings and vows, but the actual exchange of daughter to become wife is one of huge consequences. In Colin Turnbull's 'The Forest People' (1961) marriage is seen of the utmost importance. To a pygmy a wife is not only a "producer of wealth" like for the villagers, "She is an essential partner in their economy. Without a wife a man cannot hunt, he has no hearth, he has nobody to build his house, gather fruits and vegetables and cook for him" (Turnbull, 1961, p. 186). In the form of marriage "pygmies find it necessary to arrange for an exchange, so that no group is ever depleted of its womenfolk" (p.183). The exchange is in the form of 'sister-exchange'. This can be difficult since if one marriage breaks down it is more than likely that the other one will too, as the "injured party" claims back its sister.
In his ethnography, Turnbull is talking about a specific marriage relating to his close friend Kenge and her sister Yambabo. Yambabo refused Taphu and Kenge was angry about this. Her mother pointed out to her that she would offer Taphu to  Kenge's younger sister but she warned Yambabo that "she would never be able to make a respectable marriage, for she had no brothers". It was pointed out that she could find someone to marry but "unless a girl were given in exchange for her she would have no status and no security" (p. 189). This statement immediately set  Yambabo in motion into accepting Taphu since she knew what her mother said to be true. This event shows us the importance (especially to this particular tribe) of exchange within marriage. The social implications of not marrying were so great that Yambabo had to marry. Later on in the chapter we are told two interesting comments about this form exchange, Turnbull tells us that Kenge doesn't want to alienate the villages by ignoring them since "that would have meant losing good exchange-friends there who kept him supplied with village goods in return for a few favours in the forest" (p. 190).
Perhaps the most insightful comment was noted by Masisi one of the elder members of the community who was reminiscing about his own wedding. He pointed out "'If we did not let the villagers think that they arrange our marriages, then how could we expect them to give us such fine feasts and present us with so many gifts?'" This example shows us that both parties are benefiting from the marriage (note reciprocity), the villagers believe they are holding a 'proper, lawful marriage' and the pygmies get to feast! This is a prime example of the broader information that gift-giving guarantees. To a pygmy, the marriage is only acknowledged when the male pygmy presents his in-laws with an antelope to show that he will care for his new wife.
Often in our society if a new person moves into the neighbourhood, gifts of non-perishable food are offered, an example could be biscuits which could have the meaning that you might like to welcome them into the street by having tea with them, this therefore is to show friendship and the want to maintain further contact with them. If gifts are seen to be noticeably cheaper than expected this can create distance between the giver and receiver.
The obligation to give and receive is of equal importance, and therefore reciprocity is fundamental to the form of exchange. Often phrases such as 'Oh you shouldn't have' are uttered from our mouths. The person is sub-consciously thinking of what they can do to 'pay back' the giver to balance the gift-giving relationship. Marcel Mauss refers to this as an "obligation" as it completes a "total prestation" in his mind (1950). Examples of receiving gifts (apart from the obvious) are when someone comes to your house bearing chocolates or flowers as a 'Thank You' to what they are about to receive. The reciprocity here is lunch, dinner or a bed for the night. People sometimes get annoyed or upset if too little is given, in the same way there are problems if too much is given, for example, 'You have set a very high precedence for parties to come'. This is best shown by Hendry, "A parent who put on a party without the appropriate paraphernalia would run the severe risk of disapproval on the part of their own offspring, and possibly voluble complaints from their young guests" (1999, p.67) and probably their parents too!
Furthermore, Douglas emphasises this point, "It is alright to send flowers to your aunt in hospital, but never right to send the cash they are worth with a message "get yourself some flowers"; all right to offer lunch or drinks, but not to offer the price of a lunch or a drink. Hosts may go to extravagant lengths to attract and please guests - short of offering them money to come to the party. Social sanctions protect the boundary" (Douglas & Isherwood, 1979, p. 58-9)
In 1924, Mauss noted that gift-giving was fundamental to the constitution of human life and also that it is universally important. Illustrated above, gift-giving and exchange is shown to be integral to everyday life. Gifts and exchange make important statements about the relationships between the donor and recipient. The importance of reciprocity is also highlighted if a relationship is to proceed smoothly. Problems too have been discussed which can arise when people from different cultural backgrounds misinterpret the significance of presents they may receive. A few other examples of gift-giving in relation to social organisation include unexpected gifts which can symbolise the desire to strengthen a relationship in showing you like a person as more than just a casual friend.
However in every different society there are difference 'rules' associated with gift-giving; there is not one single purpose of gift-giving but many. For example in Japan the wrapping of the gift is of extreme importance and the paper is not to be ripped off as it is in our society since it can be seen as the medium of the message of the gift.
In the case of gift exchange "social relationships would be invisible without some clearly defined way of expression them". Gifts and exchange can be seen as "visible features of the invisible aspects of social organization" (Hendry, 1999, p. 82-3). This is summed up by Mauss, "Failure to give or receive, like failure to return gifts, means loss of dignity" (1924, p.40).
There is a hierarchy to gift-giving in all social organisations, to give shows superiority and "to accept without returning or repaying more is to face subordination". Even today return is made with interest with people trying to 'win' each others affections with how generous they are in giving. We all know there is no such thing as a 'free lunch'!
Word count: 2, 132
For example how would you feel if I forgot your birthday? Probably not that bad since I am a student and therefore might not know it is your birthday but how would you feel if your husband/wife, daughter/son, sister/brother etc forgot, you might be upset because these people are close to you and so 'should' remember your special day!