Durkheim first used the term anomie in his work, "The Division of Labour in Society" (1893), anomie is a breakdown in group solidarity and cohesion or deregulation. This leads to people feeling like they have no control, a sort of "normlessness" or "lawlessness". Anomie has also been likened to a "loss of purpose", "anomie carries the connotation of alienation, isolation, and desocialization. Anomie is the discord in the rhythm of social life" ((Powell, 1970, p.5). Anomie has been linked to suicide, crime, delinquency, mental disorders, alcoholism and drug addiction. There are many forms of anomie as Talcott-Parsons has shown, "when the person is unable to make institutionally accepted object-attachments with, for example, the opposite sex".
As a functionalist, one of Durkheim's main aims was to apply sociological knowledge to social intervention by the state in order to create social harmony. By saying this he stressed "social integration and moral consensus". This would modernity society. His "belief in the importance of well-organised and harmonious societies" meant "individuals could flourish and live out their lives productively and contentedly together" (Biltonal. 2002, p.470). Lives within society are patterned by forces that are out of our control, therefore we should "treat social facts as things" (p.471) to structure our lives to run smoothly. When these forces are seemingly out of our control we experience anomie (some sociologists use the term alienation instead, but this is linked to the thinking of Marx). When this occurs a person can feel depression and despair - "Suicide is the supreme manifestation of despair" (Powell, 1970, p.5). In Durkheim's own words "to pursue a goal which is by definition unattainable is to condemn oneself to a state of perpetual unhappiness". Persons aspire to goals which they either cannot attain or find hard to reach.
Anomie is best shown in relation to suicide. In his famous "Suicide" (1897) Durkheim explains variation in suicide rates in terms of integration and regulation and within this there are four types of suicide. Integration means the extent to which the individual experiences a sense of collective belonging, (Durkheim called this the 'collective conscious' it's based on common interests and feelings direct of all individuals within society). If integration is too high then Altruistic suicide can occur, e.g. selfless acts such as World War II fighter pilots where there was an extreme sense of moral obligation to the country. On the other hand if integration is too low Egoistic suicide can occur where people don't feel they are well enough integrated into society, in other words, a weak 'collective conscious'. Regulation is the extent to which the actions and desires of individuals are kept in check by moral values. If someone is too regulated they feel a sense of hopelessness or 'no way out' then Fatalistic suicide can occur (e.g. people in prison). Again on the flip side if regulation is too low Anomic suicide can occur, here there are no checks on the individual (e.g. the unemployed who have no regulation of time). Anomic suicide is where society is incapable of exercising authority over individuals and periods of disruption unleash currents of anomie which increase suicide rates (Halcli, week 3, lecture notes).
Durkheim described two types of unity in society 'mechanical' and 'organic' solidarity. Modern society would be 'organic' and levels of anomie would be low, the collective conscience would be high and would be expressed through values, customs, and law etc and then back up by sanctions from the government. This solution, non-religious civic moral order established through state, law and education would create moral unity based on mutual social interdependence otherwise known as "organic solidarity" or modernity (Biltonal. 2002, p.472). At his time of writing, the transition from mechanical to organic solidarity was incomplete and that is why he wanted to modernise to an organic society. Therein, "A unified and well regulated society diminishes both egotistic and anomic currents" (Marshall, 1964, p.6), this is seen as essential since without norms humans develop insatiable desires that lead to a disordered society with anomic currents.
Word count: 657 words.