Both of my informants have similar backgrounds, they are middle class, young and white (please see Appendix 1 for information on informants). Informant one is a psychology student and so I think she is already aware of the concept of gender and the fact that it is a socially constructed idea. Informant two was less aware of what the term gender meant, but he did say that when he was younger his dad used to push him into gender-specific activities such as sport. A common theme in their answers is that they both have a sociobiologist view of gender. Edward Wilson who coined the term 'sociobiology' (now sometimes referred to as 'evolutionary psychology') (Connell, 2002, p.31) is where males and females use their traits prescribed to them by society, (aggression and a caring nature respectively), to survive. Informant one spoke of this when she said that women use their sexuality to get ahead, "I've done it" she said and "would be very surprised if a woman hasn't". She doesn't just mean in competition for jobs and such, but it can be in a bar where she might flirt to get a drink. She also notes the external pressures on gender order saying that girls 'play up' their role, i.e. needing protection around members of the opposite sex. Informant two believes that men do it too. He believes that because he is captain of the cricket club that he can use his status to make others conform to his commands as an authoritative male.
They further backed up a sociobiologist approach when asked about what gender they would choose if they could at birth. Surprisingly, informant one said she would want to be a man. When prompted why she said, "I want a willy!" but more seriously she replied it was because men have an easier life than females and have more choices and have less expectations of themselves and from others. I believe her thoughts can be attributed to the patriarchal dividend (Connell, 2002, p.142) which gives advantage to men in the unequal gender order which is still present in our society. Informant two said he would choose to be a male stating "Women are never satisfied". He thinks he has the ability to fit in with different people at different times. Here hegemonic masculinity is shown. Informant two changes to fit in with his surroundings thus giving him the best position in all situations. He tells me that he plays up his 'gender role' as a male when he is at his student house of nine boys, referring to himself as "one of the lads". It is interesting that he plays up his gender competence in front of other males. This might be because he wants to show he is a 'real man' and not sensitive as this is what our culture praises; in a sense it is a gendered performance. Informant one said that she was always aware of her gender identity, for example, when travelling she was very safety conscious and believes this is a "weakness of being a woman". Later, she said that she would prefer it if her husband earned more than her as it is her wish to be a stay-at-home mother, caring for her children. Therefore, both have demonstrated an unaware conforming to character dichotomies such as being tough-minded in the case of informant two and nurturing in the case of informant one. (Connell, 2002, p.40) Both have prescribed to gender 'appropriate' behaviour and qualities (Halcli, week 2, lecture notes).
However much I probed my informants for 'juicy' information I found that it was really hard for them to say anything shocking or what I didn't already think I knew about them. I believe this is because of Hawthorne Effect. The Hawthorne Effect is where, 'individual behaviours may be altered because they know they are being studied' (Clark, 1999) i.e. they gave appropriate answers because they were aware that I was studying gender. This was shown when informant two contradicted himself. I asked him about salaries and how women's average income, world-wide can be as low as 56% of men's (Connell, 2002, p.2). He said that both women and men should be paid equally if they did equal jobs. He also said it would not worry him if his partner earned more than him but later said that he would want to be the main breadwinner of the household even if in the same position as a partner. In conclusion, both of my informants stressed throughout their interviews that men and women have different strengths and weaknesses so it is hard for either to judge the other. I believe they have post-structuralist views regarding the importance of culture being integral to meaning in today's western countries.
Word count: 732 words.